ridge far behind her. in the meanwhile, the child whom she was
dragging after her fell upon his knees; she halted breathless. oudarde
and gervaise rejoined her.

“that gypsy steal your child from you!” said gervaise. “that’s a
singular freak of yours!”

mahiette shook her head with a pensive air.

“the singular point is,” observed oudarde, “that _la sachette_ has the
same idea about the egyptian woman.”

“what is _la sachette_?” asked mahiette.

“hé!” said oudarde, “sister gudule.”

“and who is sister gudule?” persisted mahiette.

“you are certainly ignorant of all but your reims, not to know that!”
 replied oudarde. “‘tis the recluse of the rat-hole.”

“what!” demanded mahiette, “that poor woman to whom we are carrying this
cake?”

oudarde nodded affirmatively.

“precisely. you will see her presently at her window on the grève. she
has the same opinion as yourself of these vagabonds of egypt, who play
the tambourine and tell fortunes to the p
 
 ___________________________
 
meanwhile, mahiette was gazing with ever-increasing anxiety at that wan,
withered, dishevelled head, and her eyes filled with tears. “this is
very singular,” she murmured.

she thrust her head through the bars, and succeeded in casting a glance
at the corner where the gaze of the unhappy woman was immovably riveted.

when she withdrew her head from the window, her countenance was
inundated with tears.

“what do you call that woman?” she asked oudarde.

oudarde replied,--

“we call her sister gudule.”

“and i,” returned mahiette, “call her paquette la chantefleurie.”

then, laying her finger on her lips, she motioned to the astounded
oudarde to thrust her head through the window and look.

oudarde looked and beheld, in the corner where the eyes of the
recluse were fixed in that sombre ecstasy, a tiny shoe of pink satin,
embroidered with a thousand fanciful designs in gold and silver.

gervaise looked after oudarde, and then the three women, gazing upon the
unhappy mother, began t
 
 ___________________________
 
d not speak,
even in a low voice. this deep silence, this deep grief, this profound
oblivion in which everything had disappeared except one thing, produced
upon them the effect of the grand altar at christmas or easter. they
remained silent, they meditated, they were ready to kneel. it seemed to
them that they were ready to enter a church on the day of tenebrae.

at length gervaise, the most curious of the three, and consequently the
least sensitive, tried to make the recluse speak:

“sister! sister gudule!”

she repeated this call three times, raising her voice each time. the
recluse did not move; not a word, not a glance, not a sigh, not a sign
of life.

oudarde, in her turn, in a sweeter, more caressing voice,--“sister!”
 said she, “sister sainte-gudule!”

the same silence; the same immobility.

“a singular woman!” exclaimed gervaise, “and one not to be moved by a
catapult!”

“perchance she is deaf,” said oudarde.

“perhaps she is blind,” added gervaise.

“dead, per
 
 ___________________________
 
ey
beheld her drag herself, on her knees and elbows, to the corner where
the little shoe was. then they dared not look; they no longer saw her;
but they heard a thousand kisses and a thousand sighs, mingled with
heartrending cries, and dull blows like those of a head in contact with
a wall. then, after one of these blows, so violent that all three of
them staggered, they heard no more.

“can she have killed herself?” said gervaise, venturing to pass her head
through the air-hole. “sister! sister gudule!”

“sister gudule!” repeated oudarde.

“ah! good heavens! she no longer moves!” resumed gervaise; “is she dead?
gudule! gudule!”

mahiette, choked to such a point that she could not speak, made an
effort. “wait,” said she. then bending towards the window, “paquette!”
 she said, “paquette le chantefleurie!”

a child who innocently blows upon the badly ignited fuse of a bomb, and
makes it explode in his face, is no more terrified than was mahiette
at the effect of that n