 the
name of the king, law, and justice.

however, the audience had begun without him. his lieutenants, civil,
criminal, and private, were doing his work, according to usage; and
from eight o’clock in the morning, some scores of bourgeois and
_bourgeoises_, heaped and crowded into an obscure corner of the audience
chamber of embas du châtelet, between a stout oaken barrier and the
wall, had been gazing blissfully at the varied and cheerful spectacle of
civil and criminal justice dispensed by master florian barbedienne,
auditor of the châtelet, lieutenant of monsieur the provost, in a
somewhat confused and utterly haphazard manner.

the hall was small, low, vaulted. a table studded with fleurs-de-lis
stood at one end, with a large arm-chair of carved oak, which belonged
to the provost and was empty, and a stool on the left for the auditor,
master florian. below sat the clerk of the court, scribbling; opposite
was the populace; and in front of the door, and in front of the table
were many sergeants of the pro
 
 ___________________________
 
e carved
as a tail-piece in the keystone of the vaulted ceiling, and the judge
seated at the end of the hall on the fleurs-de-lis.

imagine, in fact, at the provost’s table, leaning upon his elbows
between two bundles of documents of cases, with his foot on the train
of his robe of plain brown cloth, his face buried in his hood of white
lamb’s skin, of which his brows seemed to be of a piece, red, crabbed,
winking, bearing majestically the load of fat on his cheeks which met
under his chin, master florian barbedienne, auditor of the châtelet.

now, the auditor was deaf. a slight defect in an auditor. master florian
delivered judgment, none the less, without appeal and very suitably. it
is certainly quite sufficient for a judge to have the air of listening;
and the venerable auditor fulfilled this condition, the sole one in
justice, all the better because his attention could not be distracted by
any noise.

moreover, he had in the audience, a pitiless censor of his deeds and
gestures, in the person of our f
 
 ___________________________
 
isible, without thickets and
without turnings; the wheel, the gibbet, or the pillory. one at least
knew whither one was going.

the clerk presented the sentence to the provost, who affixed his seal to
it, and departed to pursue his round of the audience hall, in a frame
of mind which seemed destined to fill all the jails in paris that day.
jehan frollo and robin poussepain laughed in their sleeves. quasimodo
gazed on the whole with an indifferent and astonished air.

however, at the moment when master florian barbedienne was reading the
sentence in his turn, before signing it, the clerk felt himself moved
with pity for the poor wretch of a prisoner, and, in the hope of
obtaining some mitigation of the penalty, he approached as near the
auditor’s ear as possible, and said, pointing to quasimodo, “that man is
deaf.”

he hoped that this community of infirmity would awaken master florian’s
interest in behalf of the condemned man. but, in the first place, we
have already observed that master florian did not 
 
 ___________________________
 
heel stopped. quasimodo’s eye opened slowly.

the scourging was finished. two lackeys of the official torturer bathed
the bleeding shoulders of the patient, anointed them with some unguent
which immediately closed all the wounds, and threw upon his back a sort
of yellow vestment, in cut like a chasuble. in the meanwhile, pierrat
torterue allowed the thongs, red and gorged with blood, to drip upon the
pavement.

all was not over for quasimodo. he had still to undergo that hour of
pillory which master florian barbedienne had so judiciously added to the
sentence of messire robert d’estouteville; all to the greater glory
of the old physiological and psychological play upon words of jean de
cumène, _surdus absurdus_: a deaf man is absurd.

so the hour-glass was turned over once more, and they left the hunchback
fastened to the plank, in order that justice might be accomplished to
the very end.

the populace, especially in the middle ages, is in society what the
child is in the family. as long as it remains in i