
daily meed of pleasure without caring who provided it. now she was
beginning to chafe at the obligations it imposed, to feel herself a mere
pensioner on the splendour which had once seemed to belong to her.  there
were even moments when she was conscious of having to pay her way.

for a long time she had refused to play bridge. she knew she could not
afford it, and she was afraid of acquiring so expensive a taste. she had
seen the danger exemplified in more than one of her associates--in young
ned silverton, for instance, the charming fair boy now seated in abject
rapture at the elbow of mrs. fisher, a striking divorcee with eyes and
gowns as emphatic as the head-lines of her "case." lily could remember
when young silverton had stumbled into their circle, with the air of a
strayed arcadian who has published charming sonnets in his college journal.
since then he had developed a taste for mrs. fisher and bridge, and the
latter at least had involved him in expenses from which he had been more
than on
 
 ___________________________
 
 bertha has been idle since.  but i
fancy she's out of a job just at present--and some one gave me a hint
that i had better ask lawrence. well, i did ask him--but i couldn't make
him come; and now i suppose she'll take it out of me by being perfectly
nasty to every one else."

"oh, she may take it out of him by being perfectly charming--to some one
else."

mrs. trenor shook her head dolefully. "she knows he wouldn't mind. and
who else is there? alice wetherall won't let lucius out of her sight.
ned silverton can't take his eyes off carry fisher--poor boy! gus is
bored by bertha, jack stepney knows her too well--and--well, to be sure,
there's percy gryce!"

she sat up smiling at the thought.

miss bart's countenance did not reflect the smile.

"oh, she and mr. gryce would not be likely to hit it off."

"you mean that she'd shock him and he'd bore her? well, that's not such a
bad beginning, you know. but i hope she won't take it into her head to be
nice to him, for i asked him here on purpose for you
 
 ___________________________
 
at the bills on her writing-table was enough to recall
its necessity. but meanwhile she had the morning to herself, and could
muse pleasantly on the disposal of its hours. she was familiar enough
with the habits of bellomont to know that she was likely to have a free
field till luncheon. she had seen the wetheralls, the trenor girls and
lady cressida packed safely into the omnibus; judy trenor was sure to be
having her hair shampooed; carry fisher had doubtless carried off her
host for a drive; ned silverton was probably smoking the cigarette of
young despair in his bedroom; and kate corby was certain to be playing
tennis with jack stepney and miss van osburgh. of the ladies, this left
only mrs. dorset unaccounted for, and mrs. dorset never came down till
luncheon: her doctors, she averred, had forbidden her to expose herself
to the crude air of the morning.

to the remaining members of the party lily gave no special thought;
wherever they were, they were not likely to interfere with her plans.
the
 
 ___________________________
 
elf on his elbow. "good heavens!" he went on, "i don't
underrate the decorative side of life. it seems to me the sense of
splendour has justified itself by what it has produced. the worst of it
is that so much human nature is used up in the process. if we're all the
raw stuff of the cosmic effects, one would rather be the fire that
tempers a sword than the fish that dyes a purple cloak. and a society
like ours wastes such good material in producing its little patch of
purple! look at a boy like ned silverton--he's really too good to be used
to refurbish anybody's social shabbiness. there's a lad just setting out
to discover the universe: isn't it a pity he should end by finding it in
mrs. fisher's drawing-room?"

"ned is a dear boy, and i hope he will keep his illusions long enough to
write some nice poetry about them; but do you think it is only in society
that he is likely to lose them?"

selden answered her with a shrug. "why do we call all our generous ideas
illusions, and the mean ones truths?
 
 ___________________________
 
through which, just at the
culminating moment of luncheon, the majestic advance of a great
steam-yacht drew the company's attention from the peas.

"by jove, i believe that's the dorsets back!" stepney exclaimed; and lord
hubert, dropping his single eye-glass, corroborated: "it's the
sabrina--yes."

"so soon? they were to spend a month in sicily," mrs. fisher observed.

"i guess they feel as if they had: there's only one up-to-date hotel in
the whole place," said mr. bry disparagingly.

"it was ned silverton's idea--but poor dorset and lily bart must have
been horribly bored." mrs. fisher added in an undertone to selden: "i do
hope there hasn't been a row."

"it's most awfully jolly having miss bart back," said lord hubert, in his
mild deliberate voice; and mrs. bry added ingenuously: "i daresay the
duchess will dine with us, now that lily's here."

"the duchess admires her immensely: i'm sure she'd be charmed to have it
arranged," lord hubert agreed, with the professional promptness of the
man acc
 
 ___________________________
 
s of something
vaguely obstructive. and suddenly, as selden noted the fine shades of
manner by which she harmonized herself with her surroundings, it flashed
on him that, to need such adroit handling, the situation must indeed be
desperate. she was on the edge of something--that was the impression left
with him.  he seemed to see her poised on the brink of a chasm, with one
graceful foot advanced to assert her unconsciousness that the ground was
failing her.

on the promenade des anglais, where ned silverton hung on him for the
half hour before dinner, he received a deeper impression of the general
insecurity. silverton was in a mood of titanic pessimism. how any one
could come to such a damned hole as the riviera--any one with a grain of
imagination--with the whole mediterranean to choose from: but then, if
one's estimate of a place depended on the way they broiled a spring
chicken! gad!  what a study might be made of the tyranny of the
stomach--the way a sluggish liver or insufficient gastric jui
 
 ___________________________
 
dent
of placing the atlantic between herself and her obligations made them
dwindle out of sight as if they had been milestones and she had travelled
past them.

her two months on the sabrina had been especially calculated to aid this
illusion of distance. she had been plunged into new scenes, and had found
in them a renewal of old hopes and ambitions. the cruise itself charmed
her as a romantic adventure.  she was vaguely touched by the names and
scenes amid which she moved, and had listened to ned silverton reading
theocritus by moonlight, as the yacht rounded the sicilian promontories,
with a thrill of the nerves that confirmed her belief in her intellectual
superiority. but the weeks at cannes and nice had really given her more
pleasure. the gratification of being welcomed in high company, and of
making her own ascendency felt there, so that she found herself figuring
once more as the "beautiful miss bart" in the interesting journal devoted
to recording the least movements of her cosmopolitan co
 
 ___________________________
 
it was not lily's fault if
mrs. dorset's complicated attitudes did not fall in with the duchess's
easy gait. the duchess, who seldom explained herself, had not formulated
her objection beyond saying: "she's rather a bore, you know. the only one
of your friends i like is that little mr. bry--he's funny--" but lily
knew enough not to press the point, and was not altogether sorry to be
thus distinguished at her friend's expense. bertha certainly had grown
tiresome since she had taken to poetry and ned silverton.

on the whole, it was a relief to break away now and then from the
sabrina; and the duchess's little breakfast, organized by lord hubert
with all his usual virtuosity, was the pleasanter to lily for not
including her travelling-companions. dorset, of late, had grown more than
usually morose and incalculable, and ned silverton went about with an air
that seemed to challenge the universe. the freedom and lightness of the
ducal intercourse made an agreeable change from these complications, and
li
 
 ___________________________
 
 to resist judging her by her surroundings--however
free she might be from any personal connection with it, she would be
better out of the way of a possible crash; and since she had appealed to
him for help, it was clearly his business to tell her so.

this decision at last brought him to his feet, and carried him back to
the gambling rooms, within whose doors he had seen her disappearing; but
a prolonged exploration of the crowd failed to put him on her traces. he
saw instead, to his surprise, ned silverton loitering somewhat
ostentatiously about the tables; and the discovery that this actor in the
drama was not only hovering in the wings, but actually inviting the
exposure of the footlights, though it might have seemed to imply that all
peril was over, served rather to deepen selden's sense of foreboding.
charged with this impression he returned to the square, hoping to see
miss bart move across it, as every one in monte carlo seemed inevitably
to do at least a dozen times a day; but here again h
 
 ___________________________
 
y face--the lines of worry and disappointment and failure!
every sleepless night leaves a new one--and how can i sleep, when i have
such dreadful things to think about?"

"dreadful things--what things?" asked gerty, gently detaching her wrists
from her friend's feverish fingers.

"what things? well, poverty, for one--and i don't know any that's more
dreadful." lily turned away and sank with sudden weariness into the
easy-chair near the tea-table. "you asked me just now if i could
understand why ned silverton spent so much money. of course i
understand--he spends it on living with the rich. you think we live on
the rich, rather than with them: and so we do, in a sense--but it's a
privilege we have to pay for! we eat their dinners, and drink their wine,
and smoke their cigarettes, and use their carriages and their opera-boxes
and their private cars--yes, but there's a tax to pay on every one of
those luxuries. the man pays it by big tips to the servants, by playing
cards beyond his means, by flowers 
 
 ___________________________
 
rs. hatch's
irreproachableness. the lady's offences were always against taste rather
than conduct; her divorce record seemed due to geographical rather than
ethical conditions; and her worst laxities were likely to proceed from a
wandering and extravagant good-nature.  but if lily did not mind her
detaining her manicure for luncheon, or offering the "beauty-doctor" a
seat in freddy van osburgh's box at the play, she was not equally at ease
in regard to some less apparent lapses from convention. ned silverton's
relation to stancy seemed, for instance, closer and less clear than any
natural affinities would warrant; and both appeared united in the effort
to cultivate freddy van osburgh's growing taste for mrs. hatch. there was
as yet nothing definable in the situation, which might well resolve
itself into a huge joke on the part of the other two; but lily had a
vague sense that the subject of their experiment was too young, too rich
and too credulous.  her embarrassment was increased by the fact that