partnership."

selden glanced at her with amusement: it was impossible, even with her
lovely eyes imploring him, to take a sentimental view of her case.

"ah, well, there must be plenty of capital on the look-out for such an
investment. perhaps you'll meet your fate tonight at the trenors'."

she returned his look interrogatively.

"i thought you might be going there--oh, not in that capacity!  but there
are to be a lot of your set--gwen van osburgh, the wetheralls, lady
cressida raith--and the george dorsets."

she paused a moment before the last name, and shot a query through her
lashes; but he remained imperturbable.

"mrs. trenor asked me; but i can't get away till the end of the week; and
those big parties bore me."

"ah, so they do me," she exclaimed.

"then why go?"

"it's part of the business--you forget! and besides, if i didn't, i
should be playing bezique with my aunt at richfield springs."

"that's almost as bad as marrying dillworth," he agreed, and they both
laughed for pure pleasure 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of a pretty woman, who entered the train accompanied by a
maid, a bull-terrier, and a footman staggering under a load of bags and
dressing-cases.

"oh, lily--are you going to bellomont? then you can't let me have your
seat, i suppose? but i must have a seat in this carriage--porter, you
must find me a place at once. can't some one be put somewhere else? i
want to be with my friends. oh, how do you do, mr. gryce? do please make
him understand that i must have a seat next to you and lily."

mrs. george dorset, regardless of the mild efforts of a traveller with a
carpet-bag, who was doing his best to make room for her by getting out of
the train, stood in the middle of the aisle, diffusing about her that
general sense of exasperation which a pretty woman on her travels not
infrequently creates.

she was smaller and thinner than lily bart, with a restless pliability of
pose, as if she could have been crumpled up and run through a ring, like
the sinuous draperies she affected. her small pale face seeme
 
 ___________________________
 
re the fire,
and the light from the great central lantern overhead shed a brightness
on the women's hair and struck sparks from their jewels as they moved.

there were moments when such scenes delighted lily, when they gratified
her sense of beauty and her craving for the external finish of life;
there were others when they gave a sharper edge to the meagreness of her
own opportunities. this was one of the moments when the sense of contrast
was uppermost, and she turned away impatiently as mrs. george dorset,
glittering in serpentine spangles, drew percy gryce in her wake to a
confidential nook beneath the gallery.

it was not that miss bart was afraid of losing her newly-acquired hold
over mr. gryce. mrs. dorset might startle or dazzle him, but she had
neither the skill nor the patience to effect his capture.  she was too
self-engrossed to penetrate the recesses of his shyness, and besides, why
should she care to give herself the trouble? at most it might amuse her
to make sport of his simplicity 
 
 ___________________________
 
ngly.

perhaps it was not, lily reflected; but it should be soon, unless she had
lost her cunning. if selden had come at mrs. dorset's call, it was at her
own that he would stay. so much the previous evening had told her. mrs.
trenor, true to her simple principle of making her married friends happy,
had placed selden and mrs. dorset next to each other at dinner; but, in
obedience to the time-honoured traditions of the match-maker, she had
separated lily and mr. gryce, sending in the former with george dorset,
while mr. gryce was coupled with gwen van osburgh.

george dorset's talk did not interfere with the range of his neighbour's
thoughts. he was a mournful dyspeptic, intent on finding out the
deleterious ingredients of every dish and diverted from this care only by
the sound of his wife's voice. on this occasion, however, mrs. dorset
took no part in the general conversation. she sat talking in low murmurs
with selden, and turning a contemptuous and denuded shoulder toward her
host, who, far from
 
 ___________________________
 
s as a citizen. every wealthy man should be compelled to
study the laws of his country."

mrs. dorset glanced at her quietly. "i think he has studied the divorce
laws. he told me he had promised the bishop to sign some kind of a
petition against divorce."

mrs. fisher reddened under her powder, and stepney said with a laughing
glance at miss bart: "i suppose he is thinking of marriage, and wants to
tinker up the old ship before he goes aboard."

his betrothed looked shocked at the metaphor, and george dorset exclaimed
with a sardonic growl: "poor devil! it isn't the ship that will do for
him, it's the crew."

"or the stowaways," said miss corby brightly. "if i contemplated a voyage
with him i should try to start with a friend in the hold."

miss van osburgh's vague feeling of pique was struggling for appropriate
expression. "i'm sure i don't see why you laugh at him; i think he's very
nice," she exclaimed; "and, at any rate, a girl who married him would
always have enough to be comfortable."

she l
 
 ___________________________
 
 always exchange
it for something else," she remarked.

"ah, here is something so much prettier," miss farish continued.  "do
look at this exquisite white sapphire. i'm sure the person who chose it
must have taken particular pains. what is the name?  percy gryce? ah,
then i'm not surprised!" she smiled significantly as she replaced the
card. "of course you've heard that he's perfectly devoted to evie van
osburgh? cousin grace is so pleased about it--it's quite a romance! he
met her first at the george dorsets', only about six weeks ago, and it's
just the nicest possible marriage for dear evie. oh, i don't mean the
money--of course she has plenty of her own--but she's such a quiet
stay-at-home kind of girl, and it seems he has just the same tastes; so
they are exactly suited to each other."

lily stood staring vacantly at the white sapphire on its velvet bed.
evie van osburgh and percy gryce? the names rang derisively through her
brain. evie van osburgh? the youngest, dumpiest, dullest of the four d
 
 ___________________________
 
hat there is nothing society resents so much as having given
its protection to those who have not known how to profit by it: it is for
having betrayed its connivance that the body social punishes the offender
who is found out. and in this case there was no doubt of the issue. the
code of lily's world decreed that a woman's husband should be the only
judge of her conduct: she was technically above suspicion while she had
the shelter of his approval, or even of his indifference. but with a man
of george dorset's temper there could be no thought of condonation--the
possessor of his wife's letters could overthrow with a touch the whole
structure of her existence. and into what hands bertha dorset's secret
had been delivered! for a moment the irony of the coincidence tinged
lily's disgust with a confused sense of triumph. but the disgust
prevailed--all her instinctive resistances, of taste, of training, of
blind inherited scruples, rose against the other feeling. her strongest
sense was one of personal 
 
 ___________________________
 
he
squirrels, and you shall take me out on the lake in the steam-gondola."

she smiled as she spoke, letting her eyes rest on his in a way that took
the edge from her banter and made him suddenly malleable to her will.

"all right, then: that's a go. will you come tomorrow? tomorrow at three
o'clock, at the end of the mall. i'll be there sharp, remember; you won't
go back on me, lily?"

but to miss bart's relief the repetition of her promise was cut short by
the opening of the box door to admit george dorset.

trenor sulkily yielded his place, and lily turned a brilliant smile on
the newcomer. she had not talked with dorset since their visit at
bellomont, but something in his look and manner told her that he recalled
the friendly footing on which they had last met. he was not a man to whom
the expression of admiration came easily: his long sallow face and
distrustful eyes seemed always barricaded against the expansive emotions.
but, where her own influence was concerned, lily's intuitions sent out

 
 ___________________________
 
 julia, don't look at me as if i were trying to turn you
against lily! everybody knows she is crazy about bridge.  mrs. gryce told
me herself that it was her gambling that frightened percy gryce--it seems
he was really taken with her at first. but, of course, among lily's
friends it's quite the custom for girls to play for money.  in fact,
people are inclined to excuse her on that account----"

"to excuse her for what?"

"for being hard up--and accepting attentions from men like gus
trenor--and george dorset----"

mrs. peniston gave another cry. "george dorset? is there any one else?  i
should like to know the worst, if you please."

"don't put it in that way, cousin julia. lately lily has been a good deal
with the dorsets, and he seems to admire her--but of course that's only
natural. and i'm sure there is no truth in the horrid things people say;
but she has been spending a great deal of money this winter. evie van
osburgh was at celeste's ordering her trousseau the other day--yes, the
marriage t
 
 ___________________________
 
n became general, and the individual comments on her
success were a delightful prolongation of the collective applause. at
such moments she lost something of her natural fastidiousness, and cared
less for the quality of the admiration received than for its quantity.
differences of personality were merged in a warm atmosphere of praise, in
which her beauty expanded like a flower in sunlight; and if selden had
approached a moment or two sooner he would have seen her turning on ned
van alstyne and george dorset the look he had dreamed of capturing for
himself.

fortune willed, however, that the hurried approach of mrs. fisher, as
whose aide-de-camp van alstyne was acting, should break up the group
before selden reached the threshold of the room. one or two of the men
wandered off in search of their partners for supper, and the others,
noticing selden's approach, gave way to him in accordance with the tacit
freemasonry of the ball-room. lily was therefore standing alone when he
reached her; and finding
 
 ___________________________
 
times i think it's because, at heart, she despises
the things she's trying for. and it's the difficulty of deciding that
makes her such an interesting study." she glanced tentatively at selden's
motionless profile, and resumed with a slight sigh: "well, all i can say
is, i wish she'd give me some of her discarded opportunities.  i wish we
could change places now, for instance. she could make a very good thing
out of the brys if she managed them properly, and i should know just how
to look after george dorset while bertha is reading verlaine with neddy
silverton."

she met selden's sound of protest with a sharp derisive glance.  "well,
what's the use of mincing matters? we all know that's what bertha brought
her abroad for. when bertha wants to have a good time she has to provide
occupation for george. at first i thought lily was going to play her
cards well this time, but there are rumours that bertha is jealous of her
success here and at cannes, and i shouldn't be surprised if there were a
break a
 
 ___________________________
 
ning to strike her as irrelevant. "i'm sorry i have been
negligent about the brys----" she began.

"oh, as to the brys--it's you i'm thinking of," said mrs. fisher
abruptly. she paused, and then, bending forward, with a lowered voice:
"you know we all went on to nice last night when the duchess chucked us.
it was louisa's idea--i told her what i thought of it."

miss bart assented. "yes--i caught sight of you on the way back, at the
station."

"well, the man who was in the carriage with you and george dorset--that
horrid little dabham who does 'society notes from the riviera'--had been
dining with us at nice. and he's telling everybody that you and dorset
came back alone after midnight."

"alone--? when he was with us?" lily laughed, but her laugh faded into
gravity under the prolonged implication of mrs. fisher's look. "we did
come back alone--if that's so very dreadful! but whose fault was it?  the
duchess was spending the night at cimiez with the crown princess; bertha
got bored with the show, a
 
 ___________________________
 
rowing the recent past so far back that even selden,
as part of it, retained a certain air of unreality. and he had made it so
clear that they were not to meet again; that he had merely dropped down
to nice for a day or two, and had almost his foot on the next steamer.
no--that part of the past had merely surged up for a moment on the
fleeing surface of events; and now that it was submerged again, the
uncertainty, the apprehension persisted.

they grew to sudden acuteness as she caught sight of george dorset
descending the steps of the hotel de paris and making for her across the
square. she had meant to drive down to the quay and regain the yacht; but
she now had the immediate impression that something more was to happen
first.

"which way are you going? shall we walk a bit?" he began, putting the
second question before the first was answered, and not waiting for a
reply to either before he directed her silently toward the comparative
seclusion of the lower gardens.

she detected in him at once al
 
 ___________________________
 
y.  "do
you mean, like gerty farish, to recommend the unfailing panacea of 'a
good man's love'?"

"no--i don't think either of my candidates would answer to that
description," said mrs. fisher after a pause of reflection.

"either? are there actually two?"

"well, perhaps i ought to say one and a half--for the moment."

miss bart received this with increasing amusement. "other things being
equal, i think i should prefer a half-husband: who is he?"

"don't fly out at me till you hear my reasons--george dorset."

"oh----" lily murmured reproachfully; but mrs. fisher pressed on
unrebuffed. "well, why not? they had a few weeks' honeymoon when they
first got back from europe, but now things are going badly with them
again. bertha has been behaving more than ever like a madwoman, and
george's powers of credulity are very nearly exhausted. they're at their
place here, you know, and i spent last sunday with them. it was a ghastly
party--no one else but poor neddy silverton, who looks like a
galley-slave (t
 
 ___________________________
 
n it seemed a
welcome escape from the empty noises of her life. she was weary of being
swept passively along a current of pleasure and business in which she had
no share; weary of seeing other people pursue amusement and squander
money, while she felt herself of no more account among them than an
expensive toy in the hands of a spoiled child.

it was in this frame of mind that, striking back from the shore one
morning into the windings of an unfamiliar lane, she came suddenly upon
the figure of george dorset. the dorset place was in the immediate
neighbourhood of the gormers' newly-acquired estate, and in her
motor-flights thither with mrs. gormer, lily had caught one or two
passing glimpses of the couple; but they moved in so different an orbit
that she had not considered the possibility of a direct encounter.

dorset, swinging along with bent head, in moody abstraction, did not see
miss bart till he was close upon her; but the sight, instead of bringing
him to a halt, as she had half-expected, se
 
 ___________________________
 
 meals in the dark restaurant with its surcharged
ceiling and haunting smell of coffee--all these material discomforts,
which were yet to be accounted as so many privileges soon to be
withdrawn, kept constantly before her the disadvantages of her state; and
her mind reverted the more insistently to mrs. fisher's counsels.  beat
about the question as she would, she knew the outcome of it was that she
must try to marry rosedale; and in this conviction she was fortified by
an unexpected visit from george dorset.

she found him, on the first sunday after her return to town, pacing her
narrow sitting-room to the imminent peril of the few knick-knacks with
which she had tried to disguise its plush exuberances; but the sight of
her seemed to quiet him, and he said meekly that he hadn't come to bother
her--that he asked only to be allowed to sit for half an hour and talk of
anything she liked. in reality, as she knew, he had but one subject:
himself and his wretchedness; and it was the need of her sympathy
 
 ___________________________
 
een little of rosedale since her illuminating talk with mrs.
fisher, but on the two or three occasions when they had met she was
conscious of having distinctly advanced in his favour.  there could be no
doubt that he admired her as much as ever, and she believed it rested
with herself to raise his admiration to the point where it should bear
down the lingering counsels of expediency. the task was not an easy one;
but neither was it easy, in her long sleepless nights, to face the
thought of what george dorset was so clearly ready to offer.  baseness
for baseness, she hated the other least: there were even moments when a
marriage with rosedale seemed the only honourable solution of her
difficulties. she did not indeed let her imagination range beyond the day
of plighting: after that everything faded into a haze of material
well-being, in which the personality of her benefactor remained
mercifully vague. she had learned, in her long vigils, that there were
certain things not good to think of, certain 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng implications in a resolute grasp.
"you've told me so little that i can only guess what has been happening;
but in the rush we all live in there's no time to keep on hating any one
without a cause, and if bertha is still nasty enough to want to injure
you with other people it must be because she's still afraid of you. from
her standpoint there's only one reason for being afraid of you; and my
own idea is that, if you want to punish her, you hold the means in your
hand. i believe you can marry george dorset tomorrow; but if you don't
care for that particular form of retaliation, the only thing to save you
from bertha is to marry somebody else."



chapter 7

the light projected on the situation by mrs. fisher had the cheerless
distinctness of a winter dawn. it outlined the facts with a cold
precision unmodified by shade or colour, and refracted, as it were, from
the blank walls of the surrounding limitations: she had opened windows
from which no sky was ever visible. but the idealist subdued to vu
 
 ___________________________
 
firmly upon her: "the
wonder to me is that you've waited so long to get square with that woman,
when you've had the power in your hands." she continued silent under the
rush of astonishment that his words produced, and he moved a step closer
to ask with low-toned directness: "why don't you use those letters of
hers you bought last year?"

lily stood speechless under the shock of the interrogation. in the words
preceding it she had conjectured, at most, an allusion to her supposed
influence over george dorset; nor did the astonishing indelicacy of the
reference diminish the likelihood of rosedale's resorting to it. but now
she saw how far short of the mark she had fallen; and the surprise of
learning that he had discovered the secret of the letters left her, for
the moment, unconscious of the special use to which he was in the act of
putting his knowledge.

her temporary loss of self-possession gave him time to press his point;
and he went on quickly, as though to secure completer control of the
sit
 
 ___________________________
 
 we needn't go into, did you
a beastly bad turn last spring. everybody knows what mrs. dorset is, and
her best friends wouldn't believe her on oath where their own interests
were concerned; but as long as they're out of the row it's much easier to
follow her lead than to set themselves against it, and you've simply been
sacrificed to their laziness and selfishness. isn't that a pretty fair
statement of the case?--well, some people say you've got the neatest kind
of an answer in your hands: that george dorset would marry you tomorrow,
if you'd tell him all you know, and give him the chance to show the lady
the door. i daresay he would; but you don't seem to care for that
particular form of getting even, and, taking a purely business view of
the question, i think you're right. in a deal like that, nobody comes out
with perfectly clean hands, and the only way for you to start fresh is to
get bertha dorset to back you up, instead of trying to fight her."

he paused long enough to draw breath, but not t
 
 ___________________________
 
again; and he didn't. i wouldn't have,
either--i think she acted real mean to him. he took her to the arion
ball, and had a hack for her both ways....  she's taken ten bottles, and
her headaches don't seem no better--but she's written a testimonial to
say the first bottle cured her, and she got five dollars and her picture
in the paper.... mrs. trenor's hat? the one with the green paradise?
here, miss haines--it'll be ready right off.... that was one of the
trenor girls here yesterday with mrs. george dorset.  how'd i know? why,
madam sent for me to alter the flower in that virot hat--the blue tulle:
she's tall and slight, with her hair fuzzed out--a good deal like mamie
leach, on'y thinner...."

on and on it flowed, a current of meaningless sound, on which,
startlingly enough, a familiar name now and then floated to the surface.
it was the strangest part of lily's strange experience, the hearing of
these names, the seeing the fragmentary and distorted image of the world
she had lived in reflected 