
the house of mirth



chapter 1

selden paused in surprise. in the afternoon rush of the grand central
station his eyes had been refreshed by the sight of miss lily bart.

it was a monday in early september, and he was returning to his work from
a hurried dip into the country; but what was miss bart doing in town at
that season? if she had appeared to be catching a train, he might have
inferred that he had come on her in the act of transition between one and
another of the country-houses which disputed her presence after the close
of the newport season; but her desultory air perplexed him. she stood
apart from the crowd, letting it drift by her to the platform 
 
 ___________________________
 
or the
street, and wearing an air of irresolution which might, as he surmised,
be the mask of a very definite purpose. it struck him at once that she
was waiting for some one, but he hardly knew why the idea arrested him.
there was nothing new about lily bart, yet he could never see her without
a faint movement of interest: it was characteristic of her that she
always roused speculation, that her simplest acts seemed the result of
far-reaching intentions.

an impulse of curiosity made him turn out of his direct line to the door,
and stroll past her. he knew that if she did not wish to be seen she
would contrive to elude him; and it amused him to think of putting her
skill to the test.

"mr. selden--what good luck!"

she came forward smiling, eager a
 
 ___________________________
 
it. and i don't know what to do with myself.
my maid came up this morning to do some shopping for me, and was to go on
to bellomont at one o'clock, and my aunt's house is closed, and i don't
know a soul in town." she glanced plaintively about the station. "it is
hotter than mrs. van osburgh's, after all. if you can spare the time, do
take me somewhere for a breath of air."

he declared himself entirely at her disposal: the adventure struck him as
diverting. as a spectator, he had always enjoyed lily bart; and his
course lay so far out of her orbit that it amused him to be drawn for a
moment into the sudden intimacy which her proposal implied.

"shall we go over to sherry's for a cup of tea?"

she smiled assentingly, and then made a slight grimace.

"so many people come up to town on a monday--one is sure to meet a lot of
bores. i'm as old as the hills, of course, and it ought not to make any
difference; but if i'm old enough, you're not," she objected gaily.  "i'm
dying for tea--but isn't there
 
 ___________________________
 
 she had been taking tea with selden! the mere
statement of the fact would have rendered it innocuous. but, after having
let herself be surprised in a falsehood, it was doubly stupid to snub the
witness of her discomfiture. if she had had the presence of mind to let
rosedale drive her to the station, the concession might have purchased
his silence. he had his race's accuracy in the appraisal of values, and
to be seen walking down the platform at the crowded afternoon hour in the
company of miss lily bart would have been money in his pocket, as he
might himself have phrased it. he knew, of course, that there would be a
large house-party at bellomont, and the possibility of being taken for
one of mrs. trenor's guests was doubtless included in his calculations.
mr. rosedale was still at a stage in his social ascent when it was of
importance to produce such impressions.

the provoking part was that lily knew all this--knew how easy it would
have been to silence him on the spot, and how difficult it
 
 ___________________________
 
ut somewhere else? i
want to be with my friends. oh, how do you do, mr. gryce? do please make
him understand that i must have a seat next to you and lily."

mrs. george dorset, regardless of the mild efforts of a traveller with a
carpet-bag, who was doing his best to make room for her by getting out of
the train, stood in the middle of the aisle, diffusing about her that
general sense of exasperation which a pretty woman on her travels not
infrequently creates.

she was smaller and thinner than lily bart, with a restless pliability of
pose, as if she could have been crumpled up and run through a ring, like
the sinuous draperies she affected. her small pale face seemed the mere
setting of a pair of dark exaggerated eyes, of which the visionary gaze
contrasted curiously with her self-assertive tone and gestures; so that,
as one of her friends observed, she was like a disembodied spirit who
took up a great deal of room.

having finally discovered that the seat adjoining miss bart's was at her
disp
 
 ___________________________
 
s capture.  she was too
self-engrossed to penetrate the recesses of his shyness, and besides, why
should she care to give herself the trouble? at most it might amuse her
to make sport of his simplicity for an evening--after that he would be
merely a burden to her, and knowing this, she was far too experienced to
encourage him. but the mere thought of that other woman, who could take a
man up and toss him aside as she willed, without having to regard him as
a possible factor in her plans, filled lily bart with envy. she had been
bored all the afternoon by percy gryce--the mere thought seemed to waken
an echo of his droning voice--but she could not ignore him on the morrow,
she must follow up her success, must submit to more boredom, must be
ready with fresh compliances and adaptabilities, and all on the bare
chance that he might ultimately decide to do her the honour of boring her
for life.

it was a hateful fate--but how escape from it? what choice had she? to be
herself, or a gerty farish. as 
 
 ___________________________
 
he depths of a bronze jar; a series of french
and english maids giving warning amid a chaos of hurriedly-ransacked
wardrobes and dress-closets; an equally changing dynasty of nurses and
footmen; quarrels in the pantry, the kitchen and the drawing-room;
precipitate trips to europe, and returns with gorged trunks and days of
interminable unpacking; semi-annual discussions as to where the summer
should be spent, grey interludes of economy and brilliant reactions of
expense--such was the setting of lily bart's first memories.

ruling the turbulent element called home was the vigorous and determined
figure of a mother still young enough to dance her ball-dresses to rags,
while the hazy outline of a neutral-tinted father filled an intermediate
space between the butler and the man who came to wind the clocks. even to
the eyes of infancy, mrs. hudson bart had appeared young; but lily could
not recall the time when her father had not been bald and slightly
stooping, with streaks of grey in his hair, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ccompany her. lily's companion looked rapidly
from one to the other of the two men of the party; wetherall walking
respectfully at lady cressida's side with his little sidelong look of
nervous attention, and percy gryce bringing up the rear with mrs.
wetherall and the trenors.

"ah--now i see why you were getting up your americana!" selden exclaimed
with a note of the freest admiration but the blush with which the sally
was received checked whatever amplifications he had meant to give it.

that lily bart should object to being bantered about her suitors, or even
about her means of attracting them, was so new to selden that he had a
momentary flash of surprise, which lit up a number of possibilities; but
she rose gallantly to the defence of her confusion, by saying, as its
object approached: "that was why i was waiting for you--to thank you for
having given me so many points!"

"ah, you can hardly do justice to the subject in such a short time," said
selden, as the trenor girls caught sight of m
 
 ___________________________
 
the hold."

miss van osburgh's vague feeling of pique was struggling for appropriate
expression. "i'm sure i don't see why you laugh at him; i think he's very
nice," she exclaimed; "and, at any rate, a girl who married him would
always have enough to be comfortable."

she looked puzzled at the redoubled laughter which hailed her words, but
it might have consoled her to know how deeply they had sunk into the
breast of one of her hearers.

comfortable! at that moment the word was more eloquent to lily bart than
any other in the language. she could not even pause to smile over the
heiress's view of a colossal fortune as a mere shelter against want: her
mind was filled with the vision of what that shelter might have been to
her. mrs. dorset's pin-pricks did not smart, for her own irony cut
deeper: no one could hurt her as much as she was hurting herself, for no
one else--not even judy trenor--knew the full magnitude of her folly.

she was roused from these unprofitable considerations by a whispered
 
 ___________________________
 
ress or surroundings.  her pale draperies,
and the background of foliage against which she stood, served only to
relieve the long dryad-like curves that swept upward from her poised foot
to her lifted arm. the noble buoyancy of her attitude, its suggestion of
soaring grace, revealed the touch of poetry in her beauty that selden
always felt in her presence, yet lost the sense of when he was not with
her. its expression was now so vivid that for the first time he seemed to
see before him the real lily bart, divested of the trivialities of her
little world, and catching for a moment a note of that eternal harmony of
which her beauty was a part.

"deuced bold thing to show herself in that get-up; but, gad, there isn't
a break in the lines anywhere, and i suppose she wanted us to know it!"

these words, uttered by that experienced connoisseur, mr. ned van
alstyne, whose scented white moustache had brushed selden's shoulder
whenever the parting of the curtains presented any exceptional
opportunity fo
 
 ___________________________
 
-tints of her personality and her experience, they
were for that very reason better suited to her mental vision. such
flashes of joy as lily moved in would have blinded miss farish, who was
accustomed, in the way of happiness, to such scant light as shone through
the cracks of other people's lives.

now she was the centre of a little illumination of her own: a mild but
unmistakable beam, compounded of lawrence selden's growing kindness to
herself and the discovery that he extended his liking to lily bart. if
these two factors seem incompatible to the student of feminine
psychology, it must be remembered that gerty had always been a parasite
in the moral order, living on the crumbs of other tables, and content to
look through the window at the banquet spread for her friends. now that
she was enjoying a little private feast of her own, it would have seemed
incredibly selfish not to lay a plate for a friend; and there was no one
with whom she would rather have shared her enjoyment than miss bart.

 
 ___________________________
 
 seemed to be
beating in her own heart. she had never seen him so alert, so responsive,
so attentive to what she had to say. his habitual manner had an
absent-minded kindliness which she accepted, and was grateful for, as the
liveliest sentiment her presence was likely to inspire; but she was quick
to feel in him a change implying that for once she could give pleasure as
well as receive it.

and it was so delightful that this higher degree of sympathy should be
reached through their interest in lily bart!

gerty's affection for her friend--a sentiment that had learned to keep
itself alive on the scantiest diet--had grown to active adoration since
lily's restless curiosity had drawn her into the circle of miss farish's
work. lily's taste of beneficence had wakened in her a momentary appetite
for well-doing. her visit to the girls' club had first brought her in
contact with the dramatic contrasts of life. she had always accepted with
philosophic calm the fact that such existences as hers were ped
 
 ___________________________
 
icisms of lily's conduct: as she had said, she knew "the real
lily," and the discovery that selden shared her knowledge raised her
placid acceptance of life to a dazzled sense of its possibilities--a
sense farther enlarged, in the course of the afternoon, by the receipt of
a telegram from selden asking if he might dine with her that evening.

while gerty was lost in the happy bustle which this announcement produced
in her small household, selden was at one with her in thinking with
intensity of lily bart. the case which had called him to albany was not
complicated enough to absorb all his attention, and he had the
professional faculty of keeping a part of his mind free when its services
were not needed. this part--which at the moment seemed dangerously like
the whole--was filled to the brim with the sensations of the previous
evening.  selden understood the symptoms: he recognized the fact that he
was paying up, as there had always been a chance of his having to pay up,
for the voluntary exclus
 
 ___________________________
 
be sent, with what words it would begin. as to its import
he had no doubt--he was as sure of her surrender as of his own.  and so
he had leisure to muse on all its exquisite details, as a hard worker, on
a holiday morning, might lie still and watch the beam of light travel
gradually across his room. but if the new light dazzled, it did not blind
him. he could still discern the outline of facts, though his own relation
to them had changed. he was no less conscious than before of what was
said of lily bart, but he could separate the woman he knew from the
vulgar estimate of her.  his mind turned to gerty farish's words, and the
wisdom of the world seemed a groping thing beside the insight of
innocence.  blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see god--even
the hidden god in their neighbour's breast! selden was in the state of
impassioned self-absorption that the first surrender to love produces.
his craving was for the companionship of one whose point of view should
justify his own, who sho
 
 ___________________________
 
o gerty's suddenly flaming jealousy, it
seemed incredible that lily should wish to be selden's wife. lily might
be incapable of marrying for money, but she was equally incapable of
living without it, and selden's eager investigations into the small
economies of house-keeping made him appear to gerty as tragically duped
as herself.

she remained long in her sitting-room, where the embers were crumbling to
cold grey, and the lamp paled under its gay shade.  just beneath it stood
the photograph of lily bart, looking out imperially on the cheap
gimcracks, the cramped furniture of the little room. could selden picture
her in such an interior? gerty felt the poverty, the insignificance of
her surroundings: she beheld her life as it must appear to lily. and the
cruelty of lily's judgments smote upon her memory. she saw that she had
dressed her idol with attributes of her own making. when had lily ever
really felt, or pitied, or understood?  all she wanted was the taste of
new experiences: she seemed l
 
 ___________________________
 
. she cried quietly
as she undressed, laying aside her clothes with her habitual precision,
setting everything in order for the next day, when the old life must be
taken up as though there had been no break in its routine.  her servant
did not come till eight o'clock, and she prepared her own tea-tray and
placed it beside the bed. then she locked the door of the flat,
extinguished her light and lay down.  but on her bed sleep would not
come, and she lay face to face with the fact that she hated lily bart. it
closed with her in the darkness like some formless evil to be blindly
grappled with.  reason, judgment, renunciation, all the sane daylight
forces, were beaten back in the sharp struggle for self-preservation. she
wanted happiness--wanted it as fiercely and unscrupulously as lily did,
but without lily's power of obtaining it.  and in her conscious impotence
she lay shivering, and hated her friend----

a ring at the door-bell caught her to her feet. she struck a light and
stood startled, lis
 
 ___________________________
 
tening. for a moment her heart beat incoherently, then
she felt the sobering touch of fact, and remembered that such calls were
not unknown in her charitable work. she flung on her dressing-gown to
answer the summons, and unlocking her door, confronted the shining vision
of lily bart.

gerty's first movement was one of revulsion. she shrank back as though
lily's presence flashed too sudden a light upon her misery. then she
heard her name in a cry, had a glimpse of her friend's face, and felt
herself caught and clung to.

"lily--what is it?" she exclaimed.

miss bart released her, and stood breathing brokenly, like one who has
gained shelter after a long flight.

"i was so cold--i couldn't go home. have you a fire?"

gerty's compassionate instincts, responding to the swift c
 
 ___________________________
 
ent of luncheon, the majestic advance of a great
steam-yacht drew the company's attention from the peas.

"by jove, i believe that's the dorsets back!" stepney exclaimed; and lord
hubert, dropping his single eye-glass, corroborated: "it's the
sabrina--yes."

"so soon? they were to spend a month in sicily," mrs. fisher observed.

"i guess they feel as if they had: there's only one up-to-date hotel in
the whole place," said mr. bry disparagingly.

"it was ned silverton's idea--but poor dorset and lily bart must have
been horribly bored." mrs. fisher added in an undertone to selden: "i do
hope there hasn't been a row."

"it's most awfully jolly having miss bart back," said lord hubert, in his
mild deliberate voice; and mrs. bry added ingenuously: "i daresay the
duchess will dine with us, now that lily's here."

"the duchess admires her immensely: i'm sure she'd be charmed to have it
arranged," lord hubert agreed, with the professional promptness of the
man accustomed to draw his profit from facili
 
 ___________________________
 
o be slender and queenly.  she
tried it with the duchess of beltshire and lady skiddaw, and they fled.
i've done my best to make her see her mistake--i've said to her again and
again: 'just let yourself go, louisa'; but she keeps up the humbug even
with me--i believe she keeps on being queenly in her own room, with the
door shut.

"the worst of it is," mrs. fisher went on, "that she thinks it's all my
fault. when the dorsets turned up here six weeks ago, and everybody began
to make a fuss about lily bart, i could see louisa thought that if she'd
had lily in tow instead of me she would have been hob-nobbing with all
the royalties by this time. she doesn't realize that it's lily's beauty
that does it: lord hubert tells me lily is thought even handsomer than
when he knew her at aix ten years ago. it seems she was tremendously
admired there. an italian prince, rich and the real thing, wanted to
marry her; but just at the critical moment a good-looking step-son turned
up, and lily was silly enough t
 
 ___________________________
 
is wife's bored attitude
and frivolous gown proclaimed the heiress's disregard of the
insignificant interests at stake. old ned van alstyne, seated next to her
in a coat that made affliction dapper, twirled his white moustache to
conceal the eager twitch of his lips; and grace stepney, red-nosed and
smelling of crape, whispered emotionally to mrs. herbert melson: "i
couldn't bear to see the niagara anywhere else!"

a rustle of weeds and quick turning of heads hailed the opening of the
door, and lily bart appeared, tall and noble in her black dress, with
gerty farish at her side. the women's faces, as she paused
interrogatively on the threshold, were a study in hesitation. one or two
made faint motions of recognition, which might have been subdued either
by the solemnity of the scene, or by the doubt as to how far the others
meant to go; mrs. jack stepney gave a careless nod, and grace stepney,
with a sepulchral gesture, indicated a seat at her side. but lily,
ignoring the invitation, as well as
 
 ___________________________
 
 lawyer droned on through a labyrinth of
legacies. the servants came first, then a few charitable institutions,
then several remoter melsons and stepneys, who stirred consciously as
their names rang out, and then subsided into a state of impassiveness
befitting the solemnity of the occasion. ned van alstyne, jack stepney,
and a cousin or two followed, each coupled with the mention of a few
thousands: lily wondered that grace stepney was not among them.  then she
heard her own name--"to my niece lily bart ten thousand dollars--" and
after that the lawyer again lost himself in a coil of unintelligible
periods, from which the concluding phrase flashed out with startling
distinctness: "and the residue of my estate to my dear cousin and
name-sake, grace julia stepney."

there was a subdued gasp of surprise, a rapid turning of heads, and a
surging of sable figures toward the corner in which miss stepney wailed
out her sense of unworthiness through the crumpled ball of a black-edged
handkerchief.

lil
 
 ___________________________
 
f the solace of taking anxious counsel with lawrence selden, with
whom, since his return from europe, she had renewed her old relation of
cousinly confidence.

selden himself had never been aware of any change in their relation. he
found gerty as he had left her, simple, undemanding and devoted, but with
a quickened intelligence of the heart which he recognized without seeking
to explain it. to gerty herself it would once have seemed impossible that
she should ever again talk freely with him of lily bart; but what had
passed in the secrecy of her own breast seemed to resolve itself, when
the mist of the struggle cleared, into a breaking down of the bounds of
self, a deflecting of the wasted personal emotion into the general
current of human understanding.

it was not till some two weeks after her visit from lily that gerty had
the opportunity of communicating her fears to selden.  the latter, having
presented himself on a sunday afternoon, had lingered on through the
dowdy animation of his cous
 
 ___________________________
 
ative relief. it was much simpler for him to judge miss bart
by her habitual conduct than by the rare deviations from it which had
thrown her so disturbingly in his way; and every act of hers which made
the recurrence of such deviations more unlikely, confirmed the sense of
relief with which he returned to the conventional view of her.

but gerty farish's words had sufficed to make him see how little this
view was really his, and how impossible it was for him to live quietly
with the thought of lily bart. to hear that she was in need of help--even
such vague help as he could offer--was to be at once repossessed by that
thought; and by the time he reached the street he had sufficiently
convinced himself of the urgency of his cousin's appeal to turn his steps
directly toward lily's hotel.

there his zeal met a check in the unforeseen news that miss bart had
moved away; but, on his pressing his enquiries, the clerk remembered that
she had left an address, for which he presently began to search thr
 
 ___________________________
 
had paused to ask herself if her decision had really
been taken when she entered the room.

"you always told me i should have to come to it sooner or later!" she
said with a faint smile.

"and you have come to it now?"

"i shall have to come to it--presently. but there is something else i
must come to first." she paused again, trying to transmit to her voice
the steadiness of her recovered smile. "there is some one i must say
goodbye to. oh, not you--we are sure to see each other again--but the
lily bart you knew. i have kept her with me all this time, but now we are
going to part, and i have brought her back to you--i am going to leave
her here. when i go out presently she will not go with me. i shall like
to think that she has stayed with you--and she'll be no trouble, she'll
take up no room."

she went toward him, and put out her hand, still smiling. "will you let
her stay with you?" she asked.

he caught her hand, and she felt in his the vibration of feeling that had
not yet risen to his li
 
 ___________________________
 
rd's nest built on the edge of a cliff--a mere wisp of
leaves and straw, yet so put together that the lives entrusted to it may
hang safely over the abyss.

yes--but it had taken two to build the nest; the man's faith as well as
the woman's courage. lily remembered nettie's words: i knew he knew about
me. her husband's faith in her had made her renewal possible--it is so
easy for a woman to become what the man she loves believes her to be!
well--selden had twice been ready to stake his faith on lily bart; but
the third trial had been too severe for his endurance. the very quality
of his love had made it the more impossible to recall to life.  if it had
been a simple instinct of the blood, the power of her beauty might have
revived it. but the fact that it struck deeper, that it was inextricably
wound up with inherited habits of thought and feeling, made it as
impossible to restore to growth as a deep-rooted plant torn from its bed.
selden had given her of his best; but he was as incapable as he
 
 ___________________________
 
--" then selden felt that gerty had
taken him gently by the hand, and that they were to be suffered to go up
alone.

in silence they mounted the three flights, and walked along the passage
to a closed door. gerty opened the door, and selden went in after her.
though the blind was down, the irresistible sunlight poured a tempered
golden flood into the room, and in its light selden saw a narrow bed
along the wall, and on the bed, with motionless hands and calm
unrecognizing face, the semblance of lily bart.

that it was her real self, every pulse in him ardently denied.  her real
self had lain warm on his heart but a few hours earlier--what had he to
do with this estranged and tranquil face which, for the first time,
neither paled nor brightened at his coming?

gerty, strangely tranquil too, with the conscious self-control of one who
has ministered to much pain, stood by the bed, speaking gently, as if
transmitting a final message.

"the doctor found a bottle of chloral--she had been sleeping bad
 
 ___________________________
 
ining
thousands were comprehended in one cheque, made out, at the same time, to
charles augustus trenor.

selden laid the book aside, and sank into the chair beside the desk. he
leaned his elbows on it, and hid his face in his hands. the bitter waters
of life surged high about him, their sterile taste was on his lips. did
the cheque to trenor explain the mystery or deepen it? at first his mind
refused to act--he felt only the taint of such a transaction between a
man like trenor and a girl like lily bart. then, gradually, his troubled
vision cleared, old hints and rumours came back to him, and out of the
very insinuations he had feared to probe, he constructed an explanation
of the mystery. it was true, then, that she had taken money from trenor;
but true also, as the contents of the little desk declared, that the
obligation had been intolerable to her, and that at the first opportunity
she had freed herself from it, though the act left her face to face with
bare unmitigated poverty.

that was 