.

"you're very kind; but i couldn't think of troubling you," she said,
extending her hand to mr. rosedale; and heedless of his protestations,
she sprang into the rescuing vehicle, and called out a breathless order
to the driver.



chapter 2

in the hansom she leaned back with a sigh. why must a girl pay so dearly
for her least escape from routine? why could one never do a natural thing
without having to screen it behind a structure of artifice? she had
yielded to a passing impulse in going to lawrence selden's rooms, and it
was so seldom that she could allow herself the luxury of an impulse! this
one, at any rate, was going to cost her rather more than she could
afford. she was vexed to see that, in spite of so many years of
vigilance, she had blundered twice within five minutes. that stupid story
about her dress-maker was bad enough--it would have been so simple to
tell rosedale that she had been taking tea with selden! the mere
statement of the fact would have rendered it innocuous. but, after ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 heels for
an hour at garrisons, without even the alleviation of a cigarette, her
brute of a husband having neglected to replenish her case before they
parted that morning.

"and at this hour of the day i don't suppose you've a single one left,
have you, lily?" she plaintively concluded.

miss bart caught the startled glance of mr. percy gryce, whose own lips
were never defiled by tobacco.

"what an absurd question, bertha!" she exclaimed, blushing at the thought
of the store she had laid in at lawrence selden's.

"why, don't you smoke? since when have you given it up? what--you
never---- and you don't either, mr. gryce? ah, of course--how stupid of
me--i understand."

and mrs. dorset leaned back against her travelling cushions with a smile
which made lily wish there had been no vacant seat beside her own.



chapter 3

bridge at bellomont usually lasted till the small hours; and when lily
went to bed that night she had played too long for her own good.

feeling no desire for the self-communion which
 
 ___________________________
 
you know perfectly well that, if mrs. van osburgh
were to get all the right people and leave you with all the wrong ones,
you'd manage to make things go off, and she wouldn't."

such an assurance would usually have restored mrs. trenor's complacency;
but on this occasion it did not chase the cloud from her brow.

"it isn't only lady cressida," she lamented. "everything has gone wrong
this week. i can see that bertha dorset is furious with me."

"furious with you? why?"

"because i told her that lawrence selden was coming; but he wouldn't,
after all, and she's quite unreasonable enough to think it's my fault."

miss bart put down her pen and sat absently gazing at the note she had
begun.

"i thought that was all over," she said.

"so it is, on his side. and of course bertha has been idle since.  but i
fancy she's out of a job just at present--and some one gave me a hint
that i had better ask lawrence. well, i did ask him--but i couldn't make
him come; and now i suppose she'll take it out of me by bein
 
 ___________________________
 
t to ask me to play bridge again this evening."

"bridge? does he mind bridge, too? oh, lily, what an awful life you'll
lead! but of course i won't--why didn't you give me a hint last night?
there's nothing i wouldn't do, you poor duck, to see you happy!"

and mrs. trenor, glowing with her sex's eagerness to smooth the course of
true love, enveloped lily in a long embrace.

"you're quite sure," she added solicitously, as the latter extricated
herself, "that you wouldn't like me to telephone for lawrence selden?"

"quite sure," said lily.



the next three days demonstrated to her own complete satisfaction miss
bart's ability to manage her affairs without extraneous aid.

as she sat, on the saturday afternoon, on the terrace at bellomont, she
smiled at mrs. trenor's fear that she might go too fast. if such a
warning had ever been needful, the years had taught her a salutary
lesson, and she flattered herself that she now knew how to adapt her pace
to the object of pursuit. in the case of mr. gryce she 
 
 ___________________________
 
of steps and voices: it was evident that the party
about the tea-table was breaking up.  presently she heard a tread behind
her on the terrace. she supposed that mr. gryce had at last found means
to escape from his predicament, and she smiled at the significance of his
coming to join her instead of beating an instant retreat to the fire-side.

she turned to give him the welcome which such gallantry deserved; but her
greeting wavered into a blush of wonder, for the man who had approached
her was lawrence selden.

"you see i came after all," he said; but before she had time to answer,
mrs. dorset, breaking away from a lifeless colloquy with her host, had
stepped between them with a little gesture of appropriation.



chapter 5

the observance of sunday at bellomont was chiefly marked by the punctual
appearance of the smart omnibus destined to convey the household to the
little church at the gates. whether any one got into the omnibus or not
was a matter of secondary importance, since by standing there 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a part of the walk they were to take together after
luncheon. her intentions in short had never been more definite; but poor
lily, for all the hard glaze of her exterior, was inwardly as malleable
as wax. her faculty for adapting herself, for entering into other
people's feelings, if it served her now and then in small contingencies,
hampered her in the decisive moments of life. she was like a water-plant
in the flux of the tides, and today the whole current of her mood was
carrying her toward lawrence selden. why had he come? was it to see
herself or bertha dorset?  it was the last question which, at that
moment, should have engaged her. she might better have contented herself
with thinking that he had simply responded to the despairing summons of
his hostess, anxious to interpose him between herself and the ill-humour
of mrs. dorset. but lily had not rested till she learned from mrs. trenor
that selden had come of his own accord.  "he didn't even wire me--he just
happened to find the trap at the s
 
 ___________________________
 
set,
however, his wife's attitude was a subject of such evident concern that,
when he was not scraping the sauce from his fish, or scooping the moist
bread-crumbs from the interior of his roll, he sat straining his thin
neck for a glimpse of her between the lights.

mrs. trenor, as it chanced, had placed the husband and wife on opposite
sides of the table, and lily was therefore able to observe mrs. dorset
also, and by carrying her glance a few feet farther, to set up a rapid
comparison between lawrence selden and mr. gryce. it was that comparison
which was her undoing. why else had she suddenly grown interested in
selden? she had known him for eight years or more: ever since her return
to america he had formed a part of her background. she had always been
glad to sit next to him at dinner, had found him more agreeable than most
men, and had vaguely wished that he possessed the other qualities needful
to fix her attention; but till now she had been too busy with her own
affairs to regard him as more 
 
 ___________________________
 
eptible additions. the library at bellomont was in fact never used
for reading, though it had a certain popularity as a smoking-room or a
quiet retreat for flirtation. it had occurred to lily, however, that it
might on this occasion have been resorted to by the only member of the
party in the least likely to put it to its original use. she advanced
noiselessly over the dense old rug scattered with easy-chairs, and before
she reached the middle of the room she saw that she had not been
mistaken. lawrence selden was in fact seated at its farther end; but
though a book lay on his knee, his attention was not engaged with it, but
directed to a lady whose lace-clad figure, as she leaned back in an
adjoining chair, detached itself with exaggerated slimness against the
dusky leather upholstery.

lily paused as she caught sight of the group; for a moment she seemed
about to withdraw, but thinking better of this, she announced her
approach by a slight shake of her skirts which made the couple raise
their heads
 
 ___________________________
 
that," she said. she paused again, with her
eyes on lily, and then continued, in a tone of diffuse narrative: "when
we was at the benedick i had charge of some of the gentlemen's rooms;
leastways, i swep' 'em out on saturdays.  some of the gentlemen got the
greatest sight of letters: i never saw the like of it. their waste-paper
baskets 'd be fairly brimming, and papers falling over on the floor.
maybe havin' so many is how they get so careless. some of 'em is worse
than others. mr. selden, mr. lawrence selden, he was always one of the
carefullest: burnt his letters in winter, and tore 'em in little bits in
summer. but sometimes he'd have so many he'd just bunch 'em together, the
way the others did, and tear the lot through once--like this."

while she spoke she had loosened the string from the parcel in her hand,
and now she drew forth a letter which she laid on the table between miss
bart and herself. as she had said, the letter was torn in two; but with a
rapid gesture she laid the torn edges toge
 
 ___________________________
 
 under the glare of mrs. peniston's
chandelier she had recognized the hand-writing of the letter. it was a
large disjointed hand, with a flourish of masculinity which but slightly
disguised its rambling weakness, and the words, scrawled in heavy ink on
pale-tinted notepaper, smote on lily's ear as though she had heard them
spoken.

at first she did not grasp the full import of the situation. she
understood only that before her lay a letter written by bertha dorset,
and addressed, presumably, to lawrence selden. there was no date, but the
blackness of the ink proved the writing to be comparatively recent.  the
packet in mrs. haffen's hand doubtless contained more letters of the same
kind--a dozen, lily conjectured from its thickness. the letter before her
was short, but its few words, which had leapt into her brain before she
was conscious of reading them, told a long history--a history over which,
for the last four years, the friends of the writer had smiled and
shrugged, viewing it merely as one amo
 
 ___________________________
 
sions could reach. but keenest of all was the
exhilaration of displaying her own beauty under a new aspect: of showing
that her loveliness was no mere fixed quality, but an element shaping all
emotions to fresh forms of grace.

mrs. fisher's measures had been well-taken, and society, surprised in a
dull moment, succumbed to the temptation of mrs. bry's hospitality. the
protesting minority were forgotten in the throng which abjured and came;
and the audience was almost as brilliant as the show.

lawrence selden was among those who had yielded to the proffered
inducements. if he did not often act on the accepted social axiom that a
man may go where he pleases, it was because he had long since learned
that his pleasures were mainly to be found in a small group of the
like-minded. but he enjoyed spectacular effects, and was not insensible
to the part money plays in their production: all he asked was that the
very rich should live up to their calling as stage-managers, and not
spend their money in a dull 
 
 ___________________________
 
, woke
from dreams as happy as lily's. if they were less vivid in hue, more
subdued to the half-tints of her personality and her experience, they
were for that very reason better suited to her mental vision. such
flashes of joy as lily moved in would have blinded miss farish, who was
accustomed, in the way of happiness, to such scant light as shone through
the cracks of other people's lives.

now she was the centre of a little illumination of her own: a mild but
unmistakable beam, compounded of lawrence selden's growing kindness to
herself and the discovery that he extended his liking to lily bart. if
these two factors seem incompatible to the student of feminine
psychology, it must be remembered that gerty had always been a parasite
in the moral order, living on the crumbs of other tables, and content to
look through the window at the banquet spread for her friends. now that
she was enjoying a little private feast of her own, it would have seemed
incredibly selfish not to lay a plate for a friend; a
 
 ___________________________
 
 with sudden
compunction. "but mrs. peniston--it's past midnight! what will she think?"

"she goes to bed. i have a latch-key. it doesn't matter--i can't go back
there."

"there's no need to: you shall stay here. but you must tell me where you
have been. listen, lily--it will help you to speak!" she regained miss
bart's hands, and pressed them against her.  "try to tell me--it will
clear your poor head. listen--you were dining at carry fisher's." gerty
paused and added with a flash of heroism: "lawrence selden went from here
to find you."

at the word, lily's face melted from locked anguish to the open misery of
a child. her lips trembled and her gaze widened with tears.

"he went to find me? and i missed him! oh, gerty, he tried to help me.
he told me--he warned me long ago--he foresaw that i should grow hateful
to myself!"

the name, as gerty saw with a clutch at the heart, had loosened the
springs of self-pity in her friend's dry breast, and tear by tear lily
poured out the measure of her anguish.
 
 ___________________________
 
w, and made it clear to her that she
would hear from selden before noon; but the day passed without his
writing or coming. lily remained at home, lunching and dining alone with
her aunt, who complained of flutterings of the heart, and talked icily on
general topics. mrs. peniston went to bed early, and when she had gone
lily sat down and wrote a note to selden. she was about to ring for a
messenger to despatch it when her eye fell on a paragraph in the evening
paper which lay at her elbow: "mr. lawrence selden was among the
passengers sailing this afternoon for havana and the west indies on the
windward liner antilles."

she laid down the paper and sat motionless, staring at her note. she
understood now that he was never coming--that he had gone away because he
was afraid that he might come.  she rose, and walking across the floor
stood gazing at herself for a long time in the brightly-lit mirror above
the mantel-piece.  the lines in her face came out terribly--she looked
old; and when a girl looks o
 
 ___________________________
 
m to come to her, but the words refused to shape themselves. at
length she began: "i have been thinking----" then she laid the pen down,
and sat with her elbows on the table and her face hidden in her hands.

suddenly she started up at the sound of the door-bell. it was not
late--barely ten o'clock--and there might still be a note from selden, or
a message--or he might be there himself, on the other side of the door!
the announcement of his sailing might have been a mistake--it might be
another lawrence selden who had gone to havana--all these possibilities
had time to flash through her mind, and build up the conviction that she
was after all to see or hear from him, before the drawing-room door
opened to admit a servant carrying a telegram.

lily tore it open with shaking hands, and read bertha dorset's name below
the message: "sailing unexpectedly tomorrow. will you join us on a cruise
in mediterranean?"




                        book two


chapter 1

it came vividly to selden on the casino steps
 
 ___________________________
 
was not fond of bertha dorset, but neither was she without a sense of
obligation, the heavier for having so little personal liking to sustain
it. bertha had been kind to her, they had lived together, during the last
months, on terms of easy friendship, and the sense of friction of which
lily had recently become aware seemed to make it the more urgent that she
should work undividedly in her friend's interest.

it was in bertha's interest, certainly, that she had despatched dorset to
consult with lawrence selden. once the grotesqueness of the situation
accepted, she had seen at a glance that it was the safest in which dorset
could find himself. who but selden could thus miraculously combine the
skill to save bertha with the obligation of doing so? the consciousness
that much skill would be required made lily rest thankfully in the
greatness of the obligation. since he would have to pull bertha through
she could trust him to find a way; and she put the fulness of her trust
in the telegram she managed to
 
 ___________________________
 
acked creature's attempt to
cloud the medium through which it was fleeing? it was on lily's lips to
exclaim: "you poor soul, don't double and turn--come straight back to me,
and we'll find a way out!" but the words died under the impenetrable
insolence of bertha's smile. lily sat silent, taking the brunt of it
quietly, letting it spend itself on her to the last drop of its
accumulated falseness; then, without a word, she rose and went down to
her cabin.



chapter 3

miss bart's telegram caught lawrence selden at the door of his hotel; and
having read it, he turned back to wait for dorset. the message
necessarily left large gaps for conjecture; but all that he had recently
heard and seen made these but too easy to fill in. on the whole he was
surprised; for though he had perceived that the situation contained all
the elements of an explosion, he had often enough, in the range of his
personal experience, seen just such combinations subside into
harmlessness. still, dorset's spasmodic temper, and his w
 
 ___________________________
 
d lily had lain in each
other's arms, and she had seemed to feel her very heart's blood passing
into her friend. the sacrifice she had made had seemed unavailing enough;
no trace remained in lily of the subduing influences of that hour; but
gerty's tenderness, disciplined by long years of contact with obscure and
inarticulate suffering, could wait on its object with a silent
forbearance which took no account of time. she could not, however, deny
herself the solace of taking anxious counsel with lawrence selden, with
whom, since his return from europe, she had renewed her old relation of
cousinly confidence.

selden himself had never been aware of any change in their relation. he
found gerty as he had left her, simple, undemanding and devoted, but with
a quickened intelligence of the heart which he recognized without seeking
to explain it. to gerty herself it would once have seemed impossible that
she should ever again talk freely with him of lily bart; but what had
passed in the secrecy of her own br
 
 ___________________________
 
missile as mrs. hatch at the perfidious bosom of society
was not without its charm: miss bart had even beguiled her leisure with
visions of the fair norma introduced for the first time to a family
banquet at the van osburghs'. but the thought of being personally
connected with the transaction was less agreeable; and her momentary
flashes of amusement were followed by increasing periods of doubt.

the sense of these doubts was uppermost when, late one afternoon, she was
surprised by a visit from lawrence selden. he found her alone in the
wilderness of pink damask, for in mrs. hatch's world the tea-hour was not
dedicated to social rites, and the lady was in the hands of her masseuse.

selden's entrance had caused lily an inward start of embarrassment; but
his air of constraint had the effect of restoring her self-possession,
and she took at once the tone of surprise and pleasure, wondering frankly
that he should have traced her to so unlikely a place, and asking what
had inspired him to make the search
 
 ___________________________
 
 been nipped except the crowning blossom of her beauty.

last of all, she drew forth from the bottom of her trunk a heap of white
drapery which fell shapelessly across her arm. it was the reynolds dress
she had worn in the bry tableaux. it had been impossible for her to give
it away, but she had never seen it since that night, and the long
flexible folds, as she shook them out, gave forth an odour of violets
which came to her like a breath from the flower-edged fountain where she
had stood with lawrence selden and disowned her fate. she put back the
dresses one by one, laying away with each some gleam of light, some note
of laughter, some stray waft from the rosy shores of pleasure. she was
still in a state of highly-wrought impressionability, and every hint of
the past sent a lingering tremor along her nerves.

she had just closed her trunk on the white folds of the reynolds dress
when she heard a tap at her door, and the red fist of the irish
maid-servant thrust in a belated letter. carrying it to 