her sister is going to
have a baby--as if that were anything to having a house-party! i'm sure i
shall get most horribly mixed up and there will be some awful rows. when
i was down at tuxedo i asked a lot of people for next week, and i've
mislaid the list and can't remember who is coming. and this week is going
to be a horrid failure too--and gwen van osburgh will go back and tell
her mother how bored people were. i did mean to ask the wetheralls--that
was a blunder of gus's. they disapprove of carry fisher, you know. as if
one could help having carry fisher! it was foolish of her to get that
second divorce--carry always overdoes things--but she said the only way
to get a penny out of fisher was to divorce him and make him pay alimony.
and poor carry has to consider every dollar. it's really absurd of alice
wetherall to make such a fuss about meeting her, when one thinks of what
society is coming to. some one said the other day that there was a
divorce and a case of appendicitis in every family on
 
 ___________________________
 
 is the
moral one--married a clergy-man and does missionary work in the east end.
think of my taking such a lot of trouble about a clergyman's wife, who
wears indian jewelry and botanizes! she made gus take her all through the
glass-houses yesterday, and bothered him to death by asking him the names
of the plants. fancy treating gus as if he were the gardener!"

mrs. trenor brought this out in a crescendo of indignation.

"oh, well, perhaps lady cressida will reconcile the wetheralls to meeting
carry fisher," said miss bart pacifically.

"i'm sure i hope so! but she is boring all the men horribly, and if she
takes to distributing tracts, as i hear she does, it will be too
depressing. the worst of it is that she would have been so useful at the
right time. you know we have to have the bishop once a year, and she
would have given just the right tone to things. i always have horrid luck
about the bishop's visits," added mrs. trenor, whose present misery was
being fed by a rapidly rising tide of remin
 
 ___________________________
 
ncy she's out of a job just at present--and some one gave me a hint
that i had better ask lawrence. well, i did ask him--but i couldn't make
him come; and now i suppose she'll take it out of me by being perfectly
nasty to every one else."

"oh, she may take it out of him by being perfectly charming--to some one
else."

mrs. trenor shook her head dolefully. "she knows he wouldn't mind. and
who else is there? alice wetherall won't let lucius out of her sight.
ned silverton can't take his eyes off carry fisher--poor boy! gus is
bored by bertha, jack stepney knows her too well--and--well, to be sure,
there's percy gryce!"

she sat up smiling at the thought.

miss bart's countenance did not reflect the smile.

"oh, she and mr. gryce would not be likely to hit it off."

"you mean that she'd shock him and he'd bore her? well, that's not such a
bad beginning, you know. but i hope she won't take it into her head to be
nice to him, for i asked him here on purpose for you."

lily laughed. "merci du complimen
 
 ___________________________
 
as miss bart stood leaning against the
balustrade above the sunken garden, at a little distance from the
animated group about the tea-table, she might have been lost in the mazes
of an inarticulate happiness. in reality, her thoughts were finding
definite utterance in the tranquil recapitulation of the blessings in
store for her. from where she stood she could see them embodied in the
form of mr. gryce, who, in a light overcoat and muffler, sat somewhat
nervously on the edge of his chair, while carry fisher, with all the
energy of eye and gesture with which nature and art had combined to endow
her, pressed on him the duty of taking part in the task of municipal
reform.

mrs. fisher's latest hobby was municipal reform. it had been preceded by
an equal zeal for socialism, which had in turn replaced an energetic
advocacy of christian science. mrs. fisher was small, fiery and dramatic;
and her hands and eyes were admirable instruments in the service of
whatever causes he happened to espouse. she had, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ff and the dusty
daylight let in. she looked down the long table, studying its occupants
one by one, from gus trenor, with his heavy carnivorous head sunk between
his shoulders, as he preyed on a jellied plover, to his wife, at the
opposite end of the long bank of orchids, suggestive, with her glaring
good-looks, of a jeweller's window lit by electricity. and between the
two, what a long stretch of vacuity! how dreary and trivial these people
were! lily reviewed them with a scornful impatience: carry fisher, with
her shoulders, her eyes, her divorces, her general air of embodying a
"spicy paragraph"; young silverton, who had meant to live on
proof-reading and write an epic, and who now lived on his friends and had
become critical of truffles; alice wetherall, an animated visiting-list,
whose most fervid convictions turned on the wording of invitations and
the engraving of dinner-cards; wetherall, with his perpetual nervous nod
of acquiescence, his air of agreeing with people before he knew what th
 
 ___________________________
 
ternoon walk. that walk she did not mean to
miss; one glance at the bills on her writing-table was enough to recall
its necessity. but meanwhile she had the morning to herself, and could
muse pleasantly on the disposal of its hours. she was familiar enough
with the habits of bellomont to know that she was likely to have a free
field till luncheon. she had seen the wetheralls, the trenor girls and
lady cressida packed safely into the omnibus; judy trenor was sure to be
having her hair shampooed; carry fisher had doubtless carried off her
host for a drive; ned silverton was probably smoking the cigarette of
young despair in his bedroom; and kate corby was certain to be playing
tennis with jack stepney and miss van osburgh. of the ladies, this left
only mrs. dorset unaccounted for, and mrs. dorset never came down till
luncheon: her doctors, she averred, had forbidden her to expose herself
to the crude air of the morning.

to the remaining members of the party lily gave no special thought;
wherever th
 
 ___________________________
 
ropped back to a
soberer perception of things with the question: "what was it bertha
really told him?"

"don't ask me--horrors! she seemed to have raked up everything.  oh, you
know what i mean--of course there isn't anything, really; but i suppose
she brought in prince varigliano--and lord hubert--and there was some
story of your having borrowed money of old ned van alstyne: did you ever?"

"he is my father's cousin," miss bart interposed.

"well, of course she left that out. it seems ned told carry fisher; and
she told bertha, naturally. they're all alike, you know: they hold their
tongues for years, and you think you're safe, but when their opportunity
comes they remember everything."

lily had grown pale: her voice had a harsh note in it. "it was some money
i lost at bridge at the van osburghs'. i repaid it, of course."

"ah, well, they wouldn't remember that; besides, it was the idea of the
gambling debt that frightened percy. oh, bertha knew her man--she knew
just what to tell him!"

in this
 
 ___________________________
 
t want: her
mind was filled with the vision of what that shelter might have been to
her. mrs. dorset's pin-pricks did not smart, for her own irony cut
deeper: no one could hurt her as much as she was hurting herself, for no
one else--not even judy trenor--knew the full magnitude of her folly.

she was roused from these unprofitable considerations by a whispered
request from her hostess, who drew her apart as they left the
luncheon-table.

"lily, dear, if you've nothing special to do, may i tell carry fisher
that you intend to drive to the station and fetch gus? he will be back at
four, and i know she has it in her mind to meet him. of course i'm very
glad to have him amused, but i happen to know that she has bled him
rather severely since she's been here, and she is so keen about going to
fetch him that i fancy she must have got a lot more bills this morning.
it seems to me," mrs. trenor feelingly concluded, "that most of her
alimony is paid by other women's husbands!"

miss bart, on her way to th
 
 ___________________________
 
e station, had leisure to muse over her
friend's words, and their peculiar application to herself.  why should
she have to suffer for having once, for a few hours, borrowed money of an
elderly cousin, when a woman like carry fisher could make a living
unrebuked from the good-nature of her men friends and the tolerance of
their wives? it all turned on the tiresome distinction between what a
married woman might, and a girl might not, do. of course it was shocking
for a married woman to borrow money--and lily was expertly aware of the
implication involved--but still, it was the mere malum prohibitum which
the world decries but condones, and which, though it may be punished by
private vengeance, does not provoke the collectiv
 
 ___________________________
 
of the least
hint of ambiguity. mrs. trenor evidently assumed that lily's growing
intimacy with her husband was simply an indirect way of returning her own
kindness.

"i'm so glad you and gus have become such good friends," she said
approvingly. "it's too delightful of you to be so nice to him, and put up
with all his tiresome stories. i know what they are, because i had to
listen to them when we were engaged--i'm sure he is telling the same ones
still. and now i shan't always have to be asking carry fisher here to
keep him in a good-humour. she's a perfect vulture, you know; and she
hasn't the least moral sense.  she is always getting gus to speculate for
her, and i'm sure she never pays when she loses."

miss bart could shudder at this state of things without the embarrassment
of a personal application. her own position was surely quite different.
there could be no question of her not paying when she lost, since trenor
had assured her that she was certain not to lose. in sending her the
cheque h
 
 ___________________________
 
s home life--a most
peculiar arrangement, i should say! but mrs. dorset told molly about it
herself: she said the villa was full of the most exquisite things and she
was really sorry to leave. molly said she never saw her looking better;
she was in tremendous spirits, and said she had made a match between evie
van osburgh and percy gryce. she really seems to have a very good
influence on young men. i hear she is interesting herself now in that
silly silverton boy, who has had his head turned by carry fisher, and has
been gambling so dreadfully. well, as i was saying, evie is really
engaged: mrs. dorset had her to stay with percy gryce, and managed it
all, and grace van osburgh is in the seventh heaven--she had almost
despaired of marrying evie."

mrs. peniston again paused, but this time her scrutiny addressed itself,
not to the furniture, but to her niece.

"cornelia van alstyne was so surprised: she had heard that you were to
marry young gryce. she saw the wetheralls just after they had stopped

 
 ___________________________
 
quaintance lily
had hitherto avoided. now, however, she was disposed to coincide with
mrs. fisher's view, that it didn't matter who gave the party, as long as
things were well done; and doing things well (under competent direction)
was mrs. wellington bry's strong point. the lady (whose consort was known
as "welly" bry on the stock exchange and in sporting circles) had already
sacrificed one husband, and sundry minor considerations, to her
determination to get on; and, having obtained a hold on carry fisher, she
was astute enough to perceive the wisdom of committing herself entirely
to that lady's guidance. everything, accordingly, was well done, for
there was no limit to mrs. fisher's prodigality when she was not spending
her own money, and as she remarked to her pupil, a good cook was the best
introduction to society. if the company was not as select as the cuisine,
the welly brys at least had the satisfaction of figuring for the first
time in the society columns in company with one or two notic
 
 ___________________________
 

gerty farish, seated next to selden, was lost in that indiscriminate and
uncritical enjoyment so irritating to miss bart's finer perceptions. it
may be that selden's nearness had something to do with the quality of his
cousin's pleasure; but miss farish was so little accustomed to refer her
enjoyment of such scenes to her own share in them, that she was merely
conscious of a deeper sense of contentment.

"wasn't it dear of lily to get me an invitation? of course it would never
have occurred to carry fisher to put me on the list, and i should have
been so sorry to miss seeing it all--and especially lily herself.  some
one told me the ceiling was by veronese--you would know, of course,
lawrence. i suppose it's very beautiful, but his women are so dreadfully
fat. goddesses?  well, i can only say that if they'd been mortals and had
to wear corsets, it would have been better for them. i think our women
are much handsomer. and this room is wonderfully becoming--every one
looks so well! did you ever see
 
 ___________________________
 
o the producing of such illusions, and under morpeth's
organizing hand the pictures succeeded each other with the rhythmic march
of some splendid frieze, in which the fugitive curves of living flesh and
the wandering light of young eyes have been subdued to plastic harmony
without losing the charm of life.

the scenes were taken from old pictures, and the participators had been
cleverly fitted with characters suited to their types.  no one, for
instance, could have made a more typical goya than carry fisher, with her
short dark-skinned face, the exaggerated glow of her eyes, the
provocation of her frankly-painted smile. a brilliant miss smedden from
brooklyn showed to perfection the sumptuous curves of titian's daughter,
lifting her gold salver laden with grapes above the harmonizing gold of
rippled hair and rich brocade, and a young mrs. van alstyne, who showed
the frailer dutch type, with high blue-veined forehead and pale eyes and
lashes, made a characteristic vandyck, in black satin, against a
 
 ___________________________
 
 girl--all my thoughts are
bad--i have always had bad people about me. is that any excuse? i thought
i could manage my own life--i was proud--proud! but now i'm on their
level----"

sobs shook her, and she bowed to them like a tree in a dry storm.

gerty knelt beside her, waiting, with the patience born of experience,
till this gust of misery should loosen fresh speech.  she had first
imagined some physical shock, some peril of the crowded streets, since
lily was presumably on her way home from carry fisher's; but she now saw
that other nerve-centres were smitten, and her mind trembled back from
conjecture.

lily's sobs ceased, and she lifted her head.

"there are bad girls in your slums. tell me--do they ever pick themselves
up? ever forget, and feel as they did before?"

"lily! you mustn't speak so--you're dreaming."

"don't they always go from bad to worse? there's no turning back--your
old self rejects you, and shuts you out."

she rose, stretching her arms as if in utter physical weariness.  
 
 ___________________________
 
hands are
frozen--you must undress and be made warm." gerty paused with sudden
compunction. "but mrs. peniston--it's past midnight! what will she think?"

"she goes to bed. i have a latch-key. it doesn't matter--i can't go back
there."

"there's no need to: you shall stay here. but you must tell me where you
have been. listen, lily--it will help you to speak!" she regained miss
bart's hands, and pressed them against her.  "try to tell me--it will
clear your poor head. listen--you were dining at carry fisher's." gerty
paused and added with a flash of heroism: "lawrence selden went from here
to find you."

at the word, lily's face melted from locked anguish to the open misery of
a child. her lips trembled and her gaze widened with tears.

"he went to find me? and i missed him! oh, gerty, he tried to help me.
he told me--he warned me long ago--he foresaw that i should grow hateful
to myself!"

the name, as gerty saw with a clutch at the heart, had loosened the
springs of self-pity in her friend's dry
 
 ___________________________
 
bled the eggs myself."

lily could not eat; but the tea strengthened her to rise and dress under
her maid's searching gaze. it was a relief to her that gerty was obliged
to hasten away: the two kissed silently, but without a trace of the
previous night's emotion.

lily found mrs. peniston in a state of agitation. she had sent for grace
stepney and was taking digitalis. lily breasted the storm of enquiries as
best she could, explaining that she had had an attack of faintness on her
way back from carry fisher's; that, fearing she would not have strength
to reach home, she had gone to miss farish's instead; but that a quiet
night had restored her, and that she had no need of a doctor.

this was a relief to mrs. peniston, who could give herself up to her own
symptoms, and lily was advised to go and lie down, her aunt's panacea for
all physical and moral disorders. in the solitude of her own room she was
brought back to a sharp contemplation of facts. her daylight view of them
necessarily differed from
 
 ___________________________
 
on.

mrs. peniston examined her critically. "you're a bad colour, lily: this
incessant rushing about is beginning to tell on you," she said.

miss bart saw an opening. "i don't think it's that, aunt julia; i've had
worries," she replied.

"ah," said mrs. peniston, shutting her lips with the snap of a purse
closing against a beggar.

"i'm sorry to bother you with them," lily continued, "but i really
believe my faintness last night was brought on partly by anxious
thoughts--"

"i should have said carry fisher's cook was enough to account for it.
she has a woman who was with maria melson in 1891--the spring of the year
we went to aix--and i remember dining there two days before we sailed,
and feeling sure the coppers hadn't been scoured."

"i don't think i ate much; i can't eat or sleep." lily paused, and then
said abruptly: "the fact is, aunt julia, i owe some money."

mrs. peniston's face clouded perceptibly, but did not express the
astonishment her niece had expected. she was silent, and lily was 
 
 ___________________________
 
er an infinity of ways of being idle. lord hubert dacey had finally
gone off in quest of the duchess of beltshire, charged by mrs. bry with
the delicate negotiation of securing that lady's presence at dinner, the
stepneys had left for nice in their motor-car, and mr. bry had departed
to take his place in the pigeon shooting match which was at the moment
engaging his highest faculties.

mrs. bry, who had a tendency to grow red and stertorous after luncheon,
had been judiciously prevailed upon by carry fisher to withdraw to her
hotel for an hour's repose; and selden and his companion were thus left
to a stroll propitious to confidences. the stroll soon resolved itself
into a tranquil session on a bench overhung with laurel and banksian
roses, from which they caught a dazzle of blue sea between marble
balusters, and the fiery shafts of cactus-blossoms shooting meteor-like
from the rock. the soft shade of their niche, and the adjacent glitter of
the air, were conducive to an easy lounging mood, and to
 
 ___________________________
 
but even had she felt the least trust in their efficacy,
she would still have been held back by the feeling which had kept her
from defending herself to gerty farish--a feeling that was half pride and
half humiliation. for though she knew she had been ruthlessly sacrificed
to bertha dorset's determination to win back her husband, and though her
own relation to dorset had been that of the merest good-fellowship, yet
she had been perfectly aware from the outset that her part in the affair
was, as carry fisher brutally put it, to distract dorset's attention from
his wife.  that was what she was "there for": it was the price she had
chosen to pay for three months of luxury and freedom from care.  her
habit of resolutely facing the facts, in her rare moments of
introspection, did not now allow her to put any false gloss on the
situation. she had suffered for the very faithfulness with which she had
carried out her part of the tacit compact, but the part was not a
handsome one at best, and she saw it no
 
 ___________________________
 
aid, on her expectations.

"my dear gerty, you wouldn't have me let the head-waiter see that i've
nothing to live on but aunt julia's legacy? think of grace stepney's
satisfaction if she came in and found us lunching on cold mutton and tea!
what sweet shall we have today, dear--coupe jacques or peches a la melba?"

she dropped the menu abruptly, with a quick heightening of colour, and
gerty, following her glance, was aware of the advance, from an inner
room, of a party headed by mrs. trenor and carry fisher. it was
impossible for these ladies and their companions--among whom lily had at
once distinguished both trenor and rosedale--not to pass, in going out,
the table at which the two girls were seated; and gerty's sense of the
fact betrayed itself in the helpless trepidation of her manner.  miss
bart, on the contrary, borne forward on the wave of her buoyant grace,
and neither shrinking from her friends nor appearing to lie in wait for
them, gave to the encounter the touch of naturalness which she
 
 ___________________________
 
 a word to say to the head-waiter; and the rest of the group
soon melted away in mrs. trenor's wake.

it was over in a moment--the waiter, menu in hand, still hung on the
result of the choice between coupe jacques and peches a la melba--but
miss bart, in the interval, had taken the measure of her fate. where judy
trenor led, all the world would follow; and lily had the doomed sense of
the castaway who has signalled in vain to fleeing sails.

in a flash she remembered mrs. trenor's complaints of carry fisher's
rapacity, and saw that they denoted an unexpected acquaintance with her
husband's private affairs. in the large tumultuous disorder of the life
at bellomont, where no one seemed to have time to observe any one else,
and private aims and personal interests were swept along unheeded in the
rush of collective activities, lily had fancied herself sheltered from
inconvenient scrutiny; but if judy knew when mrs. fisher borrowed money
of her husband, was she likely to ignore the same transaction on 
 
 ___________________________
 
were dispersing themselves over the
grounds in quest of the various distractions the place afforded:
distractions ranging from tennis-courts to shooting-galleries, from
bridge and whiskey within doors to motors and steam-launches without.
lily had the odd sense of having been caught up into the crowd as
carelessly as a passenger is gathered in by an express train. the blonde
and genial mrs. gormer might, indeed, have figured the conductor, calmly
assigning seats to the rush of travellers, while carry fisher represented
the porter pushing their bags into place, giving them their numbers for
the dining-car, and warning them when their station was at hand. the
train, meanwhile, had scarcely slackened speed--life whizzed on with a
deafening' rattle and roar, in which one traveller at least found a
welcome refuge from the sound of her own thoughts.  the gormer milieu
represented a social out-skirt which lily had always fastidiously
avoided; but it struck her, now that she was in it, as only a flamboyan
 
 ___________________________
 
 in a higher key, and there was more of
each thing: more noise, more colour, more champagne, more
familiarity--but also greater good-nature, less rivalry, and a fresher
capacity for enjoyment.

miss bart's arrival had been welcomed with an uncritical friendliness
that first irritated her pride and then brought her to a sharp sense of
her own situation--of the place in life which, for the moment, she must
accept and make the best of.  these people knew her story--of that her
first long talk with carry fisher had left no doubt: she was publicly
branded as the heroine of a "queer" episode--but instead of shrinking
from her as her own friends had done, they received her without question
into the easy promiscuity of their lives. they swallowed her past as
easily as they did miss anstell's, and with no apparent sense of any
difference in the size of the mouthful: all they asked was that she
should--in her own way, for they recognized a diversity of
gifts--contribute as much to the general amusement as t
 
 ___________________________
 
relief the charms of the life she was
leaving. the other guests were dispersing to take up the same existence
in a different setting: some at newport, some at bar harbour, some in the
elaborate rusticity of an adirondack camp. even gerty farish, who
welcomed lily's return with tender solicitude, would soon be preparing to
join the aunt with whom she spent her summers on lake george: only lily
herself remained without plan or purpose, stranded in a backwater of the
great current of pleasure. but carry fisher, who had insisted on
transporting her to her own house, where she herself was to perch for a
day or two on the way to the brys' camp, came to the rescue with a new
suggestion.

"look here, lily--i'll tell you what it is: i want you to take my place
with mattie gormer this summer. they're taking a party out to alaska next
month in their private car, and mattie, who is the laziest woman alive,
wants me to go with them, and relieve her of the bother of arranging
things; but the brys want me too--o
 
 ___________________________
 
e
constitutes a moral claim on the part of the person in whose behalf it
has been made. having once helped lily, she must continue to help her;
and helping her, must believe in her, because faith is the main-spring of
such natures. but even if miss bart, after her renewed taste of the
amenities of life, could have returned to the barrenness of a new york
august, mitigated only by poor gerty's presence, her worldly wisdom would
have counselled her against such an act of abnegation. she knew that
carry fisher was right: that an opportune absence might be the first step
toward rehabilitation, and that, at any rate, to linger on in town out of
season was a fatal admission of defeat.  from the gormers' tumultuous
progress across their native continent, she returned with an altered view
of her situation.  the renewed habit of luxury--the daily waking to an
assured absence of care and presence of material ease--gradually blunted
her appreciation of these values, and left her more conscious of the void
th
 
 ___________________________
 
g her to look at and listen to while he lounged in
mattie gormer's dishevelled drawing-room.

lily had thus formed, in the tumult of her surroundings, a little nucleus
of friendly relations which mitigated the crudeness of her course in
lingering with the gormers after their return. nor was she without pale
glimpses of her own world, especially since the breaking-up of the
newport season had set the social current once more toward long island.
kate corby, whose tastes made her as promiscuous as carry fisher was
rendered by her necessities, occasionally descended on the gormers,
where, after a first stare of surprise, she took lily's presence almost
too much as a matter of course. mrs. fisher, too, appearing frequently in
the neighbourhood, drove over to impart her experiences and give lily
what she called the latest report from the weather-bureau; and the
latter, who had never directly invited her confidence, could yet talk
with her more freely than with gerty farish, in whose presence it was
impo
 
 ___________________________
 
of ease.

the necessity of accepting this view of their past relation, and of
meeting it in the key of pleasantry prevalent among her new friends, was
deeply humiliating to lily. but she dared less than ever to quarrel with
rosedale. she suspected that her rejection rankled among the most
unforgettable of his rebuffs, and the fact that he knew something of her
wretched transaction with trenor, and was sure to put the basest
construction on it, seemed to place her hopelessly in his power. yet at
carry fisher's suggestion a new hope had stirred in her. much as she
disliked rosedale, she no longer absolutely despised him. for he was
gradually attaining his object in life, and that, to lily, was always
less despicable than to miss it. with the slow unalterable persistency
which she had always felt in him, he was making his way through the dense
mass of social antagonisms. already his wealth, and the masterly use he
had made of it, were giving him an enviable prominence in the world of
affairs, and pla
 
 ___________________________
 
--?" he checked himself, slashing at
the wayside weeds in a wider radius. then he began again: "miss bart,
listen--give me a minute. if we're not to meet again, at least let me
have a hearing now. you say we can't be friends after--after what has
happened. but can't i at least appeal to your pity? can't i move you if i
ask you to think of me as a prisoner--a prisoner you alone can set free?"

lily's inward start betrayed itself in a quick blush: was it possible
that this was really the sense of carry fisher's adumbrations?

"i can't see how i can possibly be of any help to you," she murmured,
drawing back a little from the mounting excitement of his look.

her tone seemed to sober him, as it had so often done in his stormiest
moments. the stubborn lines of his face relaxed, and he said, with an
abrupt drop to docility: "you would see, if you'd be as merciful as you
used to be: and heaven knows i've never needed it more!"

she paused a moment, moved in spite of herself by this reminder of her
influ
 
 ___________________________
 
arriage with rosedale seemed the only honourable solution of her
difficulties. she did not indeed let her imagination range beyond the day
of plighting: after that everything faded into a haze of material
well-being, in which the personality of her benefactor remained
mercifully vague. she had learned, in her long vigils, that there were
certain things not good to think of, certain midnight images that must at
any cost be exorcised--and one of these was the image of herself as
rosedale's wife.

carry fisher, on the strength, as she frankly owned, of the brys' newport
success, had taken for the autumn months a small house at tuxedo; and
thither lily was bound on the sunday after dorset's visit.  though it was
nearly dinner-time when she arrived, her hostess was still out, and the
firelit quiet of the small silent house descended on her spirit with a
sense of peace and familiarity. it may be doubted if such an emotion had
ever before been evoked by carry fisher's surroundings; but, contrasted
to the
 
 ___________________________
 
d then what can i do--how on earth am i to keep myself
alive? i see myself reduced to the fate of that poor silverton
woman--slinking about to employment agencies, and trying to sell painted
blotting-pads to women's exchanges! and there are thousands and thousands
of women trying to do the same thing already, and not one of the number
who has less idea how to earn a dollar than i have!"

she rose again with a hurried glance at the clock. "it's late, and i must
be off--i have an appointment with carry fisher. don't look so worried,
you dear thing--don't think too much about the nonsense i've been
talking." she was before the mirror again, adjusting her hair with a
light hand, drawing down her veil, and giving a dexterous touch to her
furs. "of course, you know, it hasn't come to the employment agencies and
the painted blotting-pads yet; but i'm rather hard-up just for the
moment, and if i could find something to do--notes to write and
visiting-lists to make up, or that kind of thing--it would tide 
 
 ___________________________
 
some one could reach
out a hand and show her the other side--show her how much is left in life
and in herself----" gerty broke off, abashed at the sound of her own
eloquence, and impeded by the difficulty of giving precise expression to
her vague yearning for her friend's retrieval. "i can't help her myself:
she's passed out of my reach," she continued. "i think she's afraid of
being a burden to me.  when she was last here, two weeks ago, she seemed
dreadfully worried about her future: she said carry fisher was trying to
find something for her to do. a few days later she wrote me that she had
taken a position as private secretary, and that i was not to be anxious,
for everything was all right, and she would come in and tell me about it
when she had time; but she has never come, and i don't like to go to her,
because i am afraid of forcing myself on her when i'm not wanted.  once,
when we were children, and i had rushed up after a long separation, and
thrown my arms about her, she said: 'please don
 
 ___________________________
 
looking across a spacious sunlit room at a
breakfast-table set invitingly near the fire. analysis and introspection
might come later; but for the moment she was not even troubled by the
excesses of the upholstery or the restless convolutions of the furniture.
the sense of being once more lapped and folded in ease, as in some dense
mild medium impenetrable to discomfort, effectually stilled the faintest
note of criticism.

when, the afternoon before, she had presented herself to the lady to whom
carry fisher had directed her, she had been conscious of entering a new
world. carry's vague presentment of mrs. norma hatch (whose reversion to
her christian name was explained as the result of her latest divorce),
left her under the implication of coming "from the west," with the not
unusual extenuation of having brought a great deal of money with her. she
was, in short, rich, helpless, unplaced: the very subject for lily's
hand. mrs. fisher had not specified the line her friend was to take; she
owned her
 
 ___________________________
 
e with old ned van alstyne; but the risk he had run would always
be ascribed to miss bart's connivance, and would somehow serve as a
summing-up and corroboration of the vague general distrust of her. it was
a relief to those who had hung back from her to find themselves thus
justified, and they were inclined to insist a little on her connection
with the hatch case in order to show that they had been right.

gerty's quest, at any rate, brought up against a solid wall of
resistance; and even when carry fisher, momentarily penitent for her
share in the hatch affair, joined her efforts to miss farish's, they met
with no better success. gerty had tried to veil her failure in tender
ambiguities; but carry, always the soul of candour, put the case squarely
to her friend.

"i went straight to judy trenor; she has fewer prejudices than the
others, and besides she's always hated bertha dorset. but what have you
done to her, lily? at the very first word about giving you a start she
flamed out about some mone
 
 ___________________________
 
 you, lily!"

the end of it was that, after anxious enquiry and much deliberation, mrs.
fisher and gerty, for once oddly united in their effort to help their
friend, decided on placing her in the work-room of mme. regina's renowned
millinery establishment. even this arrangement was not effected without
considerable negotiation, for mme. regina had a strong prejudice against
untrained assistance, and was induced to yield only by the fact that she
owed the patronage of mrs. bry and mrs. gormer to carry fisher's
influence. she had been willing from the first to employ lily in the
show-room: as a displayer of hats, a fashionable beauty might be a
valuable asset. but to this suggestion miss bart opposed a negative which
gerty emphatically supported, while mrs. fisher, inwardly unconvinced,
but resigned to this latest proof of lily's unreason, agreed that perhaps
in the end it would be more useful that she should learn the trade. to
regina's work-room lily was therefore committed by her friends, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
rds she had ever spoken to him.



that evening in her own room miss bart--who had fled early from the heavy
fumes of the basement dinner-table--sat musing upon the impulse which had
led her to unbosom herself to rosedale. beneath it she discovered an
increasing sense of loneliness--a dread of returning to the solitude of
her room, while she could be anywhere else, or in any company but her
own. circumstances, of late, had combined to cut her off more and more
from her few remaining friends. on carry fisher's part the withdrawal was
perhaps not quite involuntary. having made her final effort on lily's
behalf, and landed her safely in mme. regina's work-room, mrs. fisher
seemed disposed to rest from her labours; and lily, understanding the
reason, could not condemn her. carry had in fact come dangerously near to
being involved in the episode of mrs. norma hatch, and it had taken some
verbal ingenuity to extricate herself. she frankly owned to having
brought lily and mrs. hatch together, but then sh