am not. if i were, i
daresay i could manage to be happy even in her flat. it must be pure
bliss to arrange the furniture just as one likes, and give all the
horrors to the ash-man. if i could only do over my aunt's drawing-room i
know i should be a better woman."

"is it so very bad?" he asked sympathetically.

she smiled at him across the tea-pot which she was holding up to be
filled.

"that shows how seldom you come there. why don't you come oftener?"

"when i do come, it's not to look at mrs. peniston's furniture."

"nonsense," she said. "you don't come at all--and yet we get on so well
when we meet."

"perhaps that's the reason," he answered promptly. "i'm afraid i haven't
any cream, you know--shall you mind a slice of lemon instead?"

"i shall like it better." she waited while he cut the lemon and dropped a
thin disk into her cup. "but that is not the reason," she insisted.

"the reason for what?"

"for your never coming." she leaned forward with a shade of perplexity in
her charming eyes.
 
 ___________________________
 
 there lily
at once became the centre of a family council composed of the wealthy
relatives whom she had been taught to despise for living like pigs. it
may be that they had an inkling of the sentiments in which she had been
brought up, for none of them manifested a very lively desire for her
company; indeed, the question threatened to remain unsolved till mrs.
peniston with a sigh announced: "i'll try her for a year."

every one was surprised, but one and all concealed their surprise, lest
mrs. peniston should be alarmed by it into reconsidering her decision.

mrs. peniston was mr. bart's widowed sister, and if she was by no means
the richest of the family group, its other members nevertheless abounded
in reasons why she was clearly destined by providence to assume the
charge of lily. in the first place she was alone, and it would be
charming for her to have a young companion. then she sometimes travelled,
and lily's familiarity with foreign customs--deplored as a misfortune by
her more conser
 
 ___________________________
 
vative relatives--would at least enable her to act as a
kind of courier. but as a matter of fact mrs. peniston had not been
affected by these considerations. she had taken the girl simply because
no one else would have her, and because she had the kind of moral
mauvaise honte which makes the public display of selfishness difficult,
though it does not interfere with its private indulgence. it would have
been impossible for mrs. peniston to be heroic on a desert island, but
with the eyes of her little world upon her she took a certain pleasure in
her act.

she reaped the reward to which disinterestedness is entitled, and found
an agreeable companion in her niece. she had expected to find lily
headstrong, critical and "foreign"--for even mrs. peniston, though she
occasionally went abroad, had the family dread of foreignness--but the
girl showed a pliancy, which, to a more penetrating mind than her aunt's,
might have been less re
 
 ___________________________
 
assuring than the open selfishness of youth.
misfortune had made lily supple instead of hardening her, and a pliable
substance is less easy to break than a stiff one.

mrs. peniston, however, did not suffer from her niece's adaptability.
lily had no intention of taking advantage of her aunt's good nature.  she
was in truth grateful for the refuge offered her: mrs. peniston's opulent
interior was at least not externally dingy. but dinginess is a quality
which assumes all manner of disguises; and lily soon found that it was as
latent in the expensive routine of her aunt's life as in the makeshift
existence of a continental pension.

mrs. peniston was one of the episodical persons who form the padding of
life. it was impossible to believe that she had herself ever been a focus
of activities. the most vivid thing about her was the fact that her
grandmother had been a
 
 ___________________________
 
 van alstyne. this connection with the well-fed and
industrious stock of early new york revealed itself in the glacial
neatness of mrs. peniston's drawing-room and in the excellence of her
cuisine. she belonged to the class of old new yorkers who have always
lived well, dressed expensively, and done little else; and to these
inherited obligations mrs. peniston faithfully conformed.  she had always
been a looker-on at life, and her mind resembled one of those little
mirrors which her dutch ancestors were accustomed to affix to their upper
windows, so that from the depths of an impenetrable domesticity they
might see what was happening in the street.

mrs. peniston was the owner of a country-place in new jersey, but she had
never lived there since her husband's death--a remote event, which
appeared to dwell in her memory chiefly as a dividing point in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
personal reminiscences that formed the staple of her conversation. she
was a woman who remembered dates with intensity, and could tell at a
moment's notice whether the drawing-room curtains had been renewed before
or after mr. peniston's last illness.

mrs. peniston thought the country lonely and trees damp, and cherished a
vague fear of meeting a bull. to guard against such contingencies she
frequented the more populous watering-places, where she installed herself
impersonally in a hired house and looked on at life through the matting
screen of her verandah. in the care of such a guardian, it soon became
clear to lily that she was to enjoy only the material advantages of good
food and expensive clothing; and, though far from underrating these, she
would g
 
 ___________________________
 
ladly have exchanged them for what mrs. bart had taught her to
regard as opportunities. she sighed to think what her mother's fierce
energies would have accomplished, had they been coupled with mrs.
peniston's resources. lily had abundant energy of her own, but it was
restricted by the necessity of adapting herself to her aunt's habits. she
saw that at all costs she must keep mrs. peniston's favour till, as mrs.
bart would have phrased it, she could stand on her own legs. lily had no
mind for the vagabond life of the poor relation, and to adapt herself to
mrs. peniston she had, to some degree, to assume that lady's passive
attitude. she had fancied at first that it would be easy to draw her aunt
into the whirl of her own activities, but there was a static force in
mrs. peniston against which her niece's efforts spent themselves in vain.
to attempt to bring her into active relatio
 
 ___________________________
 
med to her natural that lily should spend all her money on dress, and
she supplemented the girl's scanty income by occasional "handsome
presents" meant to be applied to the same purpose. lily, who was
intensely practical, would have preferred a fixed allowance; but mrs.
peniston liked the periodical recurrence of gratitude evoked by
unexpected cheques, and was perhaps shrewd enough to perceive that such a
method of giving kept alive in her niece a salutary sense of dependence.

beyond this, mrs. peniston had not felt called upon to do anything for
her charge: she had simply stood aside and let her take the field. lily
had taken it, at first with the confidence of assured possessorship, then
with gradually narrowing demands, till now she found herself actually
struggling for a foothold on the broad space which had once seemed her
own for the asking. how it happened she did not yet know.  sometimes she
thought it was because mrs. peniston had been too passive, and again she
feared it was because 
 
 ___________________________
 
ring on the edge of life. if she did not marry percy
gryce, the day might come when she would have to be civil to such men as
rosedale. if she did not marry him? but she meant to marry him--she was
sure of him and sure of herself. she drew back with a shiver from the
pleasant paths in which her thoughts had been straying, and set her feet
once more in the middle of the long white road....  when she went
upstairs that night she found that the late post had brought her a fresh
batch of bills. mrs. peniston, who was a conscientious woman, had
forwarded them all to bellomont.

miss bart, accordingly, rose the next morning with the most earnest
conviction that it was her duty to go to church. she tore herself betimes
from the lingering enjoyment of her breakfast-tray, rang to have her grey
gown laid out, and despatched her maid to borrow a prayer-book from mrs.
trenor.

but her course was too purely reasonable not to contain the germs of
rebellion. no sooner were her preparations made than they rous
 
 ___________________________
 
came suddenly fixed, and
she seized on miss bart with a confidential gesture. "my dear lily, i
haven't had time for a word with you, and now i suppose you are just off.
have you seen evie? she's been looking everywhere for you: she wanted to
tell you her little secret; but i daresay you have guessed it already.
the engagement is not to be announced till next week--but you are such a
friend of mr. gryce's that they both wished you to be the first to know
of their happiness."



chapter 9

in mrs. peniston's youth, fashion had returned to town in october;
therefore on the tenth day of the month the blinds of her fifth avenue
residence were drawn up, and the eyes of the dying gladiator in bronze
who occupied the drawing-room window resumed their survey of that
deserted thoroughfare.

the first two weeks after her return represented to mrs. peniston the
domestic equivalent of a religious retreat. she "went through" the linen
and blankets in the precise spirit of the penitent exploring the inner
fol
 
 ___________________________
 
 to bear
herself in difficult situations. she had, to a shade, the exact manner
between victory and defeat: every insinuation was shed without an effort
by the bright indifference of her manner.  but she was beginning to feel
the strain of the attitude; the reaction was more rapid, and she lapsed
to a deeper self-disgust.


as was always the case with her, this moral repulsion found a physical
outlet in a quickened distaste for her surroundings.  she revolted from
the complacent ugliness of mrs. peniston's black walnut, from the
slippery gloss of the vestibule tiles, and the mingled odour of sapolio
and furniture-polish that met her at the door.

the stairs were still carpetless, and on the way up to her room she was
arrested on the landing by an encroaching tide of soapsuds. gathering up
her skirts, she drew aside with an impatient gesture; and as she did so
she had the odd sensation of having already found herself in the same
situation but in different surroundings. it seemed to her that she 
 
 ___________________________
 
o, resting on
crimson elbows, examined her with the same unflinching curiosity, the
same apparent reluctance to let her pass. on this occasion, however, miss
bart was on her own ground.

"don't you see that i wish to go by? please move your pail," she said
sharply.

the woman at first seemed not to hear; then, without a word of excuse,
she pushed back her pail and dragged a wet floor-cloth across the
landing, keeping her eyes fixed on lily while the latter swept by. it was
insufferable that mrs. peniston should have such creatures about the
house; and lily entered her room resolved that the woman should be
dismissed that evening.

mrs. peniston, however, was at the moment inaccessible to remonstrance:
since early morning she had been shut up with her maid, going over her
furs, a process which formed the culminating episode in the drama of
household renovation. in the evening also lily found herself alone, for
her aunt, who rarely dined out, had responded to the summons of a van
alstyne cousin w
 
 ___________________________
 
ho was passing through town. the house, in its state of
unnatural immaculateness and order, was as dreary as a tomb, and as lily,
turning from her brief repast between shrouded sideboards, wandered into
the newly-uncovered glare of the drawing-room she felt as though she were
buried alive in the stifling limits of mrs. peniston's existence.

she usually contrived to avoid being at home during the season of
domestic renewal. on the present occasion, however, a variety of reasons
had combined to bring her to town; and foremost among them was the fact
that she had fewer invitations than usual for the autumn. she had so long
been accustomed to pass from one country-house to another, till the close
of the holidays brought her friends to town, that the unfilled gaps of
time confronting her produced a sharp sense of waning p
 
 ___________________________
 
anwhile, as october advanced she had to face the alternative of
returning to the trenors or joining her aunt in town. even the desolating
dulness of new york in october, and the soapy discomforts of mrs.
peniston's interior, seemed preferable to what might await her at
bellomont; and with an air of heroic devotion she announced her intention
of remaining with her aunt till the holidays.

sacrifices of this nature are sometimes received with feelings as mixed
as those which actuate them; and mrs. peniston remarked to her
confidential maid that, if any of the family were to be with her at such
a crisis (though for forty years she had been thought competent to see to
the hanging of her own curtains), she would certainly have preferred miss
grace to miss lily. grace stepney was an obscure cousin, of adaptable
manners and vicarious interests, who "ran in" to sit with mrs. peniston
when lily dined out too continuously; who played bezique, picked up
dropped stitches, read out the deaths from the times
 
 ___________________________
 
, and sincerely
admired the purple satin drawing-room curtains, the dying gladiator in
the window, and the seven-by-five painting of niagara which represented
the one artistic excess of mr. peniston's temperate career.

mrs. peniston, under ordinary circumstances, was as much bored by her
excellent cousin as the recipient of such services usually is by the
person who performs them. she greatly preferred the brilliant and
unreliable lily, who did not know one end of a crochet-needle from the
other, and had frequently wounded her susceptibilities by suggesting that
the drawing-room should be "done over." but when it came to hunting for
missing napkins, or helping to decide whether the backstairs needed
re-carpeting, grace's j
 
 ___________________________
 
er resented the smell of beeswax and brown
soap, and behaved as though she thought a house ought to keep clean of
itself, without extraneous assistance.

seated under the cheerless blaze of the drawing-room chandelier--mrs.
peniston never lit the lamps unless there was "company"--lily seemed to
watch her own figure retreating down vistas of neutral-tinted dulness to
a middle age like grace stepney's. when she ceased to amuse judy trenor
and her friends she would have to fall back on amusing mrs. peniston;
whichever way she looked she saw only a future of servitude to the whims
of others, never the possibility of asserting her own eager individuality.

a ring at the door-bell, sounding emphatically through the empty house,
roused her suddenly to the extent of her boredom. it was as though all
the weariness of the past months had culminated in the vacuity of that
interminable evening. if only the ring meant a summons from the outer
world--a token that she was still remembered and wanted!

after s
 
 ___________________________
 
ly remained silent and she continued: "it wasn't no fault of our own,
neither: the agent had another man he wanted the place for, and we was
put out, bag and baggage, just to suit his fancy.  i had a long sickness
last winter, and an operation that ate up all we'd put by; and it's hard
for me and the children, haffen being so long out of a job."

after all, then, she had come only to ask miss bart to find a place for
her husband; or, more probably, to seek the young lady's intervention
with mrs. peniston. lily had such an air of always getting what she
wanted that she was used to being appealed to as an intermediary, and,
relieved of her vague apprehension, she took refuge in the conventional
formula.

"i am sorry you have been in trouble," she said.

"oh, that we have, miss, and it's on'y just beginning. if on'y we'd 'a
got another situation--but the agent, he's dead against us. it ain't no
fault of ours, neither, but----"

at this point lily's impatience overcame her. "if you have anything to
 
 ___________________________
 
iss
bart and herself. as she had said, the letter was torn in two; but with a
rapid gesture she laid the torn edges together and smoothed out the page.

a wave of indignation swept over lily. she felt herself in the presence
of something vile, as yet but dimly conjectured--the kind of vileness of
which people whispered, but which she had never thought of as touching
her own life. she drew back with a motion of disgust, but her withdrawal
was checked by a sudden discovery: under the glare of mrs. peniston's
chandelier she had recognized the hand-writing of the letter. it was a
large disjointed hand, with a flourish of masculinity which but slightly
disguised its rambling weakness, and the words, scrawled in heavy ink on
pale-tinted notepaper, smote on lily's ear as though she had heard them
spoken.

at first she did not grasp the full import of the situation. she
understood only that before her lay a letter written by bertha dorset,
and addressed, presumably, to lawrence selden. there was no dat
 
 ___________________________
 
t in her hand.

she had no idea of reading the letters; even to unfold mrs. haffen's
dirty newspaper would have seemed degrading. but what did she intend to
do with its contents? the recipient of the letters had meant to destroy
them, and it was her duty to carry out his intention. she had no right to
keep them--to do so was to lessen whatever merit lay in having secured
their possession. but how destroy them so effectually that there should
be no second risk of their falling in such hands? mrs. peniston's icy
drawing-room grate shone with a forbidding lustre: the fire, like the
lamps, was never lit except when there was company.

miss bart was turning to carry the letters upstairs when she heard the
opening of the outer door, and her aunt entered the drawing-room. mrs.
peniston was a small plump woman, with a colourless skin lined with
trivial wrinkles. her grey hair was arranged with precision, and her
clothes looked excessively new and yet slightly old-fashioned. they were
always black and t
 
 ___________________________
 
e jet at breakfast. lily had never seen her when she
was not cuirassed in shining black, with small tight boots, and an air of
being packed and ready to start; yet she never started.

she looked about the drawing-room with an expression of minute scrutiny.
"i saw a streak of light under one of the blinds as i drove up: it's
extraordinary that i can never teach that woman to draw them down evenly."

having corrected the irregularity, she seated herself on one of the
glossy purple arm-chairs; mrs. peniston always sat on a chair, never in
it.

then she turned her glance to miss bart. "my dear, you look tired; i
suppose it's the excitement of the wedding. cornelia van alstyne was full
of it: molly was there, and gerty farish ran in for a minute to tell us
about it. i think it was odd, their serving melons before the consomme: a
wedding breakfast should always begin with consomme. molly didn't care
for the bridesmaids' dresses. she had it straight from julia melson that
they cost three hundred dolla
 
 ___________________________
 
rs apiece at celeste's, but she says they
didn't look it. i'm glad you decided not to be a bridesmaid; that shade
of salmon-pink wouldn't have suited you." mrs. peniston delighted in
discussing the minutest details of festivities in which she had not taken
part. nothing would have induced her to undergo the exertion and fatigue
of attending the van osburgh wedding, but so great was her interest in
the event that, having heard two versions of it, she now prepared to
extract a third from her niece. lily, however, had been deplorably
careless in noting the particulars of the entertainment. she had failed
to observe the colour of mrs. van osburgh's gown, and could 
 
 ___________________________
 
not even say
whether the old van osburgh sevres had been used at the bride's table:
mrs. peniston, in short, found that she was of more service as a listener
than as a narrator.

"really, lily, i don't see why you took the trouble to go to the wedding,
if you don't remember what happened or whom you saw there.  when i was a
girl i used to keep the menu of every dinner i went to, and write the
names of the people on the back; and i never threw away my cotillion
favours till after your uncle's death, when it seemed unsuitable to have
so many coloured things about the house. i had a whole clos
 
 ___________________________
 
et-full, i
remember; and i can tell to this day what balls i got them at. molly van
alstyne reminds me of what i was at that age; it's wonderful how she
notices. she was able to tell her mother exactly how the wedding-dress
was cut, and we knew at once, from the fold in the back, that it must
have come from paquin."

mrs. peniston rose abruptly, and, advancing to the ormolu clock
surmounted by a helmeted minerva, which throned on the chimney-piece
between two malachite vases, passed her lace handkerchief between the
helmet and its visor.

"i knew it--the parlour-maid never dusts there!" she exclaimed,
triumphantly displaying a minute spot on the handkerchief; then,
reseating herself, she went on: "molly thought mrs. dorset the
best-dressed woman at the wedding. i've no doubt her dress did cost more
than any one else's, b
 
 ___________________________
 
pirits, and said she had made a match between evie
van osburgh and percy gryce. she really seems to have a very good
influence on young men. i hear she is interesting herself now in that
silly silverton boy, who has had his head turned by carry fisher, and has
been gambling so dreadfully. well, as i was saying, evie is really
engaged: mrs. dorset had her to stay with percy gryce, and managed it
all, and grace van osburgh is in the seventh heaven--she had almost
despaired of marrying evie."

mrs. peniston again paused, but this time her scrutiny addressed itself,
not to the furniture, but to her niece.

"cornelia van alstyne was so surprised: she had heard that you were to
marry young gryce. she saw the wetheralls just after they had stopped
with you at bellomont, and alice wetherall was quite sure there was an
engagement. she said that when mr. gryce left unexpectedly one morning,
they all thought he had rushed to town for the ring."

lily rose and moved toward the door.

"i believe i am tired:
 
 ___________________________
 
 i think i will go to bed," she said; and mrs.
peniston, suddenly distracted by the discovery that the easel sustaining
the late mr. peniston's crayon-portrait was not exactly in line with the
sofa in front of it, presented an absent-minded brow to her kiss.

in her own room lily turned up the gas-jet and glanced toward the grate.
it was as brilliantly polished as the one below, but here at least she
could burn a few papers with less risk of incurring her aunt's
disapproval. she made no immediate motion to do so, however, but dropping
into a chair looked wearily about her. her room was large and
comfortably-furnished--it was the envy
 
 ___________________________
 
 and admiration of poor grace
stepney, who boarded; but, contrasted with the light tints and luxurious
appointments of the guest-rooms where so many weeks of lily's existence
were spent, it seemed as dreary as a prison. the monumental wardrobe and
bedstead of black walnut had migrated from mr. peniston's bedroom, and
the magenta "flock" wall-paper, of a pattern dear to the early 'sixties,
was hung with large steel engravings of an anecdotic character. lily had
tried to mitigate this charmless background by a few frivolous touches,
in the shape of a lace-decked toilet table and a little painted desk
surmounted by photographs; but the futility of the attempt struck her as
she looked about the room. what a contrast to the subtle elegance of the
setting she had pictured for herself--an apartment 
 
 ___________________________
 
ision of bertha dorset, smiling, flattered, victorious, holding her up
to ridicule by insinuations intelligible to every member of their little
group. the thought of the ridicule struck deeper than any other
sensation: lily knew every turn of the allusive jargon which could flay
its victims without the shedding of blood. her cheek burned at the
recollection, and she rose and caught up the letters. she no longer meant
to destroy them: that intention had been effaced by the quick corrosion
of mrs. peniston's words.

instead, she approached her desk, and lighting a taper, tied and sealed
the packet; then she opened the wardrobe, drew out a despatch-box, and
deposited the letters within it. as she did so, it struck her with a
flash of irony that she was indebted to gus trenor for the means of
buying them.



chapter 10

the autumn dragged on monotonously. miss bart had received one or two
notes from judy trenor, reproaching her for not returning to bellomont;
but she replied evasively, alleging the
 
 ___________________________
 
 obligation to remain with her
aunt. in truth, however, she was fast wearying of her solitary existence
with mrs. peniston, and only the excitement of spending her
newly-acquired money lightened the dulness of the days.

all her life lily had seen money go out as quickly as it came in, and
whatever theories she cultivated as to the prudence of setting aside a
part of her gains, she had unhappily no saving vision of the risks of the
opposite course. it was a keen satisfaction to feel that, for a few
months at least, she would be independent of her friends' bounty, that
she could show herself abroad without wondering
 
 ___________________________
 
a smiling acceptance, hailing in the renewal of the tie an
escape from trenor's importunities.



chapter 11

meanwhile the holidays had gone by and the season was beginning.  fifth
avenue had become a nightly torrent of carriages surging upward to the
fashionable quarters about the park, where illuminated windows and
outspread awnings betokened the usual routine of hospitality. other
tributary currents crossed the mainstream, bearing their freight to the
theatres, restaurants or opera; and mrs. peniston, from the secluded
watch-tower of her upper window, could tell to a nicety just when the
chronic volume of sound was increased by the sudden influx setting toward
a van osburgh ball, or when the multiplication of wheels meant merely
that the opera was over, or that there was a big supper at sherry's.

mrs. peniston followed the rise and culmination of the season as keenly
as the most active sharer in its gaieties; and, as a looker-on, she
enjoyed opportunities of comparison and generalization s
 
 ___________________________
 
al
memory for the vicissitudes of the "new people" who rose to the surface
with each recurring tide, and were either submerged beneath its rush or
landed triumphantly beyond the reach of envious breakers; and she was apt
to display a remarkable retrospective insight into their ultimate fate,
so that, when they had fulfilled their destiny, she was almost always
able to say to grace stepney--the recipient of her prophecies--that she
had known exactly what would happen.

this particular season mrs. peniston would have characterized as that in
which everybody "felt poor" except the welly brys and mr. simon rosedale.
it had been a bad autumn in wall street, where prices fell in accordance
with that peculiar law which proves railway stocks and bales of cotton to
be more sensitive to the allotment of executive power than many estimable
citizens trained to all the advantages of self-government. even fortunes
supposed to be independent of the market either betrayed a secret
dependence on it, or suffered
 
 ___________________________
 
erienced spectator exactly what is going to take place. but
mr. rosedale wanted, in the long run, a more individual environment. he
was sensitive to shades of difference which miss bart would never have
credited him with perceiving, because he had no corresponding variations
of manner; and it was becoming more and more clear to him that miss bart
herself possessed precisely the complementary qualities needed to round
off his social personality.

such details did not fall within the range of mrs. peniston's vision.
like many minds of panoramic sweep, hers was apt to overlook the minutiae
of the foreground, and she was much more likely to know where carry
fisher had found the welly brys' chef for them, than what was happening
to her own niece. she was not, however, without purveyors of information
ready to supplement her deficiencies. grace stepney's mind was like a
kind of moral fly-paper, to which the buzzing items of gossip were drawn
by a fatal attraction, and where they hung fast in the toil
 
 ___________________________
 
 classified as a
gerty farish without the saving traits of youth and enthusiasm.

in reality, the two differed from each other as much as they differed
from the object of their mutual contemplation. miss farish's heart was a
fountain of tender illusions, miss stepney's a precise register of facts
as manifested in their relation to herself. she had sensibilities which,
to lily, would have seemed comic in a person with a freckled nose and red
eyelids, who lived in a boarding-house and admired mrs. peniston's
drawing-room; but poor grace's limitations gave them a more concentrated
inner life, as poor soil starves certain plants into intenser
efflorescence. she had in truth no abstract propensity to malice: she did
not dislike lily because the latter was brilliant and predominant, but
because she thought that lily disliked her. it is less mortifying to
believe one's self unpopular than insignificant, and vanity prefers to
assume that indifference is a latent form of unfriendliness. even such
scant 
 
 ___________________________
 
civilities as lily accorded to mr. rosedale would have made miss
stepney her friend for life; but how could she foresee that such a friend
was worth cultivating? how, moreover, can a young woman who has never
been ignored measure the pang which this injury inflicts? and, lastly,
how could lily, accustomed to choose between a pressure of engagements,
guess that she had mortally offended miss stepney by causing her to be
excluded from one of mrs. peniston's infrequent dinner-parties?

mrs. peniston disliked giving dinners, but she had a high sense of family
obligation, and on the jack stepneys' return from their honeymoon she
felt it incumbent upon her to light the drawing-room lamps and extract
her best silver from the safe deposit vaults. mrs. peniston's rare
entertainments were preceded by days of heart-rending vacillation as to
every detail of the feast, from the seating of the guests to the pattern
of the table-cloth, and in the course of one of these preliminary
discussions she had 
 
 ___________________________
 
suggested to her cousin grace that, as
the dinner was a family affair, she might be included in it. for a week
the prospect had lighted up miss stepney's colourless existence; then she
had been given to understand that it would be more convenient to have her
another day. miss stepney knew exactly what had happened. lily, to whom
family reunions were occasions of unalloyed dulness, had persuaded her
aunt that a dinner of "smart" people would be much more to the taste of
the young couple, and mrs. peniston, who leaned helplessly on her niece
in social matters, had been prevailed upon to pronounce grace's exile.
after all, grace could come any other day; why should she mind being put
off?

it was precisely because miss stepney could come any other day--and
because she knew her relations were in the secret of her unoccupied
evenings--that this incident loomed gigantically on her horizon. she was
aware that she had lily to thank for it; and dull resentment was turned
to active animosity.

mrs. penis
 
 ___________________________
 
ton, on whom she had looked in a day or two after the dinner,
laid down her crochet-work and turned abruptly from her oblique survey of
fifth avenue.

"gus trenor?--lily and gus trenor?" she said, growing so suddenly pale
that her visitor was almost alarmed.

"oh, cousin julia . . . of course i don't mean . . ."

"i don't know what you do mean," said mrs. peniston, with a frightened
quiver in her small fretful voice. "such things were never heard of in my
day. and my own niece! i'm not sure i understand you. do people say he's
in love with her?"

mrs. peniston's horror was genuine. though she boasted an unequalled
familiarity with the secret chronicles of society, she had the innocence
of the school-girl who regards wickedness as a part of "history," and to
whom it never occurs that the scandals she reads of in lesson-hours may
be repeating themselves in
 
 ___________________________
 
 the next street. mrs. peniston had kept her
imagination shrouded, like the drawing-room furniture. she knew, of
course, that society was "very much changed," and that many women her
mother would have thought "peculiar" were now in a position to be
critical about their visiting-lists; she had discussed the perils of
divorce with her rector, and had felt thankful at times that lily was
still unmarried; but the idea that any scandal could attach to a young
girl's name, above all that it could be lightly coupled with that of a
m
 
 ___________________________
 
arried man, was so new to her that she was as much aghast as if she had
been accused of leaving her carpets down all summer, or of violating any
of the other cardinal laws of housekeeping.

miss stepney, when her first fright had subsided, began to feel the
superiority that greater breadth of mind confers. it was really pitiable
to be as ignorant of the world as mrs. peniston!  she smiled at the
latter's question. "people always say unpleasant things--and certainly
they're a great deal together. a friend of mine met them the other
afternoon in the park--quite late, after the lamps were lit. it's a pity
lily makes herself so conspicuous."

"conspicuous!" gasped mrs. peniston. she bent forward, lowering her voice
to mitigate the horror. "what sort of things do they say? that he means
to get a divorce and marry her?"

grace stepney laughed outright. "dear me, no! he wo
 
 ___________________________
 
it on a fat stupid man almost old enough to be her
father?" this argument had such a convincing ring that it gave mrs.
peniston sufficient reassurance to pick up her work, while she waited for
grace stepney to rally her scattered forces.

but miss stepney was on the spot in an instant. "that's the worst of
it--people say she isn't wasting her time! every one knows, as you say,
that lily is too handsome and--and charming--to devote herself to a man
like gus trenor unless--"

"unless?" echoed mrs. peniston. her visitor drew breath nervously. it was
agreeable to shock mrs. peniston, but not to shock her to the verge of
anger. miss stepney was not sufficiently familiar with the classic drama
to have recalled in advance how bearers of bad tidings are proverbially
received, but she now had a rapid vision of forfeited dinners and a
reduced wardrobe as the possible consequence of her disinterestedness. to
the honour of her sex, however, hatred of lily prevailed over more
personal considerations. mrs. p
 
 ___________________________
 
eniston had chosen the wrong moment to
boast of her niece's charms.

"unless," said grace, leaning forward to speak with low-toned emphasis,
"unless there are material advantages to be gained by making herself
agreeable to him."

she felt that the moment was tremendous, and remembered suddenly that
mrs. peniston's black brocade, with the cut jet fringe, would have been
hers at the end of the season.

mrs. peniston put down her work again. another aspect of the same idea
had presented itself to her, and she felt that it was beneath her dignity
to have her nerves racked by a dependent relative who wore her old
clothes.

"if you take pleasure in annoying me by mysterious insinuations," she
said coldly, "you might at least have chosen a more suitable time than
just as i am recovering from the strain of giving a large dinner."

the mention of the dinner dispelled miss stepney's last scruples.  "i
don't know w
 
 ___________________________
 
hy i should be accused of taking pleasure in telling you
about lily. i was sure i shouldn't get any thanks for it," she returned
with a flare of temper. "but i have some family feeling left, and as you
are the only person who has any authority over lily, i thought you ought
to know what is being said of her."

"well," said mrs. peniston, "what i complain of is that you haven't told
me yet what is being said."

"i didn't suppose i should have to put it so plainly. people say that gus
trenor pays her bills."

"pays her bills--her bills?" mrs. peniston broke into a laugh. "i can't
imagine where you can have picked up such rubbish. lily has her own
income--and i provide for her very handsomely--"

"oh, we all know that," interposed miss stepney drily. "but lily wears a
great many smart gowns--"

"i like her to be well-dressed--it'
 
 ___________________________
 
s only suitable!"

"certainly; but then there are her gambling debts besides."

miss stepney, in the beginning, had not meant to bring up this point; but
mrs. peniston had only her own incredulity to blame.  she was like the
stiff-necked unbelievers of scripture, who must be annihilated to be
convinced.

"gambling debts? lily?" mrs. peniston's voice shook with anger and
bewilderment. she wondered whether grace stepney had gone out of her
mind. "what do you mean by her gambling debts?"

"simply that if one plays bridge for money in lily's set one is liable to
lose a great deal--and i don't suppose lily always wins."

"who told you that my niece played cards for money?"

"mercy, cousin julia, don't look at me as if i were trying to turn you
against lily! everybody knows she is crazy about bridge.  mrs. gryce told
me herself that it w
 
 ___________________________
 
as her gambling that frightened percy gryce--it seems
he was really taken with her at first. but, of course, among lily's
friends it's quite the custom for girls to play for money.  in fact,
people are inclined to excuse her on that account----"

"to excuse her for what?"

"for being hard up--and accepting attentions from men like gus
trenor--and george dorset----"

mrs. peniston gave another cry. "george dorset? is there any one else?  i
should like to know the worst, if you please."

"don't put it in that way, cousin julia. lately lily has been a good deal
with the dorsets, and he seems to admire her--but of course that's only
natural. and i'm sure there is no truth in the horrid things people say;
but she has been spending a great deal of money this winter. evie van
osburgh was at celeste's ordering her trousseau the other day--yes, the
marriage takes place next mont
 
 ___________________________
 
h--and she told me that celeste showed her
the most exquisite things she was just sending home to lily. and people
say that judy trenor has quarrelled with her on account of gus; but i'm
sure i'm sorry i spoke, though i only meant it as a kindness."

mrs. peniston's genuine incredulity enabled her to dismiss miss stepney
with a disdain which boded ill for that lady's prospect of succeeding to
the black brocade; but minds impenetrable to reason have generally some
crack through which suspicion filters, and her visitor's insinuations did
not glide off as easily as she had expected. mrs. peniston disliked
scenes, and her determination to avoid them had always led her to hold
herself aloof from the details of lily's life.  in her youth, girls had
not been su
 
 ___________________________
 
nterference in such affairs on the part of their natural
guardians was considered as unwarrantable as a spectator's suddenly
joining in a game. there had of course been "fast" girls even in mrs.
peniston's early experience; but their fastness, at worst, was understood
to be a mere excess of animal spirits, against which there could be no
graver charge than that of being "unladylike." the modern fastness
appeared synonymous with immorality, and the mere idea of immorality was
as offensive to mrs. peniston as a smell of cooking in the drawing-room:
it was one of the conceptions her mind refused to admit.

she had no immediate intention of repeating to lily what she had heard,
or even of trying to ascertain its truth by means of discreet
interrogation. to do so might be to provoke a scene; and a scene, in the
shaken state of mrs. peniston's nerves, with the effects of her dinner
not worn off, and her mind still tremulous with new impressions, was a
risk she deemed it her duty to avoid.  but there 
 
 ___________________________
 
remained in her thoughts
a settled deposit of resentment against her niece, all the denser because
it was not to be cleared by explanation or discussion.  it was horrible
of a young girl to let herself be talked about; however unfounded the
charges against her, she must be to blame for their having been made.
mrs. peniston felt as if there had been a contagious illness in the
house, and she was doomed to sit shivering among her contaminated
furniture.



chapter 12

miss bart had in fact been treading a devious way, and none of her
critics could have been more alive to the fact than herself; but she had
a fatalistic sense of being drawn from one wrong turning to another,
without ever perceiving the right road till it was too late to take it.

lily, who considered herself above narrow prejudices, had not imagined

 
 ___________________________
 
opportunities.

intimacy with the dorsets was not likely to lessen such difficulties on
the material side. mrs. dorset had none of judy trenor's lavish impulses,
and dorset's admiration was not likely to express itself in financial
"tips," even had lily cared to renew her experiences in that line. what
she required, for the moment, of the dorsets' friendship, was simply its
social sanction. she knew that people were beginning to talk of her; but
this fact did not alarm her as it had alarmed mrs. peniston. in her set
such gossip was not unusual, and a handsome girl who flirted with a
married man was merely assumed to be pressing to the limit of her
opportunities. it was trenor himself who frightened her.  their walk in
the park had not been a success.  trenor had married young, and since his
marriage his intercourse with women had not taken the form of the
sentimental small-talk which doubles upon itself like the paths in a
maze. he was first puzzled and then irritated to find himself always led
 
 ___________________________
 
s and hours left of the night! and she must spend
them alone, shuddering sleepless on her bed. her soft nature recoiled
from this ordeal, which had none of the stimulus of conflict to goad her
through it. oh, the slow cold drip of the minutes on her head! she had a
vision of herself lying on the black walnut bed--and the darkness would
frighten her, and if she left the light burning the dreary details of the
room would brand themselves forever on her brain.  she had always hated
her room at mrs. peniston's--its ugliness, its impersonality, the fact
that nothing in it was really hers.  to a torn heart uncomforted by human
nearness a room may open almost human arms, and the being to whom no four
walls mean more than any others, is, at such hours, expatriate everywhere.

lily had no heart to lean on. her relation with her aunt was as
superficial as that of chance lodgers who pass on the stairs. but even
had the two been in closer contact, it was impossible to think of mrs.
peniston's mind as offer
 
 ___________________________
 
 rose, stretching her arms as if in utter physical weariness.  "go to
bed, dear! you work hard and get up early. i'll watch here by the fire,
and you'll leave the light, and your door open. all i want is to feel
that you are near me." she laid both hands on gerty's shoulders, with a
smile that was like sunrise on a sea strewn with wreckage.

"i can't leave you, lily. come and lie on my bed. your hands are
frozen--you must undress and be made warm." gerty paused with sudden
compunction. "but mrs. peniston--it's past midnight! what will she think?"

"she goes to bed. i have a latch-key. it doesn't matter--i can't go back
there."

"there's no need to: you shall stay here. but you must tell me where you
have been. listen, lily--it will help you to speak!" she regained miss
bart's hands, and pressed them against her.  "try to tell me--it will
clear your poor head. listen--you were dining at carry fisher's." gerty
paused and added with a flash of heroism: "lawrence selden went from here
to find you."
 
 ___________________________
 
"you were not well; i am so glad you came here," gerty returned.

"but how am i to get home? and aunt julia--?"

"she knows; i telephoned early, and your maid has brought your things.
but won't you eat something? i scrambled the eggs myself."

lily could not eat; but the tea strengthened her to rise and dress under
her maid's searching gaze. it was a relief to her that gerty was obliged
to hasten away: the two kissed silently, but without a trace of the
previous night's emotion.

lily found mrs. peniston in a state of agitation. she had sent for grace
stepney and was taking digitalis. lily breasted the storm of enquiries as
best she could, explaining that she had had an attack of faintness on her
way back from carry fisher's; that, fearing she would not have strength
to reach home, she had gone to miss farish's instead; but that a quiet
night had restored her, and that she had no need of a doctor.

this was a relief to mrs. peniston, who could give herself up to her own
symptoms, and lily was a
 
 ___________________________
 
lace her
outraged feelings gave her a paralyzing sense of insignificance. she was
realizing for the first time that a woman's dignity may cost more to keep
up than her carriage; and that the maintenance of a moral attribute
should be dependent on dollars and cents, made the world appear a more
sordid place than she had conceived it.

after luncheon, when grace stepney's prying eyes had been removed, lily
asked for a word with her aunt. the two ladies went upstairs to the
sitting-room, where mrs. peniston seated herself in her black satin
arm-chair tufted with yellow buttons, beside a bead-work table bearing a
bronze box with a miniature of beatrice cenci in the lid. lily felt for
these objects the same distaste which the prisoner may entertain for the
fittings of the court-room. it was here that her aunt received her rare
confidences, and the pink-eyed smirk of the turbaned beatrice was
associated in her mind with the gradual fading of the smile from mrs.
peniston's lips. that lady's dread of a
 
 ___________________________
 
 scene gave her an inexorableness
which the greatest strength of character could not have produced, since
it was independent of all considerations of right or wrong; and knowing
this, lily seldom ventured to assail it. she had never felt less like
making the attempt than on the present occasion; but she had sought in
vain for any other means of escape from an intolerable situation.

mrs. peniston examined her critically. "you're a bad colour, lily: this
incessant rushing about is beginning to tell on you," she said.

miss bart saw an opening. "i don't think it's that, aunt julia; i've had
worries," she replied.

"ah," said mrs. peniston, shutting her lips with the snap of a purse
closing against a beggar.

"i'm sorry to bother you with them," lily continued, "but i really
believe my faintness last night was brought on partly by anxious
thoughts--"

"i should have said carry fisher's coo
 
 ___________________________
 
k was enough to account for it.
she has a woman who was with maria melson in 1891--the spring of the year
we went to aix--and i remember dining there two days before we sailed,
and feeling sure the coppers hadn't been scoured."

"i don't think i ate much; i can't eat or sleep." lily paused, and then
said abruptly: "the fact is, aunt julia, i owe some money."

mrs. peniston's face clouded perceptibly, but did not express the
astonishment her niece had expected. she was silent, and lily was forced
to continue: "i have been foolish----"

"no doubt you have: extremely foolish," mrs. peniston interposed.  "i
fail to see how any one with your income, and no expenses--not to mention
the handsome presents i've always given you----"

"oh, you've been most generous, aunt julia; i shall never forget your
kindness. but perhaps you don't quite realize the expense a girl is pu
 
 ___________________________
 
or you last october."

lily hesitated: her aunt's implacable memory had never been more
inconvenient. "you were as kind as possible; but i have had to get a few
things since----"

"what kind of things? clothes? how much have you spent? let me see the
bill--i daresay the woman is swindling you."

"oh, no, i think not: clothes have grown so frightfully expensive; and
one needs so many different kinds, with country visits, and golf and
skating, and aiken and tuxedo----"

"let me see the bill," mrs. peniston repeated.

lily hesitated again. in the first place, mme. celeste had not yet sent
in her account, and secondly, the amount it represented was only a
fraction of the sum that lily needed.

"she hasn't sent in the bill for my winter things, but i know it's large;
and there are one or two other things; i've been careless and
imprudent--i'm frightened to think of what i owe----"

she raised the troubled loveliness of her face to mrs. peniston, vainly
hoping that a sight so moving to the other sex 
 
 ___________________________
 
might not be without
effect upon her own. but the effect produced was that of making mrs.
peniston shrink back apprehensively.

"really, lily, you are old enough to manage your own affairs, and after
frightening me to death by your performance of last night you might at
least choose a better time to worry me with such matters." mrs. peniston
glanced at the clock, and swallowed a tablet of digitalis. "if you owe
celeste another thousand, she may send me her account," she added, as
though to end the discussion at any cost.

"i am very sorry, aunt julia; i hate to trouble you at such a time; but i
have really no choice--i ought to have spoken sooner--i owe a great deal
more than a thousand dollars."

"a great deal more? do you owe two? she must have robbed you!"

"i told you it was not only celeste. i--there are other bills--more
pres
 
 ___________________________
 
sing--that must be settled."

"what on earth have you been buying? jewelry? you must have gone off your
head," said mrs. peniston with asperity. "but if you have run into debt,
you must suffer the consequences, and put aside your monthly income till
your bills are paid. if you stay quietly here until next spring, instead
of racing about all over the country, you will have no expenses at all,
and surely in four or five months you can settle the rest of your bills
if i pay the dress-maker now."

lily was again silent. she knew she could not hope to extract even a
thousand dollars from mrs. peniston on the mere plea of payin
 
 ___________________________
 
g celeste's
bill: mrs. peniston would expect to go over the dress-maker's account,
and would make out the cheque to her and not to lily. and yet the money
must be obtained before the day was over!

"the debts i speak of are--different--not like tradesmen's bills," she
began confusedly; but mrs. peniston's look made her almost afraid to
continue. could it be that her aunt suspected anything? the idea
precipitated lily's avowal.

"the fact is, i've played cards a good deal--bridge; the women all do it;
girls too--it's expected. sometimes i've won--won a good deal--but lately
i've been unlucky--and of course such debts can't be paid off
gradually----"

she paused: mrs. peniston's face seemed to be petrifying as she listened.

"cards--you've played cards for money? it's true, then: when i was told
 
 ___________________________
 

so i wouldn't believe it. i won't ask if the other horrors i was told
were true too; i've heard enough for the state of my nerves. when i think
of the example you've had in this house! but i suppose it's your foreign
bringing-up--no one knew where your mother picked up her friends. and her
sundays were a scandal--that i know."

mrs. peniston wheeled round suddenly. "you play cards on sunday?"

lily flushed with the recollection of certain rainy sundays at bellomont
and with the dorsets.

"you're hard on me, aunt julia: i have never really cared for cards, but
a girl hates to be thought priggish and superior, and one drifts into
doing what the others do. i've had a dreadful lesson, and if you'll help
me out this time i promise you--"

mrs. peniston raised her hand warningly. "you needn't make any promises:
it's unnecessary. when i o
 
 ___________________________
 
ts hands stood at half-past three, and she remembered
that selden was to come to her at four. she had meant to put him off with
a word--but now her heart leaped at the thought of seeing him. was there
not a promise of rescue in his love? as she had lain at gerty's side the
night before, she had thought of his coming, and of the sweetness of
weeping out her pain upon his breast. of course she had meant to clear
herself of its consequences before she met him--she had never really
doubted that mrs. peniston would come to her aid. and she had felt, even
in the full storm of her misery, that selden's love could not be her
ultimate refuge; only it would be so sweet to take a moment's shelter
there, while she gathered fresh strength to go on.

but now his love was her only hope, and as she sat alone with her
wretchedness the thought of confiding in him became as seductive as the
river's flow to the suicide. the first plunge would be terrible--but
afterward, what blessedness might come! she remembered 
 
 ___________________________
 
she had never learned to
live with her own thoughts, and to be confronted with them through such
hours of lucid misery made the confused wretchedness of her previous
vigil seem easily bearable.

daylight disbanded the phantom crew, and made it clear to her that she
would hear from selden before noon; but the day passed without his
writing or coming. lily remained at home, lunching and dining alone with
her aunt, who complained of flutterings of the heart, and talked icily on
general topics. mrs. peniston went to bed early, and when she had gone
lily sat down and wrote a note to selden. she was about to ring for a
messenger to despatch it when her eye fell on a paragraph in the evening
paper which lay at her elbow: "mr. lawrence selden was among the
passengers sailing this afternoon for havana and the west indies on the
windward liner antilles."

she laid down the paper and sat motionless, staring at her note. she
understood now that he was never coming--that he had gone away because he
was afra
 
 ___________________________
 
id that he might come.  she rose, and walking across the floor
stood gazing at herself for a long time in the brightly-lit mirror above
the mantel-piece.  the lines in her face came out terribly--she looked
old; and when a girl looks old to herself, how does she look to other
people? she moved away, and began to wander aimlessly about the room,
fitting her steps with mechanical precision between the monstrous roses
of mrs. peniston's axminster. suddenly she noticed that the pen with
which she had written to selden still rested against the uncovered
inkstand. she seated herself again, and taking out an envelope, addressed
it rapidly to rosedale. then she laid out a sheet of paper, and sat over
it with suspended pen. it had been easy enough to write the date, and
"dear mr. rosedale"--but after that her inspiration flagged. she meant to
tell him to come to her, but the words refused to shape themselves. at
length she began: 
 
 ___________________________
 
n he knew her at aix ten years ago. it seems she was tremendously
admired there. an italian prince, rich and the real thing, wanted to
marry her; but just at the critical moment a good-looking step-son turned
up, and lily was silly enough to flirt with him while her
marriage-settlements with the step-father were being drawn up. some
people said the young man did it on purpose. you can fancy the scandal:
there was an awful row between the men, and people began to look at lily
so queerly that mrs. peniston had to pack up and finish her cure
elsewhere. not that she ever understood: to this day she thinks that aix
didn't suit her, and mentions her having been sent there as proof of the
incompetence of french doctors. that's lily all over, you know: she works
like a slave preparing the ground and sowing her seed; but the day she
ought to be reaping the harvest she over-sleeps herself or goes off on a
picnic."

mrs. fisher paused and looked reflectively at the deep shimmer of sea
between the cactus-f
 
 ___________________________
 
rkness of the raised hood, while his name was
sent up to stepney, and he paced the showy hall, awaiting the latter's
descent. ten minutes later the two men passed out together between the
gold-laced custodians of the threshold; but in the vestibule stepney drew
up with a last flare of reluctance.

"it's understood, then?" he stipulated nervously, with his hand on
selden's arm. "she leaves tomorrow by the early train--and my wife's
asleep, and can't be disturbed."



chapter 4

the blinds of mrs. peniston's drawing-room were drawn down against the
oppressive june sun, and in the sultry twilight the faces of her
assembled relatives took on a fitting shadow of bereavement. they were
all there: van alstynes, stepneys and melsons--even a stray peniston or
two, indicating, by a greater latitude in dress and manner, the fact of
remoter relationship and more settled hopes. the peniston side was, in
fact, secure in the knowledge that the bulk of mr. peniston's property
"went back"; while the direct conn
 
 ___________________________
 
y's official attempt to
direct her, moved across the room with her smooth free gait, and seated
herself in a chair which seemed to have been purposely placed apart from
the others.

it was the first time that she had faced her family since her return from
europe, two weeks earlier; but if she perceived any uncertainty in their
welcome, it served only to add a tinge of irony to the usual composure of
her bearing. the shock of dismay with which, on the dock, she had heard
from gerty farish of mrs. peniston's sudden death, had been mitigated,
almost at once, by the irrepressible thought that now, at last, she would
be able to pay her debts. she had looked forward with considerable
uneasiness to her first encounter with her aunt.  mrs. peniston had
vehemently opposed her niece's departure with the dorsets, and had marked
her continued disapproval by not writing during lily's absence. the
certainty that she had heard of the rupture with the dorsets made the
prospect of the meeting more formidable; a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd how should lily have
repressed a quick sense of relief at the thought that, instead of
undergoing the anticipated ordeal, she had only to enter gracefully on a
long-assured inheritance? it had been, in the consecrated phrase, "always
understood" that mrs. peniston was to provide handsomely for her niece;
and in the latter's mind the understanding had long since crystallized
into fact.

"she gets everything, of course--i don't see what we're here for," mrs.
jack stepney remarked with careless loudness to ned van alstyne; and the
latter's deprecating murmur--"julia was always a just woman"--might have
been interpreted as signifying either acquiescence or doubt.

"well, it's only about four hundred thousand," mrs. stepney rejoined with
a yawn; and grace ste
 
 ___________________________
 
pney, in the silence produced by the lawyer's
preliminary cough, was heard to sob out: "they won't find a towel
missing--i went over them with her the very day----"

lily, oppressed by the close atmosphere, and the stifling odour of fresh
mourning, felt her attention straying as mrs. peniston's lawyer, solemnly
erect behind the buhl table at the end of the room, began to rattle
through the preamble of the will.

"it's like being in church," she reflected, wondering vaguely where gwen
stepney had got such an awful hat. then she noticed how stout jack had
grown--he would soon be almost as plethoric as herbert melson, who sat a
few feet off, breathing puffily as he leaned his black-gloved hands on
his stick.

"i wonder why rich people always grow fat--i suppose it's because there's
not
 
 ___________________________
 
ntly: "you
asked me just now for the truth--well, the truth about any girl is that
once she's talked about she's done for; and the more she explains her
case the worse it looks.--my good gerty, you don't happen to have a
cigarette about you?"



in her stuffy room at the hotel to which she had gone on landing, lily
bart that evening reviewed her situation. it was the last week in june,
and none of her friends were in town. the few relatives who had stayed
on, or returned, for the reading of mrs. peniston's will, had taken
flight again that afternoon to newport or long island; and not one of
them had made any proffer of hospitality to lily. for the first time in
her life she found herself utterly alone except for gerty farish. even at
the actual moment of her break with the dorsets she had not had so keen a
sense of its consequences, for the duchess of beltshire, hearing of the
catastrophe from lord hubert, had instantly offered her protection, and
under her sheltering wing lily had made an almo
 
 ___________________________
 
 lily had fancied herself sheltered from
inconvenient scrutiny; but if judy knew when mrs. fisher borrowed money
of her husband, was she likely to ignore the same transaction on lily's
part? if she was careless of his affections she was plainly jealous of
his pocket; and in that fact lily read the explanation of her rebuff. the
immediate result of these conclusions was the passionate resolve to pay
back her debt to trenor. that obligation discharged, she would have but a
thousand dollars of mrs. peniston's legacy left, and nothing to live on
but her own small income, which was considerably less than gerty farish's
wretched pittance; but this consideration gave way to the imperative
claim of her wounded pride.  she must be quits with the trenors first;
after that she would take thought for the future.

in her ignorance of legal procrastinations she had supposed that her
legacy would be paid over within a few days of the reading of her aunt's
will; and after an interval of anxious suspense, she w
 
 ___________________________
 
rote to enquire the
cause of the delay. there was another interval before mrs. peniston's
lawyer, who was also one of the executors, replied to the effect that,
some questions having arisen relative to the interpretation of the will,
he and his associates might not be in a position to pay the legacies till
the close of the twelvemonth legally allotted for their settlement.
bewildered and indignant, lily resolved to try the effect of a personal
appeal; but she returned from her expedition with a sense of the
powerlessness of beauty and charm against the unfeeling processes of the
l
 
 ___________________________
 
aw. it seemed intolerable to live on for another year under the weight
of her debt; and in her extremity she decided to turn to miss stepney,
who still lingered in town, immersed in the delectable duty of "going
over" her benefactress's effects. it was bitter enough for lily to ask a
favour of grace stepney, but the alternative was bitterer still; and one
morning she presented herself at mrs. peniston's, where grace, for the
facilitation of her pious task, had taken up a provisional abode.

the strangeness of entering as a suppliant the house where she had so
long commanded, increased lily's desire to shorten the ordeal; and when
miss stepney entered the darkened drawing-room, rustling with the best
quality of crape, her visitor went straight to the point: would she be
willing to advance the amount of the expected legacy?

grace, in reply, wept and wondered at the request, bemoaned the
inexo
 
 ___________________________
 
 slight attack before you sailed. oh, i
don't know the particulars, of course--i don't want to know them--but
there were rumours about your affairs that made her most unhappy--no one
could be with her without seeing that. i can't help it if you are
offended by my telling you this now--if i can do anything to make you
realize the folly of your course, and how deeply she disapproved of it, i
shall feel it is the truest way of making up to you for her loss."



chapter 5

it seemed to lily, as mrs. peniston's door closed on her, that she was
taking a final leave of her old life. the future stretched before her
dull and bare as the deserted length of fifth avenue, and opportunities
showed as meagrely as the few cabs trailing in quest of fares that did
not come. the completeness of the analogy was, however, disturbed as she
reached the sidewalk by the rapid approach of a hansom which pulled up at
sight of her.

from beneath its luggage-laden top, she caught the wave of a signalling
hand; and the nex
 
 ___________________________
 
 the gormers?"

"oh, i don't defend her intimacy with the gormers; but that too is at an
end now, i think. you know people have been very unkind since bertha
dorset quarrelled with her."

"ah----" selden exclaimed, rising abruptly to walk to the window, where
he remained with his eyes on the darkening street while his cousin
continued to explain: "judy trenor and her own family have deserted her
too--and all because bertha dorset has said such horrible things. and she
is very poor--you know mrs. peniston cut her off with a small legacy,
after giving her to understand that she was to have everything."

"yes--i know," selden assented curtly, turning back into the room, but
only to stir about with restless steps in the circumscribed space between
door and window. "yes--she's been abominably treated; but it's
unfortunately the precise thing that a man who wants to show his sympathy
can't say to her."

his words caused gerty a slight chill of disappointment. "there would be
other ways of showing you
 
 ___________________________
 
e stress of the old thoughts would return; but
at least they did not importune her waking hour. the drug gave her a
momentary illusion of complete renewal, from which she drew strength to
take up her daily work. the strength was more and more needed as the
perplexities of her future increased. she knew that to gerty and mrs.
fisher she was only passing through a temporary period of probation,
since they believed that the apprenticeship she was serving at mme.
regina's would enable her, when mrs. peniston's legacy was paid, to
realize the vision of the green-and-white shop with the fuller competence
acquired by her preliminary training. but to lily herself, aware that the
legacy could not be put to such a use, the preliminary training seemed a
wasted effort. she understood clearly enough that, even if she could ever
learn to compete with hands formed from childhood for their special work,
the small pay she received would not be a sufficient addition to her
income to compensate her for such drudg