et, as he
might himself have phrased it. he knew, of course, that there would be a
large house-party at bellomont, and the possibility of being taken for
one of mrs. trenor's guests was doubtless included in his calculations.
mr. rosedale was still at a stage in his social ascent when it was of
importance to produce such impressions.

the provoking part was that lily knew all this--knew how easy it would
have been to silence him on the spot, and how difficult it might be to do
so afterward. mr. simon rosedale was a man who made it his business to
know everything about every one, whose idea of showing himself to be at
home in society was to display an inconvenient familiarity with the
habits of those with whom he wished to be thought intimate. lily was sure
that within twenty-four hours the story of her visiting her dress-maker
at the benedick would be in active circulation among mr. rosedale's
acquaintances. the worst of it was that she had always snubbed and
ignored him. on his first appearance--wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ting. the glow of the stones warmed lily's veins like
wine. more completely than any other expression of wealth they symbolized
the life she longed to lead, the life of fastidious aloofness and
refinement in which every detail should have the finish of a jewel, and
the whole form a harmonious setting to her own jewel-like rareness.

"oh, lily, do look at this diamond pendant--it's as big as a
dinner-plate! who can have given it?" miss farish bent short-sightedly
over the accompanying card. "mr. simon rosedale.  what, that horrid man?
oh, yes--i remember he's a friend of jack's, and i suppose cousin grace
had to ask him here today; but she must rather hate having to let gwen
accept such a present from him."

lily smiled. she doubted mrs. van osburgh's reluctance, but was aware of
miss farish's habit of ascribing her own delicacies of feeling to the
persons least likely to be encumbered by them.

"well, if gwen doesn't care to be seen wearing it she can always exchange
it for something else," she rema
 
 ___________________________
 
 were either submerged beneath its rush or
landed triumphantly beyond the reach of envious breakers; and she was apt
to display a remarkable retrospective insight into their ultimate fate,
so that, when they had fulfilled their destiny, she was almost always
able to say to grace stepney--the recipient of her prophecies--that she
had known exactly what would happen.

this particular season mrs. peniston would have characterized as that in
which everybody "felt poor" except the welly brys and mr. simon rosedale.
it had been a bad autumn in wall street, where prices fell in accordance
with that peculiar law which proves railway stocks and bales of cotton to
be more sensitive to the allotment of executive power than many estimable
citizens trained to all the advantages of self-government. even fortunes
supposed to be independent of the market either betrayed a secret
dependence on it, or suffered from a sympathetic affection: fashion
sulked in its country houses, or came to town incognito, general
enter