at
bellomont; and with an air of heroic devotion she announced her intention
of remaining with her aunt till the holidays.

sacrifices of this nature are sometimes received with feelings as mixed
as those which actuate them; and mrs. peniston remarked to her
confidential maid that, if any of the family were to be with her at such
a crisis (though for forty years she had been thought competent to see to
the hanging of her own curtains), she would certainly have preferred miss
grace to miss lily. grace stepney was an obscure cousin, of adaptable
manners and vicarious interests, who "ran in" to sit with mrs. peniston
when lily dined out too continuously; who played bezique, picked up
dropped stitches, read out the deaths from the times, and sincerely
admired the purple satin drawing-room curtains, the dying gladiator in
the window, and the seven-by-five painting of niagara which represented
the one artistic excess of mr. peniston's temperate career.

mrs. peniston, under ordinary circumstances, was as
 
 ___________________________
 
rs needed
re-carpeting, grace's judgment was certainly sounder than lily's: not to
mention the fact that the latter resented the smell of beeswax and brown
soap, and behaved as though she thought a house ought to keep clean of
itself, without extraneous assistance.

seated under the cheerless blaze of the drawing-room chandelier--mrs.
peniston never lit the lamps unless there was "company"--lily seemed to
watch her own figure retreating down vistas of neutral-tinted dulness to
a middle age like grace stepney's. when she ceased to amuse judy trenor
and her friends she would have to fall back on amusing mrs. peniston;
whichever way she looked she saw only a future of servitude to the whims
of others, never the possibility of asserting her own eager individuality.

a ring at the door-bell, sounding emphatically through the empty house,
roused her suddenly to the extent of her boredom. it was as though all
the weariness of the past months had culminated in the vacuity of that
interminable evening. if o
 
 ___________________________
 
nguishing features of each season: its dulness, its
extravagance, its lack of balls or excess of divorces. she had a special
memory for the vicissitudes of the "new people" who rose to the surface
with each recurring tide, and were either submerged beneath its rush or
landed triumphantly beyond the reach of envious breakers; and she was apt
to display a remarkable retrospective insight into their ultimate fate,
so that, when they had fulfilled their destiny, she was almost always
able to say to grace stepney--the recipient of her prophecies--that she
had known exactly what would happen.

this particular season mrs. peniston would have characterized as that in
which everybody "felt poor" except the welly brys and mr. simon rosedale.
it had been a bad autumn in wall street, where prices fell in accordance
with that peculiar law which proves railway stocks and bales of cotton to
be more sensitive to the allotment of executive power than many estimable
citizens trained to all the advantages of self-gov
 
 ___________________________
 
art
herself possessed precisely the complementary qualities needed to round
off his social personality.

such details did not fall within the range of mrs. peniston's vision.
like many minds of panoramic sweep, hers was apt to overlook the minutiae
of the foreground, and she was much more likely to know where carry
fisher had found the welly brys' chef for them, than what was happening
to her own niece. she was not, however, without purveyors of information
ready to supplement her deficiencies. grace stepney's mind was like a
kind of moral fly-paper, to which the buzzing items of gossip were drawn
by a fatal attraction, and where they hung fast in the toils of an
inexorable memory. lily would have been surprised to know how many
trivial facts concerning herself were lodged in miss stepney's head. she
was quite aware that she was of interest to dingy people, but she assumed
that there is only one form of dinginess, and that admiration for
brilliancy is the natural expression of its inferior state. s
 
 ___________________________
 
he knew that
gerty farish admired her blindly, and therefore supposed that she
inspired the same sentiments in grace stepney, whom she classified as a
gerty farish without the saving traits of youth and enthusiasm.

in reality, the two differed from each other as much as they differed
from the object of their mutual contemplation. miss farish's heart was a
fountain of tender illusions, miss stepney's a precise register of facts
as manifested in their relation to herself. she had sensibilities which,
to lily, would have seemed comic in a person with a freckled nose and red
eyelids, who lived in a boarding-house and ad
 
 ___________________________
 
ble
to be as ignorant of the world as mrs. peniston!  she smiled at the
latter's question. "people always say unpleasant things--and certainly
they're a great deal together. a friend of mine met them the other
afternoon in the park--quite late, after the lamps were lit. it's a pity
lily makes herself so conspicuous."

"conspicuous!" gasped mrs. peniston. she bent forward, lowering her voice
to mitigate the horror. "what sort of things do they say? that he means
to get a divorce and marry her?"

grace stepney laughed outright. "dear me, no! he would hardly do that.
it--it's a flirtation--nothing more."

"a flirtation? between my niece and a married man? do you mean to tell me
that, with lily's looks and advantages, she could find no better use for
her time than to waste it on a fat stupid man almost old enough to be her
father?" this argument had such a convincing ring that it gave mrs.
peniston sufficient reassurance to pick up her work, while she waited for
grace stepney to rally her scattered for
 
 ___________________________
 
pney drily. "but lily wears a
great many smart gowns--"

"i like her to be well-dressed--it's only suitable!"

"certainly; but then there are her gambling debts besides."

miss stepney, in the beginning, had not meant to bring up this point; but
mrs. peniston had only her own incredulity to blame.  she was like the
stiff-necked unbelievers of scripture, who must be annihilated to be
convinced.

"gambling debts? lily?" mrs. peniston's voice shook with anger and
bewilderment. she wondered whether grace stepney had gone out of her
mind. "what do you mean by her gambling debts?"

"simply that if one plays bridge for money in lily's set one is liable to
lose a great deal--and i don't suppose lily always wins."

"who told you that my niece played cards for money?"

"mercy, cousin julia, don't look at me as if i were trying to turn you
against lily! everybody knows she is crazy about bridge.  mrs. gryce told
me herself that it was her gambling that frightened percy gryce--it seems
he was really taken with
 
 ___________________________
 
knew that
not a penny of it was her own, and that to restore her self-respect she
must at once repay the whole amount. the inability thus to solace her
outraged feelings gave her a paralyzing sense of insignificance. she was
realizing for the first time that a woman's dignity may cost more to keep
up than her carriage; and that the maintenance of a moral attribute
should be dependent on dollars and cents, made the world appear a more
sordid place than she had conceived it.

after luncheon, when grace stepney's prying eyes had been removed, lily
asked for a word with her aunt. the two ladies went upstairs to the
sitting-room, where mrs. peniston seated herself in her black satin
arm-chair tufted with yellow buttons, beside a bead-work table bearing a
bronze box with a miniature of beatrice cenci in the lid. lily felt for
these objects the same distaste which the prisoner may entertain for the
fittings of the court-room. it was here that her aunt received her rare
confidences, and the pink-eyed smirk
 
 ___________________________
 
e disgraced, lily: disgraced by your conduct far
more than by its results. you say your friends have persuaded you to play
cards with them; well, they may as well learn a lesson too. they can
probably afford to lose a little money--and at any rate, i am not going
to waste any of mine in paying them. and now i must ask you to leave
me--this scene has been extremely painful, and i have my own health to
consider.  draw down the blinds, please; and tell jennings i will see no
one this afternoon but grace stepney."

lily went up to her own room and bolted the door. she was trembling with
fear and anger--the rush of the furies' wings was in her ears. she walked
up and down the room with blind irregular steps. the last door of escape
was closed--she felt herself shut in with her dishonour.

suddenly her wild pacing brought her before the clock on the
chimney-piece. its hands stood at half-past three, and she remembered
that selden was to come to her at four. she had meant to put him off with
a word--but n
 
 ___________________________
 
d on the uncertainty of its extent.
jack stepney, in his new character as the richest nephew, tacitly took
the lead, emphasizing his importance by the deeper gloss of his mourning
and the subdued authority of his manner; while his wife's bored attitude
and frivolous gown proclaimed the heiress's disregard of the
insignificant interests at stake. old ned van alstyne, seated next to her
in a coat that made affliction dapper, twirled his white moustache to
conceal the eager twitch of his lips; and grace stepney, red-nosed and
smelling of crape, whispered emotionally to mrs. herbert melson: "i
couldn't bear to see the niagara anywhere else!"

a rustle of weeds and quick turning of heads hailed the opening of the
door, and lily bart appeared, tall and noble in her black dress, with
gerty farish at her side. the women's faces, as she paused
interrogatively on the threshold, were a study in hesitation. one or two
made faint motions of recognition, which might have been subdued either
by the solemnity of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he scene, or by the doubt as to how far the others
meant to go; mrs. jack stepney gave a careless nod, and grace stepney,
with a sepulchral gesture, indicated a seat at her side. but lily,
ignoring the invitation, as well as jack stepney's official attempt to
direct her, moved across the room with her smooth free gait, and seated
herself in a chair which seemed to have been purposely placed apart from
the others.

it was the first time that she had faced her family since her return from
europe, two weeks earlier; but if she perceived any uncertainty in their
welcome, it served only to add a tinge of irony to the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 peniston was to provide handsomely for her niece;
and in the latter's mind the understanding had long since crystallized
into fact.

"she gets everything, of course--i don't see what we're here for," mrs.
jack stepney remarked with careless loudness to ned van alstyne; and the
latter's deprecating murmur--"julia was always a just woman"--might have
been interpreted as signifying either acquiescence or doubt.

"well, it's only about four hundred thousand," mrs. stepney rejoined with
a yawn; and grace stepney, in the silence produced by the lawyer's
preliminary cough, was heard to sob out: "they won't find a towel
missing--i went over them with her the very day----"

lily, oppressed by the close atmosphere, and the stifling odour of fresh
mourning, felt her attention straying as mrs. peniston's lawyer, solemnly
erect behind the buhl table at the end of the room, began to rattle
through the preamble of the will.

"it's like being in church," she reflected, wondering vaguely where gwen
stepney had got
 
 ___________________________
 
 if i inherit, i shall have to be careful of my
figure," she mused, while the lawyer droned on through a labyrinth of
legacies. the servants came first, then a few charitable institutions,
then several remoter melsons and stepneys, who stirred consciously as
their names rang out, and then subsided into a state of impassiveness
befitting the solemnity of the occasion. ned van alstyne, jack stepney,
and a cousin or two followed, each coupled with the mention of a few
thousands: lily wondered that grace stepney was not among them.  then she
heard her own name--"to my niece lily bart ten thousand dollars--" and
after that the lawyer again lost himself in a coil of unintelligible
periods, from which the concluding phrase flashed out with startling
distinctness: "and the residue of my estate to my dear cousin and
name-sake, grace julia stepney."

there was a subdued gasp of surprise, a rapid turning of heads, and a
surging of sable figures toward the corner in which miss stepney wailed
out her sense of u
 
 ___________________________
 
out her. it widened as she turned to go, and no one advanced to
fill it up. she paused a moment, glancing about her, calmly taking the
measure of her situation. she heard some one ask a question about the
date of the will; she caught a fragment of the lawyer's answer--something
about a sudden summons, and an "earlier instrument." then the tide of
dispersal began to drift past her; mrs. jack stepney and mrs. herbert
melson stood on the doorstep awaiting their motor; a sympathizing group
escorted grace stepney to the cab it was felt to be fitting she should
take, though she lived but a street or two away; and miss bart and gerty
found themselves almost alone in the purple drawing-room, which more than
ever, in its stuffy dimness, resembled a well-kept family vault, in which
the last corpse had just been decently deposited.



in gerty farish's sitting-room, whither a hansom had carried the two
friends, lily dropped into a chair with a faint sound of laughter: it
struck her as a humorous coincidence t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat her aunt's legacy should so
nearly represent the amount of her debt to trenor. the need of
discharging that debt had reasserted itself with increased urgency since
her return to america, and she spoke her first thought in saying to the
anxiously hovering gerty: "i wonder when the legacies will be paid."

but miss farish could not pause over the legacies; she broke into a
larger indignation. "oh, lily, it's unjust; it's cruel--grace stepney
must feel she has no right to all that money!"

"any one who knew how to please aunt julia has a right to her money,"
miss bart rejoined philosophically.

"but she was devoted to you--she led every one to think--" gerty checked
herself in evident embarrassment, and miss bart turned to her with a
direct look. "gerty, be honest: this will was made only six weeks ago.
she had heard of my break with the dorsets?"

"every one heard, of course, that there had been some disagreement--some
misunderstan
 
 ___________________________
 
o trust to the happy chance of an
accidental meeting, and lily knew that, even so late in the season, there
was always a hope of running across her friends in their frequent
passages through town.

to this end she assiduously showed herself at the restaurants they
frequented, where, attended by the troubled gerty, she lunched
luxuriously, as she said, on her expectations.

"my dear gerty, you wouldn't have me let the head-waiter see that i've
nothing to live on but aunt julia's legacy? think of grace stepney's
satisfaction if she came in and found us lunching on cold mutton and tea!
what sweet shall we have today, dear--coupe jacques or peches a la melba?"

she dropped the menu abruptly, with a quick heightening of colour, and
gerty, following her glance, was aware of the advance, from an inner
room, of a party headed by mrs. trenor and carry fisher. it was
impossible for these ladies and their companions--among whom lily had at
once distinguished both trenor and rosedale--not to pass, in going out
 
 ___________________________
 
ered and indignant, lily resolved to try the effect of a personal
appeal; but she returned from her expedition with a sense of the
powerlessness of beauty and charm against the unfeeling processes of the
law. it seemed intolerable to live on for another year under the weight
of her debt; and in her extremity she decided to turn to miss stepney,
who still lingered in town, immersed in the delectable duty of "going
over" her benefactress's effects. it was bitter enough for lily to ask a
favour of grace stepney, but the alternative was bitterer still; and one
morning she presented herself at mrs. peniston's, where grace, for the
facilitation of her pious task, had taken up a provisional abode.

the strangeness of entering as a suppliant the house where she had so
long commanded, increased lily's desire to shorten the ordeal; and when
miss stepney entered the darkened drawing-room, rustling with the best
quality of crape, her visitor went straight to the point: would she be
willing to advance the amoun
 
 ___________________________
 
n julia would have
wished--she had told the executors so to their faces; but they were
inaccessible to reason, and there was nothing to do but to wait. let lily
take example by her, and be patient--let them both remember how
beautifully patient cousin julia had always been.

lily made a movement which showed her imperfect assimilation of this
example. "but you will have everything, grace--it would be easy for you
to borrow ten times the amount i am asking for."

"borrow--easy for me to borrow?" grace stepney rose up before her in
sable wrath. "do you imagine for a moment that i would raise money on my
expectations from cousin julia, when i know so well her unspeakable
horror of every transaction of the sort? why, lily, if you must know the
truth, it was the idea of your being in debt that brought on her
illness--you remember she had a slight attack before you sailed. oh, i
don't know the particulars, of course--i don't want to know them--but
there were rumours about your affairs that made her most 