 never forsook her, she glanced about in the hope of seeing some
other member of the trenors' party. she wanted to get away from herself,
and conversation was the only means of escape that she knew.

her search was rewarded by the discovery of a very blond young man with a
soft reddish beard, who, at the other end of the carriage, appeared to be
dissembling himself behind an unfolded newspaper. lily's eye brightened,
and a faint smile relaxed the drawn lines of her mouth. she had known
that mr. percy gryce was to be at bellomont, but she had not counted on
the luck of having him to herself in the train; and the fact banished all
perturbing thoughts of mr. rosedale. perhaps, after all, the day was to
end more favourably than it had begun.

she began to cut the pages of a novel, tranquilly studying her prey
through downcast lashes while she organized a method of attack.
something in his attitude of conscious absorption told her that he was
aware of her presence: no one had ever been quite so engros
 
 ___________________________
 
sed in an
evening paper! she guessed that he was too shy to come up to her, and
that she would have to devise some means of approach which should not
appear to be an advance on her part.  it amused her to think that any one
as rich as mr. percy gryce should be shy; but she was gifted with
treasures of indulgence for such idiosyncrasies, and besides, his
timidity might serve her purpose better than too much assurance. she had
the art of giving self-confidence to the embarrassed, but she was not
equally sure of being able to embarrass the self-confident.

she waited till the train had emerged from the tunnel and was racing
between the ragged edges of the northern suburbs. then, as it lowered its
speed near yonkers, she rose from her seat and 
 
 ___________________________
 
erally in
proportion to the outer self-depreciation. with a more confident person
she would not have dared to dwell so long on one topic, or to show such
exaggerated interest in it; but she had rightly guessed that mr. gryce's
egoism was a thirsty soil, requiring constant nurture from without. miss
bart had the gift of following an undercurrent of thought while she
appeared to be sailing on the surface of conversation; and in this case
her mental excursion took the form of a rapid survey of mr. percy gryce's
future as combined with her own. the gryces were from albany, and but
lately introduced to the metropolis, where the mother and son had come,
after old jefferson gryce's death, to take possession of his house in
madison avenue--an appalling house, all brown stone without and black
walnut within, with the gryce library in a fire-proof annex that looked
like a mausoleum.  lily, however, knew all about them: young mr. gryce's
arrival had fluttered the maternal breasts of new york, and when a gir
 
 ___________________________
 
ith a farther displacement of her
surroundings, explaining meanwhile that she had come across from mount
kisco in her motor-car that morning, and had been kicking her heels for
an hour at garrisons, without even the alleviation of a cigarette, her
brute of a husband having neglected to replenish her case before they
parted that morning.

"and at this hour of the day i don't suppose you've a single one left,
have you, lily?" she plaintively concluded.

miss bart caught the startled glance of mr. percy gryce, whose own lips
were never defiled by tobacco.

"what an absurd question, bertha!" she exclaimed, blushing at the thought
of the store she had laid in at lawrence selden's.

"why, don't you smoke? since when have you given it up? what--you
never---- and you don't either, mr. gryce? ah, of course--how stupid of
me--i understand."

and mrs. dorset leaned back against her travelling cushions with a smile
which made lily wish there had been no vacant seat beside her own.



chapter 3

bridge at bel
 
 ___________________________
 
rn overhead shed a brightness
on the women's hair and struck sparks from their jewels as they moved.

there were moments when such scenes delighted lily, when they gratified
her sense of beauty and her craving for the external finish of life;
there were others when they gave a sharper edge to the meagreness of her
own opportunities. this was one of the moments when the sense of contrast
was uppermost, and she turned away impatiently as mrs. george dorset,
glittering in serpentine spangles, drew percy gryce in her wake to a
confidential nook beneath the gallery.

it was not that miss bart was afraid of losing her newly-acquired hold
over mr. gryce. mrs. dorset might startle or dazzle him, but she had
neither the skill nor the patience to effect his capture.  she was too
self-engrossed to penetrate the recesses of his shyness, and besides, why
should she care to give herself the trouble? at most it might amuse her
to make sport of his simplicity for an evening--after that he would be
merely a burde
 
 ___________________________
 
n to her, and knowing this, she was far too experienced to
encourage him. but the mere thought of that other woman, who could take a
man up and toss him aside as she willed, without having to regard him as
a possible factor in her plans, filled lily bart with envy. she had been
bored all the afternoon by percy gryce--the mere thought seemed to waken
an echo of his droning voice--but she could not ignore him on the morrow,
she must follow up her success, must submit to more boredom, must be
ready with fresh compliances and adaptabilities, and all on the bare
chance that he might ultimately decide to do her the honour of boring her
for life.

it was a hateful fate--but how escape from it? what choice had she? to be
herself, or a gerty farish. as she entered her bedroom, with its
softly-shaded lights, her lac
 
 ___________________________
 
 face swam out waveringly from a
background of shadows, the uncertain light blurring it like a haze; but
the two lines about the mouth remained.

lily rose and undressed in haste.

"it is only because i am tired and have such odious things to think
about," she kept repeating; and it seemed an added injustice that petty
cares should leave a trace on the beauty which was her only defence
against them.

but the odious things were there, and remained with her. she returned
wearily to the thought of percy gryce, as a wayfarer picks up a heavy
load and toils on after a brief rest. she was almost sure she had
"landed" him: a few days' work and she would win her reward. but the
reward itself seemed unpalatable just then: she could get no zest from
the thought of victory. it would be a rest from worry, no more--and how
little that would have seemed to her a few years earlier! her ambitions
had shrunk gradually in the desiccating air of failure. but why had she
failed? was it her own fault or that of desti
 
 ___________________________
 
ask him--but i couldn't make
him come; and now i suppose she'll take it out of me by being perfectly
nasty to every one else."

"oh, she may take it out of him by being perfectly charming--to some one
else."

mrs. trenor shook her head dolefully. "she knows he wouldn't mind. and
who else is there? alice wetherall won't let lucius out of her sight.
ned silverton can't take his eyes off carry fisher--poor boy! gus is
bored by bertha, jack stepney knows her too well--and--well, to be sure,
there's percy gryce!"

she sat up smiling at the thought.

miss bart's countenance did not reflect the smile.

"oh, she and mr. gryce would not be likely to hit it off."

"you mean that she'd shock him and he'd bore her? well, that's not such a
bad beginning, you know. but i hope she won't take it into her head to be
nice to him, for i asked him here on purpose for you."

lily laughed. "merci du compliment! i should certainly have no show
against bertha."

"do you think i am uncomplimentary? i'm not really, you kn
 
 ___________________________
 
ayed the encroaching
boredom which would presently crack the thin veneer of his smile.

"how impatient men are!" lily reflected. "all jack has to do to get
everything he wants is to keep quiet and let that girl marry him; whereas
i have to calculate and contrive, and retreat and advance, as if i were
going through an intricate dance, where one misstep would throw me
hopelessly out of time."

as they drew nearer she was whimsically struck by a kind of family
likeness between miss van osburgh and percy gryce. there was no
resemblance of feature. gryce was handsome in a didactic way--he looked
like a clever pupil's drawing from a plaster-cast--while gwen's
countenance had no more modelling than a face painted on a toy balloon.
but the deeper affinity was unmistakable: the two had the same prejudices
and ideals, and the same quality of making other standards non-existent
by ignoring them. this attribute was common to most of lily's set: they
had a force of negation which eliminated everything beyond 
 
 ___________________________
 
to the last degree of rural elegance. in the foreground glowed
the warm tints of the gardens.  beyond the lawn, with its pyramidal
pale-gold maples and velvety firs, sloped pastures dotted with cattle;
and through a long glade the river widened like a lake under the silver
light of september. lily did not want to join the circle about the
tea-table. they represented the future she had chosen, and she was
content with it, but in no haste to anticipate its joys. the certainty
that she could marry percy gryce when she pleased had lifted a heavy load
from her mind, and her money troubles were too recent for their removal
not to leave a sense of relief which a less discerning intelligence might
have taken for happiness. her vulgar cares were at an end. she would be
able to arrange her life as she pleased, to soar into that empyrean of
security where creditors cannot penetrate. she would have smarter gowns
than judy trenor, and far, far more jewels than bertha dorset. she would
be free forever from the
 
 ___________________________
 
gering enjoyment of her breakfast-tray, rang to have her grey
gown laid out, and despatched her maid to borrow a prayer-book from mrs.
trenor.

but her course was too purely reasonable not to contain the germs of
rebellion. no sooner were her preparations made than they roused a
smothered sense of resistance. a small spark was enough to kindle lily's
imagination, and the sight of the grey dress and the borrowed prayer-book
flashed a long light down the years. she would have to go to church with
percy gryce every sunday. they would have a front pew in the most
expensive church in new york, and his name would figure handsomely in the
list of parish charities. in a few years, when he grew stouter, he would
be made a warden. once in the winter the rector would come to dine, and
her husband would beg her to go over the list and see that no divorcees
were included, except those who had showed signs of penitence by being
re-married to the very wealthy. there was nothing especially arduous in
this round 
 
 ___________________________
 
changed, and she said: "well, if it is, he has succeeded."

selden, following her glance, perceived a party of people advancing
toward them from the farther bend of the path. lady cressida had
evidently insisted on walking home, and the rest of the church-goers had
thought it their duty to accompany her. lily's companion looked rapidly
from one to the other of the two men of the party; wetherall walking
respectfully at lady cressida's side with his little sidelong look of
nervous attention, and percy gryce bringing up the rear with mrs.
wetherall and the trenors.

"ah--now i see why you were getting up your americana!" selden exclaimed
with a note of the freest admiration but the blush with which the sally
was received checked whatever amplifications he had meant to give it.

that lily bart should object to being bantered about her suitors, or even
about her means of attracting them, was so new to selden that he had a
momentary flash of surprise, which lit up a number of possibilities; but
she ro
 
 ___________________________
 
ar judy! i'm sorry to
have been such a bore, and you are very good to me. but you must have
some letters for me to answer--let me at least be useful."

she settled herself at the desk, and mrs. trenor accepted her resumption
of the morning's task with a sigh which implied that, after all, she had
proved herself unfit for higher uses.

the luncheon table showed a depleted circle. all the men but jack stepney
and dorset had returned to town (it seemed to lily a last touch of irony
that selden and percy gryce should have gone in the same train), and lady
cressida and the attendant wetheralls had been despatched by motor to
lunch at a distant country-house.  at such moments of diminished interest
it was usual for mrs. dorset to keep her room till the afternoon; but on
this occasion she drifted in when luncheon was half over, hollowed-eyed
and drooping, but with an edge of malice under her indifference.

she raised her eyebrows as she looked about the table. "how few of us are
left! i do so enjoy the 
 
 ___________________________
 
y to
rise once more above her doubts and feel a renewed faith in her beauty,
her power, and her general fitness to attract a brilliant destiny. it
could not be that one conscious of such aptitudes for mastery and
enjoyment was doomed to a perpetuity of failure; and her mistakes looked
easily reparable in the light of her restored self-confidence.

a special appositeness was given to these reflections by the discovery,
in a neighbouring pew, of the serious profile and neatly-trimmed beard of
mr. percy gryce. there was something almost bridal in his own aspect: his
large white gardenia had a symbolic air that struck lily as a good omen.
after all, seen in an assemblage of his kind he was not
ridiculous-looking: a friendly critic might have called his heaviness
weighty, and he was at his best in the attitude of vacant passivity which
brings out the oddities of the restless. she fancied he was the kind of
man whose sentimental associations would be stirred by the conventional
imagery of a wedding, an
 
 ___________________________
 

lily smiled. she doubted mrs. van osburgh's reluctance, but was aware of
miss farish's habit of ascribing her own delicacies of feeling to the
persons least likely to be encumbered by them.

"well, if gwen doesn't care to be seen wearing it she can always exchange
it for something else," she remarked.

"ah, here is something so much prettier," miss farish continued.  "do
look at this exquisite white sapphire. i'm sure the person who chose it
must have taken particular pains. what is the name?  percy gryce? ah,
then i'm not surprised!" she smiled significantly as she replaced the
card. "of course you've heard that he's perfectly devoted to evie van
osburgh? cousin grace is so pleased about it--it's quite a romance! he
met her first at the george dorsets', only about six weeks ago, and it's
just the nicest possible marriage for dear evie. oh, i don't mean the
money--of course she has plenty of her own--but she's such a quiet
stay-at-home kind of girl, and it seems he has just the same tastes; so
t
 
 ___________________________
 
hey are exactly suited to each other."

lily stood staring vacantly at the white sapphire on its velvet bed.
evie van osburgh and percy gryce? the names rang derisively through her
brain. evie van osburgh? the youngest, dumpiest, dullest of the four dull
and dumpy daughters whom mrs. van osburgh, with unsurpassed astuteness,
had "placed" one by one in enviable niches of existence!  ah, lucky girls
who grow up in the shelter of a mother's love--a mother who knows how to
contrive opportunities without conceding favours, how to take advantage
of propinquity without allowing appetite to be dulled by habit! the
cleverest girl may miscalcu
 
 ___________________________
 
late where her own interests are concerned,
may yield too much at one moment and withdraw too far at the next: it
takes a mother's unerring vigilance and foresight to land her daughters
safely in the arms of wealth and suitability.

lily's passing light-heartedness sank beneath a renewed sense of failure.
life was too stupid, too blundering! why should percy gryce's millions be
joined to another great fortune, why should this clumsy girl be put in
possession of powers she would never know how to use?

she was roused from these speculations by a familiar touch on her arm,
and turning saw gus trenor beside her. she felt a thrill of vexation:
what right had he to touch her? luckily gerty farish had wandered off to
the next table, and they were alone.

trenor, looking stouter than ever in his tight frock-coat, and
unbecomingly flushed by the bridal libations
 
 ___________________________
 
 a look that made up for the
hand-clasp he would have claimed if they had been alone--and how glad she
was that they were not! the news filled her with the glow produced by a
sudden cessation of physical pain. the world was not so stupid and
blundering after all: now and then a stroke of luck came to the
unluckiest. at the thought her spirits began to rise: it was
characteristic of her that one trifling piece of good fortune should give
wings to all her hopes. instantly came the reflection that percy gryce
was not irretrievably lost; and she smiled to think of the excitement of
recapturing him from evie van osburgh. what chance could such a simpleton
have against her if she chose to exert herself? she glanced about, hoping
to catch a glimpse of gryce; but her eyes lit instead on the glossy
countenance of mr. rosedale, who was slipping through the crowd with an
air half obsequious, half obtrusive, as though, the moment his presence
was recognized, it would swell to the dimensions of the room.

not
 
 ___________________________
 
a glass of lemonade or some innocent
drink before we all have to rush for the train."

she turned away as she spoke, letting him strut at her side through the
gathering groups on the terrace, while every nerve in her throbbed with
the consciousness of what selden must have thought of the scene.

but under her angry sense of the perverseness of things, and the light
surface of her talk with rosedale, a third idea persisted: she did not
mean to leave without an attempt to discover the truth about percy gryce.
chance, or perhaps his own resolve, had kept them apart since his hasty
withdrawal from bellomont; but miss bart was an expert in making the most
of the unexpected, and the distasteful incidents of the last few
minutes--the revelation to selden of precisely that part of her life
which she most wished him to ignore--increased her longing for shelter,
for escape from such humiliating contingencies. any definite situation
would be more tolerable than this buffeting of chances, which kept her in
a
 
 ___________________________
 
milan. it seems she goes to a new man in paris, who
won't take an order till his client has spent a day with him at his villa
at neuilly. he says he must study his subject's home life--a most
peculiar arrangement, i should say! but mrs. dorset told molly about it
herself: she said the villa was full of the most exquisite things and she
was really sorry to leave. molly said she never saw her looking better;
she was in tremendous spirits, and said she had made a match between evie
van osburgh and percy gryce. she really seems to have a very good
influence on young men. i hear she is interesting herself now in that
silly silverton boy, who has had his head turned by carry fisher, and has
been gambling so dreadfully. well, as i was saying, evie is really
engaged: mrs. dorset had her to stay with percy gryce, and managed it
all, and grace van osburgh is in the seventh heaven--she had almost
despaired of marrying evie."

mrs. peniston again paused, but this time her scrutiny addressed itself,
not to th
 
 ___________________________
 
wilderment. she wondered whether grace stepney had gone out of her
mind. "what do you mean by her gambling debts?"

"simply that if one plays bridge for money in lily's set one is liable to
lose a great deal--and i don't suppose lily always wins."

"who told you that my niece played cards for money?"

"mercy, cousin julia, don't look at me as if i were trying to turn you
against lily! everybody knows she is crazy about bridge.  mrs. gryce told
me herself that it was her gambling that frightened percy gryce--it seems
he was really taken with her at first. but, of course, among lily's
friends it's quite the custom for girls to play for money.  in fact,
people are inclined to excuse her on that account----"

"to excuse her for what?"

"for being hard up--and accepting attentions from men like gus
trenor--and george dorset----"

mrs. peniston gave another cry. "george dorset? is there any one else?  i
should like to know the worst, if you please."

"don't put it in that way, cousin julia. lately lily
 
 ___________________________
 
hies. his understanding of lily helped to
confirm her own belief in her friend. they dwelt together on the fact
that lily had had no chance. gerty instanced her generous impulses--her
restlessness and discontent. the fact that her life had never satisfied
her proved that she was made for better things. she might have married
more than once--the conventional rich marriage which she had been taught
to consider the sole end of existence--but when the opportunity came she
had always shrunk from it. percy gryce, for instance, had been in love
with her--every one at bellomont had supposed them to be engaged, and her
dismissal of him was thought inexplicable. this view of the gryce
incident chimed too well with selden's mood not to be instantly adopted
by him, with a flash of retrospective contempt for what had once seemed
the obvious solution. if rejection there had been--and he wondered now
that he had ever doubted it!--then he held the key to the secret, and the
hillsides of bellomont were lit up, no
 
 ___________________________
 
ew or a cog in the great machine i called life, and when i dropped
out of it i found i was of no use anywhere else. what can one do when one
finds that one only fits into one hole? one must get back to it or be
thrown out into the rubbish heap--and you don't know what it's like in
the rubbish heap!"

her lips wavered into a smile--she had been distracted by the whimsical
remembrance of the confidences she had made to him, two years earlier, in
that very room. then she had been planning to marry percy gryce--what was
it she was planning now?

the blood had risen strongly under selden's dark skin, but his emotion
showed itself only in an added seriousness of manner.

"you have something to tell me--do you mean to marry?" he said abruptly.

lily's eyes did not falter, but a look of wonder, of puzzled
self-interrogation, formed itself slowly in their depths. in the light of
his question, she had paused to ask herself if her decision had really
been taken when she entered the room.

"you always told m
 
 ___________________________
 
ry flourish of
the pen. as she continued to gaze at it, she felt the glitter of the
visions mounting to her brain, and after a while she lifted the lid of
the desk and slipped the magic formula out of sight.  it was easier to
think without those five figures dancing before her eyes; and she had a
great deal of thinking to do before she slept.

she opened her cheque-book, and plunged into such anxious calculations as
had prolonged her vigil at bellomont on the night when she had decided to
marry percy gryce. poverty simplifies book-keeping, and her financial
situation was easier to ascertain than it had been then; but she had not
yet learned the control of money, and during her transient phase of
luxury at the emporium she had slipped back into habits of extravagance
which still impaired her slender balance. a careful examination of her
cheque-book, and of the unpaid bills in her desk, showed that, when the
latter had been settled, she would have barely enough to live on for the
next three or four