all to one's self! what a
miserable thing it is to be a woman." she leaned back in a luxury of
discontent.

selden was rummaging in a cupboard for the cake.

"even women," he said, "have been known to enjoy the privileges of a
flat."

"oh, governesses--or widows. but not girls--not poor, miserable,
marriageable girls!"

"i even know a girl who lives in a flat."

she sat up in surprise. "you do?"

"i do," he assured her, emerging from the cupboard with the sought-for
cake.

"oh, i know--you mean gerty farish." she smiled a little unkindly. "but i
said marriageable--and besides, she has a horrid little place, and no
maid, and such queer things to eat. her cook does the washing and the
food tastes of soap. i should hate that, you know."

"you shouldn't dine with her on wash-days," said selden, cutting the cake.

they both laughed, and he knelt by the table to light the lamp under the
kettle, while she measured out the tea into a little tea-pot of green
glaze. as he watched her hand, polished as a bit
 
 ___________________________
 
 filled lily bart with envy. she had been
bored all the afternoon by percy gryce--the mere thought seemed to waken
an echo of his droning voice--but she could not ignore him on the morrow,
she must follow up her success, must submit to more boredom, must be
ready with fresh compliances and adaptabilities, and all on the bare
chance that he might ultimately decide to do her the honour of boring her
for life.

it was a hateful fate--but how escape from it? what choice had she? to be
herself, or a gerty farish. as she entered her bedroom, with its
softly-shaded lights, her lace dressing-gown lying across the silken
bedspread, her little embroidered slippers before the fire, a vase of
carnations filling the air with perfume, and the last novels and
magazines lying uncut on a table beside the reading-lamp, she had a
vision of miss farish's cramped flat, with its cheap conveniences and
hideous wall-papers. no; she was not made for mean and shabby
surroundings, for the squalid compromises of poverty. her
 
 ___________________________
 
fely in the arms of wealth and suitability.

lily's passing light-heartedness sank beneath a renewed sense of failure.
life was too stupid, too blundering! why should percy gryce's millions be
joined to another great fortune, why should this clumsy girl be put in
possession of powers she would never know how to use?

she was roused from these speculations by a familiar touch on her arm,
and turning saw gus trenor beside her. she felt a thrill of vexation:
what right had he to touch her? luckily gerty farish had wandered off to
the next table, and they were alone.

trenor, looking stouter than ever in his tight frock-coat, and
unbecomingly flushed by the bridal libations, gazed at her with
undisguised approval.

"by jove, lily, you do look a stunner!" he had slipped insensibly into
the use of her christian name, and she had never found the right moment
to correct him. besides, in her set all the men and women called each
other by their christian names; it was only on trenor's lips that the
familiar
 
 ___________________________
 
ty woman expects to see reflected in
masculine eyes; and the discovery, if distasteful to her vanity, was
reassuring to her nerves. between the relief of her escape from trenor,
and the vague apprehension of her meeting with rosedale, it was pleasant
to rest a moment on the sense of complete understanding which lawrence
selden's manner always conveyed.

"this is luck," he said smiling. "i was wondering if i should be able to
have a word with you before the special snatches us away.  i came with
gerty farish, and promised not to let her miss the train, but i am sure
she is still extracting sentimental solace from the wedding presents. she
appears to regard their number and value as evidence of the disinterested
affection of the contracting parties."

there was not the least trace of embarrassment in his voice, and as he
spoke, leaning slightly against the jamb of the window, and letting his
eyes rest on her in the frank enjoyment of her grace, she felt with a
faint chill of regret that he had gone 
 
 ___________________________
 
with an expression of minute scrutiny.
"i saw a streak of light under one of the blinds as i drove up: it's
extraordinary that i can never teach that woman to draw them down evenly."

having corrected the irregularity, she seated herself on one of the
glossy purple arm-chairs; mrs. peniston always sat on a chair, never in
it.

then she turned her glance to miss bart. "my dear, you look tired; i
suppose it's the excitement of the wedding. cornelia van alstyne was full
of it: molly was there, and gerty farish ran in for a minute to tell us
about it. i think it was odd, their serving melons before the consomme: a
wedding breakfast should always begin with consomme. molly didn't care
for the bridesmaids' dresses. she had it straight from julia melson that
they cost three hundred dollars apiece at celeste's, but she says they
didn't look it. i'm glad you decided not to be a bridesmaid; that shade
of salmon-pink wouldn't have suited you." mrs. peniston delighted in
discussing the minutest details of fes
 
 ___________________________
 
ike a
kind of moral fly-paper, to which the buzzing items of gossip were drawn
by a fatal attraction, and where they hung fast in the toils of an
inexorable memory. lily would have been surprised to know how many
trivial facts concerning herself were lodged in miss stepney's head. she
was quite aware that she was of interest to dingy people, but she assumed
that there is only one form of dinginess, and that admiration for
brilliancy is the natural expression of its inferior state. she knew that
gerty farish admired her blindly, and therefore supposed that she
inspired the same sentiments in grace stepney, whom she classified as a
gerty farish without the saving traits of youth and enthusiasm.

in reality, the two differed from each other as much as they differed
from the object of their mutual contemplation. miss farish's heart was a
fountain of tender illusions, miss stepney's a precise register of facts
as manifested in their relation to herself. she had sensibilities which,
to lily, would have 
 
 ___________________________
 
rface of rich tissues and
jewelled shoulders in harmony with the festooned and gilded walls, and
the flushed splendours of the venetian ceiling. at the farther end of the
room a stage had been constructed behind a proscenium arch curtained with
folds of old damask; but in the pause before the parting of the folds
there was little thought of what they might reveal, for every woman who
had accepted mrs. bry's invitation was engaged in trying to find out how
many of her friends had done the same.

gerty farish, seated next to selden, was lost in that indiscriminate and
uncritical enjoyment so irritating to miss bart's finer perceptions. it
may be that selden's nearness had something to do with the quality of his
cousin's pleasure; but miss farish was so little accustomed to refer her
enjoyment of such scenes to her own share in them, that she was merely
conscious of a deeper sense of contentment.

"wasn't it dear of lily to get me an invitation? of course it would never
have occurred to carry fisher 
 
 ___________________________
 
type, with high blue-veined forehead and pale eyes and
lashes, made a characteristic vandyck, in black satin, against a
curtained archway. then there were kauffmann nymphs garlanding the altar
of love; a veronese supper, all sheeny textures, pearl-woven heads and
marble architecture; and a watteau group of lute-playing comedians,
lounging by a fountain in a sunlit glade.

each evanescent picture touched the vision-building faculty in selden,
leading him so far down the vistas of fancy that even gerty farish's
running commentary--"oh, how lovely lulu melson looks!" or: "that must be
kate corby, to the right there, in purple"--did not break the spell of
the illusion. indeed, so skilfully had the personality of the actors been
subdued to the scenes they figured in that even the least imaginative of
the audience must have felt a thrill of contrast when the curtain
suddenly parted on a picture which was simply and undisguisedly the
portrait of miss bart.

here there could be no mistaking the predominan
 
 ___________________________
 
 he had time to feel the whole
tragedy of her life. it was as though her beauty, thus detached from all
that cheapened and vulgarized it, had held out suppliant hands to him
from the world in which he and she had once met for a moment, and where
he felt an overmastering longing to be with her again.

he was roused by the pressure of ecstatic fingers. "wasn't she too
beautiful, lawrence? don't you like her best in that simple dress? it
makes her look like the real lily--the lily i know."

he met gerty farish's brimming gaze. "the lily we know," he corrected;
and his cousin, beaming at the implied understanding, exclaimed joyfully:
"i'll tell her that! she always says you dislike her."

the performance over, selden's first impulse was to seek miss bart.
during the interlude of music which succeeded the tableaux, the actors
had seated themselves here and there in the audience, diversifying its
conventional appearance by the varied picturesqueness of their dress.
lily, however, was not among them, and
 
 ___________________________
 
's corner. if only she could reach there before this
labouring anguish burst from her breast to her lips--if only she could
feel the hold of gerty's arms while she shook in the ague-fit of fear
that was coming upon her! she pushed up the door in the roof and called
the address to the driver. it was not so late--gerty might still be
waking. and even if she were not, the sound of the bell would penetrate
every recess of her tiny apartment, and rouse her to answer her friend's
call.



chapter 14

gerty farish, the morning after the wellington brys' entertainment, woke
from dreams as happy as lily's. if they were less vivid in hue, more
subdued to the half-tints of her personality and her experience, they
were for that very reason better suited to her mental vision. such
flashes of joy as lily moved in would have blinded miss farish, who was
accustomed, in the way of happiness, to such scant light as shone through
the cracks of other people's lives.

now she was the centre of a little illumination of
 
 ___________________________
 
uld feel other
demands only through her own, and no pain was long vivid which did not
press on an answering nerve. but for the moment she was drawn out of
herself by the interest of her direct relation with a world so unlike her
own. she had supplemented her first gift by personal assistance to one or
two of miss farish's most appealing subjects, and the admiration and
interest her presence excited among the tired workers at the club
ministered in a new form to her insatiable desire to please.

gerty farish was not a close enough reader of character to disentangle
the mixed threads of which lily's philanthropy was woven. she supposed
her beautiful friend to be actuated by the same motive as herself--that
sharpening of the moral vision which makes all human suffering so near
and insistent that the other aspects of life fade into remoteness.  gerty
lived by such simple formulas that she did not hesitate to class her
friend's state with the emotional "change of heart" to which her dealings
with the p
 
 ___________________________
 
d dangerously like
the whole--was filled to the brim with the sensations of the previous
evening.  selden understood the symptoms: he recognized the fact that he
was paying up, as there had always been a chance of his having to pay up,
for the voluntary exclusions of his past. he had meant to keep free from
permanent ties, not from any poverty of feeling, but because, in a
different way, he was, as much as lily, the victim of his environment.
there had been a germ of truth in his declaration to gerty farish that he
had never wanted to marry a "nice" girl: the adjective connoting, in his
cousin's vocabulary, certain utilitarian qualities which are apt to
preclude the luxury of charm.  now it had been selden's fate to have a
charming mother: her graceful portrait, all smiles and cashmere, still
emitted a faded scent of the undefinable quality. his father was the kind
of man who delights in a charming woman: who quotes her, stimulates her,
and keeps her perennially charming. neither one of the couple
 
 ___________________________
 
er as of his own.  and so
he had leisure to muse on all its exquisite details, as a hard worker, on
a holiday morning, might lie still and watch the beam of light travel
gradually across his room. but if the new light dazzled, it did not blind
him. he could still discern the outline of facts, though his own relation
to them had changed. he was no less conscious than before of what was
said of lily bart, but he could separate the woman he knew from the
vulgar estimate of her.  his mind turned to gerty farish's words, and the
wisdom of the world seemed a groping thing beside the insight of
innocence.  blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see god--even
the hidden god in their neighbour's breast! selden was in the state of
impassioned self-absorption that the first surrender to love produces.
his craving was for the companionship of one whose point of view should
justify his own, who should confirm, by deliberate observation, the truth
to which his intuitions had leaped. he could not wait for
 
 ___________________________
 
 the midday
recess, but seized a moment's leisure in court to scribble his telegram
to gerty farish.

reaching town, he was driven direct to his club, where he hoped a note
from miss bart might await him. but his box contained only a line of
rapturous assent from gerty, and he was turning away disappointed when he
was hailed by a voice from the smoking room.

"hallo, lawrence! dining here? take a bite with me--i've ordered a
canvas-back."

he discovered trenor, in his day clothes, sitting, with a tall glass at
his elbow, behind the folds of a sporting journal.

selden thanked him, but pleaded
 
 ___________________________
 
eiress's disregard of the
insignificant interests at stake. old ned van alstyne, seated next to her
in a coat that made affliction dapper, twirled his white moustache to
conceal the eager twitch of his lips; and grace stepney, red-nosed and
smelling of crape, whispered emotionally to mrs. herbert melson: "i
couldn't bear to see the niagara anywhere else!"

a rustle of weeds and quick turning of heads hailed the opening of the
door, and lily bart appeared, tall and noble in her black dress, with
gerty farish at her side. the women's faces, as she paused
interrogatively on the threshold, were a study in hesitation. one or two
made faint motions of recognition, which might have been subdued either
by the solemnity of the scene, or by the doubt as to how far the others
meant to go; mrs. jack stepney gave a careless nod, and grace stepney,
with a sepulchral gesture, indicated a seat at her side. but lily,
ignoring the invitation, as well as jack stepney's official attempt to
direct her, moved across th
 
 ___________________________
 
e room with her smooth free gait, and seated
herself in a chair which seemed to have been purposely placed apart from
the others.

it was the first time that she had faced her family since her return from
europe, two weeks earlier; but if she perceived any uncertainty in their
welcome, it served only to add a tinge of irony to the usual composure of
her bearing. the shock of dismay with which, on the dock, she had heard
from gerty farish of mrs. peniston's sudden death, had been mitigated,
almost at once, by the irrepressible thought that now, at last, she would
be able to pay her debts. she had looked forward with considerable
uneasiness to her first encounter with her aunt.  mrs. peniston had
vehemently opposed her niece's departure with the dorsets, and had marked
her continued disapproval by not writing during lily's absence. the
certainty that she had heard of the rupture with the dorsets made the
prospect of the meeting m
 
 ___________________________
 
e tide of
dispersal began to drift past her; mrs. jack stepney and mrs. herbert
melson stood on the doorstep awaiting their motor; a sympathizing group
escorted grace stepney to the cab it was felt to be fitting she should
take, though she lived but a street or two away; and miss bart and gerty
found themselves almost alone in the purple drawing-room, which more than
ever, in its stuffy dimness, resembled a well-kept family vault, in which
the last corpse had just been decently deposited.



in gerty farish's sitting-room, whither a hansom had carried the two
friends, lily dropped into a chair with a faint sound of laughter: it
struck her as a humorous coincidence that her aunt's legacy should so
nearly represent the amount of her debt to trenor. the need of
discharging that debt had reasserted itself with increased urgency since
her return to america, and she spoke her first thought in saying to the
anxiously hovering gerty: "i wonder when the legacies will be paid."

but miss farish could not pa
 
 ___________________________
 
igarette about you?"



in her stuffy room at the hotel to which she had gone on landing, lily
bart that evening reviewed her situation. it was the last week in june,
and none of her friends were in town. the few relatives who had stayed
on, or returned, for the reading of mrs. peniston's will, had taken
flight again that afternoon to newport or long island; and not one of
them had made any proffer of hospitality to lily. for the first time in
her life she found herself utterly alone except for gerty farish. even at
the actual moment of her break with the dorsets she had not had so keen a
sense of its consequences, for the duchess of beltshire, hearing of the
catastrophe from lord hubert, had instantly offered her protection, and
under her sheltering wing lily had made an almost triumphant progress to
london. there she had been sorely tempted to linger on in a society which
asked of her only to amuse and charm it, without enquiring too curiously
how she had acquired her gift for doing so; but seld
 
 ___________________________
 
the actors and witnesses in the miserable drama--had
preceded her with their version of the case; and, even had she seen the
least chance of gaining a hearing for her own, some obscure disdain and
reluctance would have restrained her.  she knew it was not by
explanations and counter-charges that she could ever hope to recover her
lost standing; but even had she felt the least trust in their efficacy,
she would still have been held back by the feeling which had kept her
from defending herself to gerty farish--a feeling that was half pride and
half humiliation. for though she knew she had been ruthlessly sacrificed
to bertha dorset's determination to win back her husband, and though her
own relation to dorset had been that of the merest good-fellowship, yet
she had been perfectly aware from the outset that her part in the affair
was, as carry fisher brutally put it, to distract dorset's attention from
his wife.  that was what she was "there for": it was the price she had
chosen to pay for three mont
 
 ___________________________
 
trospection, did not now allow her to put any false gloss on the
situation. she had suffered for the very faithfulness with which she had
carried out her part of the tacit compact, but the part was not a
handsome one at best, and she saw it now in all the ugliness of failure.

she saw, too, in the same uncompromising light, the train of consequences
resulting from that failure; and these became clearer to her with every
day of her weary lingering in town. she stayed on partly for the comfort
of gerty farish's nearness, and partly for lack of knowing where to go.
she understood well enough the nature of the task before her. she must
set out to regain, little by little, the position she had lost; and the
first step in the tedious task was to find out, as soon as possible, on
how many of her friends she could count. her hopes were mainly centred on
mrs. trenor, who had treasures of easy-going tolerance for those who were
amusing or useful to her, and in the noisy rush of whose existence the
still sma
 
 ___________________________
 
money
of her husband, was she likely to ignore the same transaction on lily's
part? if she was careless of his affections she was plainly jealous of
his pocket; and in that fact lily read the explanation of her rebuff. the
immediate result of these conclusions was the passionate resolve to pay
back her debt to trenor. that obligation discharged, she would have but a
thousand dollars of mrs. peniston's legacy left, and nothing to live on
but her own small income, which was considerably less than gerty farish's
wretched pittance; but this consideration gave way to the imperative
claim of her wounded pride.  she must be quits with the trenors first;
after that she would take thought for the future.

in her ignorance of legal procrastinations she had supposed that her
legacy would be paid over within a few days of the reading of her aunt's
will; and after an interval of anxious suspense, she wrote to enquire the
cause of the delay. there was another interval before mrs. peniston's
lawyer, who was also
 
 ___________________________
 
ng there isn't any. that's not my way, and i can only say i'm
thoroughly ashamed of myself for following the other women's lead. but
we'll talk of that by and bye--tell me now where you're staying and what
your plans are. i don't suppose you're keeping house in there with grace
stepney, eh?--and it struck me you might be rather at loose ends."

in lily's present mood there was no resisting the honest friendliness of
this appeal, and she said with a smile: "i am at loose ends for the
moment, but gerty farish is still in town, and she's good enough to let
me be with her whenever she can spare the time."

mrs. fisher made a slight grimace. "h'm--that's a temperate joy.  oh, i
know--gerty's a trump, and worth all the rest of us put together; but a
la longue you're used to a little higher seasoning, aren't you, dear?
and besides, i suppose she'll be off herself before long--the first of
august, you say? well, look here, you can't spend your summer in town;
we'll talk of that later too. but meanwhile, w
 
 ___________________________
 
ints: a hard glaze of
indifference was fast forming over her delicacies and susceptibilities,
and each concession to expediency hardened the surface a little more.

on the monday, when the party disbanded with uproarious adieux, the
return to town threw into stronger relief the charms of the life she was
leaving. the other guests were dispersing to take up the same existence
in a different setting: some at newport, some at bar harbour, some in the
elaborate rusticity of an adirondack camp. even gerty farish, who
welcomed lily's return with tender solicitude, would soon be preparing to
join the aunt with whom she spent her summers on lake george: only lily
herself remained without plan or purpose, stranded in a backwater of the
great current of pleasure. but carry fisher, who had insisted on
transporting her to her own house, where she herself was to perch for a
day or two on the way to the brys' camp, came to the rescue with a new
suggestion.

"look here, lily--i'll tell you what it is: i want you
 
 ___________________________
 
d want for you just at present."

miss bart lifted her eyes with a keen glance. "to take me out of my
friends' way, you mean?" she said quietly; and mrs. fisher responded with
a deprecating kiss: "to keep you out of their sight till they realize how
much they miss you."



miss bart went with the gormers to alaska; and the expedition, if it did
not produce the effect anticipated by her friend, had at least the
negative advantage of removing her from the fiery centre of criticism and
discussion. gerty farish had opposed the plan with all the energy of her
somewhat inarticulate nature. she had even offered to give up her visit
to lake george, and remain in town with miss bart, if the latter would
renounce her journey; but lily could disguise her real distaste for this
plan under a sufficiently valid reason.

"you dear innocent, don't you see," she protested, "that carry is quite
right, and that i must take up my usual life, and go about among people
as much as possible? if my old friends choose to b
 
 ___________________________
 
tes made her as promiscuous as carry fisher was
rendered by her necessities, occasionally descended on the gormers,
where, after a first stare of surprise, she took lily's presence almost
too much as a matter of course. mrs. fisher, too, appearing frequently in
the neighbourhood, drove over to impart her experiences and give lily
what she called the latest report from the weather-bureau; and the
latter, who had never directly invited her confidence, could yet talk
with her more freely than with gerty farish, in whose presence it was
impossible even to admit the existence of much that mrs. fisher
conveniently took for granted.

mrs. fisher, moreover, had no embarrassing curiosity. she did not wish to
probe the inwardness of lily's situation, but simply to view it from the
outside, and draw her conclusions accordingly; and these conclusions, at
the end of a confidential talk, she summed up to her friend in the
succinct remark: "you must marry as soon as you can."

lily uttered a faint laugh--for onc
 
 ___________________________
 
e mrs. fisher lacked originality.  "do
you mean, like gerty farish, to recommend the unfailing panacea of 'a
good man's love'?"

"no--i don't think either of my candidates would answer to that
description," said mrs. fisher after a pause of reflection.

"either? are there actually two?"

"well, perhaps i ought to say one and a half--for the moment."

miss bart received this with increasing amusement. "other things being
equal, i think i should prefer a half-husband: who is he?"

"don't fly out at me till you hear my reasons--george dorset."

"oh----" lily murm
 
 ___________________________
 
s somewhat depressing excursion she was immediately conscious
that mrs. dorset's influence was still in the air. there had been another
exchange of visits, a tea at a country-club, an encounter at a hunt ball;
there was even a rumour of an approaching dinner, which mattie gormer,
with an unnatural effort at discretion, tried to smuggle out of the
conversation whenever miss bart took part in it.

the latter had already planned to return to town after a farewell sunday
with her friends; and, with gerty farish's aid, had discovered a small
private hotel where she might establish herself for the winter.  the
hotel being on the edge of a fashionable neighbourhood, the price of the
few square feet she was to occupy was considerably in excess of her
means; but she found a justification for her dislike of poorer quarters
in the argument that, at this particular juncture, it was of the utmost
importance to keep up a show of prosperity. in reality, it was impossible
for her, while she had the means to pay h
 
 ___________________________
 
er way for a week ahead, to
lapse into a form of existence like gerty farish's. she had never been so
near the brink of insolvency; but she could at least manage to meet her
weekly hotel bill, and having settled the heaviest of her previous debts
out of the money she had received from trenor, she had a still fair
margin of credit to go upon. the situation, however, was not agreeable
enough to lull her to complete unconsciousness of its insecurity.  her
rooms, with their cramped outlook down a sallow vista of brick walls and
fire-escapes, her lonely meals in the dark res
 
 ___________________________
 
 hitherto her
intermittent impulses of resistance had sufficed to maintain her
self-respect.  if she slipped she recovered her footing, and it was only
afterward that she was aware of having recovered it each time on a
slightly lower level. she had rejected rosedale's offer without conscious
effort; her whole being had risen against it; and she did not yet
perceive that, by the mere act of listening to him, she had learned to
live with ideas which would once have been intolerable to her.




to gerty farish, keeping watch over her with a tenderer if less
discerning eye than mrs. fisher's, the results of the struggle were
already distinctly visible. she did not, indeed, know what hostages lily
had already given to expediency; but she saw her passionately and
irretrievably pledged to the ruinous policy of "keeping up." gerty could
smile now at her own early dream of her friend's renovation through
adversity: she understood clearly enough that lily was not of those to
whom privation teaches the unimp
 
 ___________________________
 
d tide me over
till the legacy is paid. and carry has promised to find somebody who
wants a kind of social secretary--you know she makes a specialty of the
helpless rich."




miss bart had not revealed to gerty the full extent of her anxiety. she
was in fact in urgent and immediate need of money: money to meet the
vulgar weekly claims which could neither be deferred nor evaded. to give
up her apartment, and shrink to the obscurity of a boarding-house, or the
provisional hospitality of a bed in gerty farish's sitting-room, was an
expedient which could only postpone the problem confronting her; and it
seemed wiser as well as more agreeable to remain where she was and find
some means of earning her living. the possibility of having to do this
was one which she had never before seriously considered, and the
discovery that, as a bread-winner, she was likely to prove as helpless
and ineffectual as poor miss silverton, was a severe shock to her
self-confidence.

having been accustomed to take herself at
 
 ___________________________
 

twice, he and she had met for an illumined moment; and the recognition of
this fact, when its first pang had been surmounted, produced in him a
sense of negative relief. it was much simpler for him to judge miss bart
by her habitual conduct than by the rare deviations from it which had
thrown her so disturbingly in his way; and every act of hers which made
the recurrence of such deviations more unlikely, confirmed the sense of
relief with which he returned to the conventional view of her.

but gerty farish's words had sufficed to make him see how little this
view was really his, and how impossible it was for him to live quietly
with the thought of lily bart. to hear that she was in need of help--even
such vague help as he could offer--was to be at once repossessed by that
thought; and by the time he reached the street he had sufficiently
convinced himself of the urgency of his cousin's appeal to turn his steps
directly toward lily's hotel.

there his zeal met a check in the unforeseen news that m
 
 ___________________________
 
iss bart had
moved away; but, on his pressing his enquiries, the clerk remembered that
she had left an address, for which he presently began to search through
his books.

it was certainly strange that she should have taken this step without
letting gerty farish know of her decision; and selden waited with a vague
sense of uneasiness while the address was sought for. the process lasted
long enough for uneasiness to turn to apprehension; but when at length a
slip of paper was handed him, and he read on it: "care of mrs. norma
hatch, emporium hotel," his apprehension passed into an incredulous
stare, and this into the gesture of disgust with which he tore the paper
in two, and turned to walk quickly homeward.



chapter 9

when lily woke on the morning a
 
 ___________________________
 
f hot air and
sedentary toil, rather than with any actual signs of want: they were
employed in a fashionable millinery establishment, and were fairly well
clothed and well paid; but the youngest among them was as dull and
colourless as the middle-aged. in the whole work-room there was only one
skin beneath which the blood still visibly played; and that now burned
with vexation as miss bart, under the lash of the forewoman's comment,
began to strip the hat-frame of its over-lapping spangles.

to gerty farish's hopeful spirit a solution appeared to have been reached
when she remembered how beautifully lily could trim hats.  instances of
young lady-milliners establishing themselves under fashionable patronage,
and imparting to their "creations" that indefinable touch which the
professional hand can never give, had flattered gerty's visions of the
future, and convinced even lily that her separation from mrs. norma hatch
need not reduce her to dependence on her friends.

the parting had occurred a few 
 
 ___________________________
 
than human had she not taken a certain
pleasure in seeing her forebodings confirmed.

"you'd better go back to binding edges," she said drily. lily slipped out
last among the band of liberated work-women. she did not care to be
mingled in their noisy dispersal: once in the street, she always felt an
irresistible return to her old standpoint, an instinctive shrinking from
all that was unpolished and promiscuous. in the days--how distant they
now seemed!--when she had visited the girls' club with gerty farish, she
had felt an enlightened interest in the working-classes; but that was
because she looked down on them from above, from the happy altitude of
her grace and her beneficence. now that she was on a level with them, the
point of view was less interesting.

she felt a touch on her arm, and met the penitent eye of miss kilroy.
"miss bart, i guess you can sew those spangles on as well as i can when
you're feeling right. miss haines didn't act fair to you."

lily's colour rose at the unexpected adv
 
 ___________________________
 
it was strange that it had not come
to his lips sooner--that he had let her pass from him the evening before
without being able to speak it. but what did that matter, now that a new
day had come? it was not a word for twilight, but for the morning.

selden ran eagerly up the steps and pulled the bell; and even in his
state of self-absorption it came as a sharp surprise to him that the door
should open so promptly. it was still more of a surprise to see, as he
entered, that it had been opened by gerty farish--and that behind her, in
an agitated blur, several other figures ominously loomed.

"lawrence!" gerty cried in a strange voice, "how could you get here so
quickly?"--and the trembling hand she laid on him seemed instantly to
close about his heart.

he noticed the other faces, vague with fear and conjecture--he saw the
landlady's imposing bulk sway professionally toward him; but he shrank
back, putting up his hand, while his eyes mechanically mounted the steep
black walnut stairs, up which he wa