
"what luck!" she repeated. "how nice of you to come to my rescue!"

he responded joyfully that to do so was his mission in life, and asked
what form the rescue was to take.

"oh, almost any--even to sitting on a bench and talking to me.  one sits
out a cotillion--why not sit out a train? it isn't a bit hotter here than
in mrs. van osburgh's conservatory--and some of the women are not a bit
uglier."  she broke off, laughing, to explain that she had come up to
town from tuxedo, on her way to the gus trenors' at bellomont, and had
missed the three-fifteen train to rhinebeck.  "and there isn't another
till half-past five." she consulted the little jewelled watch among her
laces.  "just two hours to wait. and i don't know what to do with myself.
my maid came up this morning to do some shopping for me, and was to go on
to bellomont at one o'clock, and my aunt's house is closed, and i don't
know a soul in town." she glanced plaintively about the station. "it is
hotter than mrs. van osburgh's, after al
 
 ___________________________
 
ut made mrs.
trenor feel, when she finally heard it drive away, that she had somehow
vicariously made use of it.

it was mrs. trenor's theory that her daughters actually did go to church
every sunday; but their french governess's convictions calling her to the
rival fane, and the fatigues of the week keeping their mother in her room
till luncheon, there was seldom any one present to verify the fact. now
and then, in a spasmodic burst of virtue--when the house had been too
uproarious over night--gus trenor forced his genial bulk into a tight
frock-coat and routed his daughters from their slumbers; but habitually,
as lily explained to mr. gryce, this parental duty was forgotten till the
church bells were ringing across the park, and the omnibus had driven
away empty.

lily had hinted to mr. gryce that this neglect of religious observances
was repugnant to her early traditions, and that during her visits to
bellomont she regularly accompanied muriel and hilda to church. this
tallied with the assura
 
 ___________________________
 
lways
open; but most of the captives were like flies in a bottle, and having
once flown in, could never regain their freedom. it was selden's
distinction that he had never forgotten the way out.

that was the secret of his way of readjusting her vision. lily, turning
her eyes from him, found herself scanning her little world through his
retina: it was as though the pink lamps had been shut off and the dusty
daylight let in. she looked down the long table, studying its occupants
one by one, from gus trenor, with his heavy carnivorous head sunk between
his shoulders, as he preyed on a jellied plover, to his wife, at the
opposite end of the long bank of orchids, suggestive, with her glaring
good-looks, of a jeweller's window lit by electricity. and between the
two, what a long stretch of vacuity! how dreary and trivial these people
were! lily reviewed them with a scornful impatience: carry fisher, with
her shoulders, her eyes, her divorces, her general air of embodying a
"spicy paragraph"; young si
 
 ___________________________
 
r removed from it
to understand its necessities.  the result of her meditations was the
decision to join her aunt at richfield. she could not remain at bellomont
without playing bridge, and being involved in other expenses; and to
continue her usual series of autumn visits would merely prolong the same
difficulties. she had reached a point where abrupt retrenchment was
necessary, and the only cheap life was a dull life. she would start the
next morning for richfield.

at the station she thought gus trenor seemed surprised, and not wholly
unrelieved, to see her. she yielded up the reins of the light runabout in
which she had driven over, and as he climbed heavily to her side,
crushing her into a scant third of the seat, he said: "halloo! it isn't
often you honour me. you must have been uncommonly hard up for something
to do."

the afternoon was warm, and propinquity made her more than usually
conscious that he was red and massive, and that beads of moisture had
caused the dust of the train to adh
 
 ___________________________
 
than most of her sex of the exact nature of the transaction, and
its vagueness seemed to diminish its indelicacy. she could not, indeed,
imagine herself, in any extremity, stooping to extract a "tip" from mr.
rosedale; but at her side was a man in possession of that precious
commodity, and who, as the husband of her dearest friend, stood to her in
a relation of almost fraternal intimacy.

in her inmost heart lily knew it was not by appealing to the fraternal
instinct that she was likely to move gus trenor; but this way of
explaining the situation helped to drape its crudity, and she was always
scrupulous about keeping up appearances to herself. her personal
fastidiousness had a moral equivalent, and when she made a tour of
inspection in her own mind there were certain closed doors she did not
open.

as they reached the gates of bellomont she turned to trenor with a smile.
"the afternoon is so perfect--don't you want to drive me a little
farther? i've been rather out of spirits all day, and it's 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the renewed sense of power in handling men, while it
consoled her wounded vanity, helped also to obscure the thought of the
claim at which his manner hinted. he was a coarse dull man who, under all
his show of authority, was a mere supernumerary in the costly show for
which his money paid: surely, to a clever girl, it would be easy to hold
him by his vanity, and so keep the obligation on his side.



chapter 8

the first thousand dollar cheque which lily received with a blotted
scrawl from gus trenor strengthened her self-confidence in the exact
degree to which it effaced her debts.

the transaction had justified itself by its results: she saw now how
absurd it would have been to let any primitive scruple deprive her of
this easy means of appeasing her creditors. lily felt really virtuous as
she dispensed the sum in sops to her tradesmen, and the fact that a fresh
order accompanied each payment did not lessen her sense of
disinterestedness. how many women, in her place, would have given the
 
 ___________________________
 
far at the next: it
takes a mother's unerring vigilance and foresight to land her daughters
safely in the arms of wealth and suitability.

lily's passing light-heartedness sank beneath a renewed sense of failure.
life was too stupid, too blundering! why should percy gryce's millions be
joined to another great fortune, why should this clumsy girl be put in
possession of powers she would never know how to use?

she was roused from these speculations by a familiar touch on her arm,
and turning saw gus trenor beside her. she felt a thrill of vexation:
what right had he to touch her? luckily gerty farish had wandered off to
the next table, and they were alone.

trenor, looking stouter than ever in his tight frock-coat, and
unbecomingly flushed by the bridal libations, gazed at her with
undisguised approval.

"by jove, lily, you do look a stunner!" he had slipped insensibly into
the use of her christian name, and she had never found the right moment
to correct him. besides, in her set all the men and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ld flay
its victims without the shedding of blood. her cheek burned at the
recollection, and she rose and caught up the letters. she no longer meant
to destroy them: that intention had been effaced by the quick corrosion
of mrs. peniston's words.

instead, she approached her desk, and lighting a taper, tied and sealed
the packet; then she opened the wardrobe, drew out a despatch-box, and
deposited the letters within it. as she did so, it struck her with a
flash of irony that she was indebted to gus trenor for the means of
buying them.



chapter 10

the autumn dragged on monotonously. miss bart had received one or two
notes from judy trenor, reproaching her for not returning to bellomont;
but she replied evasively, alleging the obligation to remain with her
aunt. in truth, however, she was fast wearying of her solitary existence
with mrs. peniston, and only the excitement of spending her
newly-acquired money lightened the dulness of the days.

all her life lily had seen money go out as quickly a
 
 ___________________________
 
 unattainable. he gave, at any rate,
no sign of resenting it and seemed prepared to supply in his own manner
all the ease that was lacking in hers.

his object in calling was to ask her to go to the opera in his box on the
opening night, and seeing her hesitate he said persuasively: "mrs. fisher
is coming, and i've secured a tremendous admirer of yours, who'll never
forgive me if you don't accept."

as lily's silence left him with this allusion on his hands, he added with
a confidential smile: "gus trenor has promised to come to town on
purpose. i fancy he'd go a good deal farther for the pleasure of seeing
you."

miss bart felt an inward motion of annoyance: it was distasteful enough
to hear her name coupled with trenor's, and on rosedale's lips the
allusion was peculiarly unpleasant.

"the trenors are my best friends--i think we should all go a long way to
see each other," she said, absorbing herself in the preparation of fresh
tea.

her visitor's smile grew increasingly intimate. "well, i was
 
 ___________________________
 
ould have phrased it) had "come into line,"
confirmed his confidence in his powers of handling this skittish sex. her
way of glossing over the transaction with trenor he regarded at once as a
tribute to his own acuteness, and a confirmation of his suspicions. the
girl was evidently nervous, and mr. rosedale, if he saw no other means of
advancing his acquaintance with her, was not above taking advantage of
her nervousness.

he left lily to a passion of disgust and fear. it seemed incredible that
gus trenor should have spoken of her to rosedale.  with all his faults,
trenor had the safeguard of his traditions, and was the less likely to
overstep them because they were so purely instinctive. but lily recalled
with a pang that there were convivial moments when, as judy had confided
to her, gus "talked foolishly": in one of these, no doubt, the fatal word
had slipped from him. as for rosedale, she did not, after the first
shock, greatly care what conclusions he had drawn.  though usually adroit
enoug
 
 ___________________________
 
 happy
shifting of lights with which practice had familiarized miss bart, the
cause shrank to a pin-point in the general brightness of the effect. but
brilliant young ladies, a little blinded by their own effulgence, are apt
to forget that the modest satellite drowned in their light is still
performing its own revolutions and generating heat at its own rate. if
lily's poetic enjoyment of the moment was undisturbed by the base thought
that her gown and opera cloak had been indirectly paid for by gus trenor,
the latter had not sufficient poetry in his composition to lose sight of
these prosaic facts. he knew only that he had never seen lily look
smarter in her life, that there wasn't a woman in the house who showed
off good clothes as she did, and that hitherto he, to whom she owed the
opportunity of making this display, had reaped no return beyond that of
gazing at her in company with several hundred other pairs of eyes.

it came to lily therefore as a disagreeable surprise when, in the back of
t
 
 ___________________________
 
hy should she mind being put
off?

it was precisely because miss stepney could come any other day--and
because she knew her relations were in the secret of her unoccupied
evenings--that this incident loomed gigantically on her horizon. she was
aware that she had lily to thank for it; and dull resentment was turned
to active animosity.

mrs. peniston, on whom she had looked in a day or two after the dinner,
laid down her crochet-work and turned abruptly from her oblique survey of
fifth avenue.

"gus trenor?--lily and gus trenor?" she said, growing so suddenly pale
that her visitor was almost alarmed.

"oh, cousin julia . . . of course i don't mean . . ."

"i don't know what you do mean," said mrs. peniston, with a frightened
quiver in her small fretful voice. "such things were never heard of in my
day. and my own niece! i'm not sure i understand you. do people say he's
in love with her?"

mrs. peniston's horror was genuine. though she boasted an unequalled
familiarity with the secret chronicles o
 
 ___________________________
 
d no better use for
her time than to waste it on a fat stupid man almost old enough to be her
father?" this argument had such a convincing ring that it gave mrs.
peniston sufficient reassurance to pick up her work, while she waited for
grace stepney to rally her scattered forces.

but miss stepney was on the spot in an instant. "that's the worst of
it--people say she isn't wasting her time! every one knows, as you say,
that lily is too handsome and--and charming--to devote herself to a man
like gus trenor unless--"

"unless?" echoed mrs. peniston. her visitor drew breath nervously. it was
agreeable to shock mrs. peniston, but not to shock her to the verge of
anger. miss stepney was not sufficiently familiar with the classic drama
to have recalled in advance how bearers of bad tidings are proverbially
received, but she now had a rapid vision of forfeited dinners and a
reduced wardrobe as the possible consequence of her disinterestedness. to
the honour of her sex, however, hatred of lily prevailed
 
 ___________________________
 
n a contagious illness in the
house, and she was doomed to sit shivering among her contaminated
furniture.



chapter 12

miss bart had in fact been treading a devious way, and none of her
critics could have been more alive to the fact than herself; but she had
a fatalistic sense of being drawn from one wrong turning to another,
without ever perceiving the right road till it was too late to take it.

lily, who considered herself above narrow prejudices, had not imagined
that the fact of letting gus trenor make a little money for her would
ever disturb her self-complacency. and the fact in itself still seemed
harmless enough; only it was a fertile source of harmful complications.
as she exhausted the amusement of spending the money these complications
became more pressing, and lily, whose mind could be severely logical in
tracing the causes of her ill-luck to others, justified herself by the
thought that she owed all her troubles to the enmity of bertha dorset.
this enmity, however, had apparentl
 
 ___________________________
 
 the latter contingency seemed improbable, yet lily was not without a
sense of uneasiness. if her roaming sympathies had struck root anywhere,
it was in her friendship with judy trenor. she believed in the sincerity
of her friend's affection, though it sometimes showed itself in
self-interested ways, and she shrank with peculiar reluctance from any
risk of estranging it. but, aside from this, she was keenly conscious of
the way in which such an estrangement would react on herself. the fact
that gus trenor was judy's husband was at times lily's strongest reason
for disliking him, and for resenting the obligation under which he had
placed her. to set her doubts at rest, miss bart, soon after the new
year, "proposed" herself for a week-end at bellomont. she had learned in
advance that the presence of a large party would protect her from too
great assiduity on trenor's part, and his wife's telegraphic "come by all
means" seemed to assure her of her usual welcome.

judy received her amicably. the car
 
 ___________________________
 
e sighed with her eyes in
his; and before he could speak she had turned and slipped through the
arch of boughs, disappearing in the brightness of the room beyond.

selden stood where she had left him. he knew too well the transiency of
exquisite moments to attempt to follow her; but presently he reentered
the house and made his way through the deserted rooms to the door. a few
sumptuously-cloaked ladies were already gathered in the marble vestibule,
and in the coat-room he found van alstyne and gus trenor.

the former, at selden's approach, paused in the careful selection of a
cigar from one of the silver boxes invitingly set out near the door.

"hallo, selden, going too? you're an epicurean like myself, i see: you
don't want to see all those goddesses gobbling terrapin.  gad, what a
show of good-looking women; but not one of 'em could touch that little
cousin of mine. talk of jewels--what's a woman want with jewels when
she's got herself to show? the trouble is that all these fal-bals they
wear
 
 ___________________________
 
re the ladies on whose approval she depended to be
induced to give her their patronage? gerty learned that whatever sympathy
her friend's case might have excited a few months since had been
imperilled, if not lost, by her association with mrs. hatch. once again,
lily had withdrawn from an ambiguous situation in time to save her
self-respect, but too late for public vindication.  freddy van osburgh
was not to marry mrs. hatch; he had been rescued at the eleventh
hour--some said by the efforts of gus trenor and rosedale--and despatched
to europe with old ned van alstyne; but the risk he had run would always
be ascribed to miss bart's connivance, and would somehow serve as a
summing-up and corroboration of the vague general distrust of her. it was
a relief to those who had hung back from her to find themselves thus
justified, and they were inclined to insist a little on her connection
with the hatch case in order to show that they had been right.

gerty's quest, at any rate, brought up against a so
 
 ___________________________
 
e at regina's."

"good lord--you? but what for? i knew your aunt had turned you down: mrs.
fisher told me about it. but i understood you got a legacy from her----"

"i got ten thousand dollars; but the legacy is not to be paid till next
summer."

"well, but--look here: you could borrow on it any time you wanted."

she shook her head gravely. "no; for i owe it already."

"owe it? the whole ten thousand?"

"every penny." she paused, and then continued abruptly, with her eyes on
his face: "i think gus trenor spoke to you once about having made some
money for me in stocks."

she waited, and rosedale, congested with embarrassment, muttered that he
remembered something of the kind.

"he made about nine thousand dollars," lily pursued, in the same tone of
eager communicativeness. "at the time, i understood that he was
speculating with my own money: it was incredibly stupid of me, but i knew
nothing of business. afterward i found out that he had not used my
money--that what he said he had made for me he
 
 ___________________________
 
 could
interrupt him he had continued eagerly: "well, i'll lend you the money to
pay trenor; and i won't--i--see here, don't take me up till i've
finished. what i mean is, it'll be a plain business arrangement, such as
one man would make with another.  now, what have you got to say against
that?"

lily's blush deepened to a glow in which humiliation and gratitude were
mingled; and both sentiments revealed themselves in the unexpected
gentleness of her reply.

"only this: that it is exactly what gus trenor proposed; and that i can
never again be sure of understanding the plainest business arrangement."
then, realizing that this answer contained a germ of injustice, she
added, even more kindly: "not that i don't appreciate your kindness--that
i'm not grateful for it. but a business arrangement between us would in
any case be impossible, because i shall have no security to give when my
debt to gus trenor has been paid."

rosedale received this statement in silence: he seemed to feel the note
of fin
 
 ___________________________
 
 to go to the country that time i had
lung-trouble. my name's nettie struther. it was nettie crane then--but i
daresay you don't remember that either."

yes: lily was beginning to remember. the episode of nettie crane's timely
rescue from disease had been one of the most satisfying incidents of her
connection with gerty's charitable work. she had furnished the girl with
the means to go to a sanatorium in the mountains: it struck her now with
a peculiar irony that the money she had used had been gus trenor's.

she tried to reply, to assure the speaker that she had not forgotten; but
her voice failed in the effort, and she felt herself sinking under a
great wave of physical weakness. nettie struther, with a startled
exclamation, sat down and slipped a shabbily-clad arm behind her back.

"why, miss bart, you are sick. just lean on me a little till you feel
better."

a faint glow of returning strength seemed to pass into lily from the
pressure of the supporting arm.

"i'm only tired--it is nothing,"
 
 ___________________________
 
t the room, unless it showed itself in the scrupulous neatness of the
scant articles of furniture: a washing-stand, two chairs, a small
writing-desk, and the little table near the bed. on this table stood the
empty bottle and glass, and from these also he averted his eyes.

the desk was closed, but on its slanting lid lay two letters which he
took up. one bore the address of a bank, and as it was stamped and
sealed, selden, after a moment's hesitation, laid it aside. on the other
letter he read gus trenor's name; and the flap of the envelope was still
ungummed.

temptation leapt on him like the stab of a knife. he staggered under it,
steadying himself against the desk. why had she been writing to
trenor--writing, presumably, just after their parting of the previous
evening? the thought unhallowed the memory of that last hour, made a mock
of the word he had come to speak, and defiled even the reconciling
silence upon which it fell. he felt himself flung back on all the ugly
uncertainties from whi