.

hitherto lily had been undisturbed by scruples. in her little set mr.
rosedale had been pronounced "impossible," and jack stepney roundly
snubbed for his attempt to pay his debts in dinner invitations. even mrs.
trenor, whose taste for variety had led her into some hazardous
experiments, resisted jack's attempts to disguise mr. rosedale as a
novelty, and declared that he was the same little jew who had been served
up and rejected at the social board a dozen times within her memory; and
while judy trenor was obdurate there was small chance of mr. rosedale's
penetrating beyond the outer limbo of the van osburgh crushes. jack gave
up the contest with a laughing "you'll see," and, sticking manfully to
his guns, showed himself with rosedale at the fashionable restaurants, in
company with the personally vivid if socially obscure ladies who are
available for such purposes. but the attempt had hitherto been vain, and
as rosedale undoubtedly paid for the dinners, the laugh remained with his
debtor.

mr
 
 ___________________________
 
ons; but figure as she
would, she could not conjure back the vanished three hundred dollars. it
was the sum she had set aside to pacify her dress-maker--unless she
should decide to use it as a sop to the jeweller. at any rate, she had so
many uses for it that its very insufficiency had caused her to play high
in the hope of doubling it.  but of course she had lost--she who needed
every penny, while bertha dorset, whose husband showered money on her,
must have pocketed at least five hundred, and judy trenor, who could have
afforded to lose a thousand a night, had left the table clutching such a
heap of bills that she had been unable to shake hands with her guests
when they bade her good night.

a world in which such things could be seemed a miserable place to lily
bart; but then she had never been able to understand the laws of a
universe which was so ready to leave her out of its calculations.

she began to undress without ringing for her maid, whom she had sent to
bed. she had been long enough i
 
 ___________________________
 
h it, but in no haste to anticipate its joys. the certainty
that she could marry percy gryce when she pleased had lifted a heavy load
from her mind, and her money troubles were too recent for their removal
not to leave a sense of relief which a less discerning intelligence might
have taken for happiness. her vulgar cares were at an end. she would be
able to arrange her life as she pleased, to soar into that empyrean of
security where creditors cannot penetrate. she would have smarter gowns
than judy trenor, and far, far more jewels than bertha dorset. she would
be free forever from the shifts, the expedients, the humiliations of the
relatively poor. instead of having to flatter, she would be flattered;
instead of being grateful, she would receive thanks. there were old
scores she could pay off as well as old benefits she could return. and
she had no doubts as to the extent of her power. she knew that mr. gryce
was of the small chary type most inaccessible to impulses and emotions.
he had the kind
 
 ___________________________
 
dly betrayed would surely
whet his appetite for the afternoon walk. that walk she did not mean to
miss; one glance at the bills on her writing-table was enough to recall
its necessity. but meanwhile she had the morning to herself, and could
muse pleasantly on the disposal of its hours. she was familiar enough
with the habits of bellomont to know that she was likely to have a free
field till luncheon. she had seen the wetheralls, the trenor girls and
lady cressida packed safely into the omnibus; judy trenor was sure to be
having her hair shampooed; carry fisher had doubtless carried off her
host for a drive; ned silverton was probably smoking the cigarette of
young despair in his bedroom; and kate corby was certain to be playing
tennis with jack stepney and miss van osburgh. of the ladies, this left
only mrs. dorset unaccounted for, and mrs. dorset never came down till
luncheon: her doctors, she averred, had forbidden her to expose herself
to the crude air of the morning.

to the remaining members
 
 ___________________________
 
an artist and i happen to be the bit of colour you
are using today. it's a part of your cleverness to be able to produce
premeditated effects extemporaneously."

lily smiled also: his words were too acute not to strike her sense of
humour. it was true that she meant to use the accident of his presence as
part of a very definite effect; or that, at least, was the secret pretext
she had found for breaking her promise to walk with mr. gryce.  she had
sometimes been accused of being too eager--even judy trenor had warned
her to go slowly.  well, she would not be too eager in this case; she
would give her suitor a longer taste of suspense. where duty and
inclination jumped together, it was not in lily's nature to hold them
asunder. she had excused herself from the walk on the plea of a headache:
the horrid headache which, in the morning, had prevented her venturing to
church. her appearance at luncheon justified the excuse.  she looked
languid, full of a suffering sweetness; she carried a scent-bottle
 
 ___________________________
 
hey had sunk into the
breast of one of her hearers.

comfortable! at that moment the word was more eloquent to lily bart than
any other in the language. she could not even pause to smile over the
heiress's view of a colossal fortune as a mere shelter against want: her
mind was filled with the vision of what that shelter might have been to
her. mrs. dorset's pin-pricks did not smart, for her own irony cut
deeper: no one could hurt her as much as she was hurting herself, for no
one else--not even judy trenor--knew the full magnitude of her folly.

she was roused from these unprofitable considerations by a whispered
request from her hostess, who drew her apart as they left the
luncheon-table.

"lily, dear, if you've nothing special to do, may i tell carry fisher
that you intend to drive to the station and fetch gus? he will be back at
four, and i know she has it in her mind to meet him. of course i'm very
glad to have him amused, but i happen to know that she has bled him
rather severely since she's
 
 ___________________________
 
as certainly sounder than lily's: not to
mention the fact that the latter resented the smell of beeswax and brown
soap, and behaved as though she thought a house ought to keep clean of
itself, without extraneous assistance.

seated under the cheerless blaze of the drawing-room chandelier--mrs.
peniston never lit the lamps unless there was "company"--lily seemed to
watch her own figure retreating down vistas of neutral-tinted dulness to
a middle age like grace stepney's. when she ceased to amuse judy trenor
and her friends she would have to fall back on amusing mrs. peniston;
whichever way she looked she saw only a future of servitude to the whims
of others, never the possibility of asserting her own eager individuality.

a ring at the door-bell, sounding emphatically through the empty house,
roused her suddenly to the extent of her boredom. it was as though all
the weariness of the past months had culminated in the vacuity of that
interminable evening. if only the ring meant a summons from the ou
 
 ___________________________
 
onger meant
to destroy them: that intention had been effaced by the quick corrosion
of mrs. peniston's words.

instead, she approached her desk, and lighting a taper, tied and sealed
the packet; then she opened the wardrobe, drew out a despatch-box, and
deposited the letters within it. as she did so, it struck her with a
flash of irony that she was indebted to gus trenor for the means of
buying them.



chapter 10

the autumn dragged on monotonously. miss bart had received one or two
notes from judy trenor, reproaching her for not returning to bellomont;
but she replied evasively, alleging the obligation to remain with her
aunt. in truth, however, she was fast wearying of her solitary existence
with mrs. peniston, and only the excitement of spending her
newly-acquired money lightened the dulness of the days.

all her life lily had seen money go out as quickly as it came in, and
whatever theories she cultivated as to the prudence of setting aside a
part of her gains, she had unhappily no saving vi
 
 ___________________________
 
sion of the risks of the
opposite course. it was a keen satisfaction to feel that, for a few
months at least, she would be independent of her friends' bounty, that
she could show herself abroad without wondering whether some penetrating
eye would detect in her dress the traces of judy trenor's refurbished
splendour. the fact that the money freed her temporarily from all minor
obligations obscured her sense of the greater one it represented, and
having never before known what it was to command so large a sum, she
lingered delectably over the amusement of spending it.

it was on one of these occasions that, leaving a shop where she had spent
an hour of deliberation over a dressing-case of the most complicated
elegance, she ran across miss farish, who had entered the same
establishmen
 
 ___________________________
 
 capable of measuring distances and drawing conclusions
with all the accuracy needful to its welfare; and the fact that mr.
rosedale's drawing-room manner lacked perspective made lily class him
with trenor and the other dull men she knew, and assume that a little
flattery, and the occasional acceptance of his hospitality, would suffice
to render him innocuous. however, there could be no doubt of the
expediency of showing herself in his box on the opening night of the
opera; and after all, since judy trenor had promised to take him up that
winter, it was as well to reap the advantage of being first in the field.

for a day or two after rosedale's visit, lily's thoughts were dogged by
the consciousness of trenor's shadowy claim, and she wished she had a
clearer notion of the exact nature of the transaction which seemed to
have put her in his power; but her mind shrank from any unusual
application, and she was always helplessly puzzled by figures. moreover
she had not seen trenor since the day of th
 
 ___________________________
 
n that way, cousin julia. lately lily has been a good deal
with the dorsets, and he seems to admire her--but of course that's only
natural. and i'm sure there is no truth in the horrid things people say;
but she has been spending a great deal of money this winter. evie van
osburgh was at celeste's ordering her trousseau the other day--yes, the
marriage takes place next month--and she told me that celeste showed her
the most exquisite things she was just sending home to lily. and people
say that judy trenor has quarrelled with her on account of gus; but i'm
sure i'm sorry i spoke, though i only meant it as a kindness."

mrs. peniston's genuine incredulity enabled her to dismiss miss stepney
with a disdain which boded ill for that lady's prospect of succeeding to
the black brocade; but minds impenetrable to reason have generally some
crack through which suspicion filters, and her visitor's insinuations did
not glide off as easily as she had expected. mrs. peniston disliked
scenes, and her determina
 
 ___________________________
 
of bertha dorset.
this enmity, however, had apparently expired in a renewal of friendliness
between the two women. lily's visit to the dorsets had resulted, for
both, in the discovery that they could be of use to each other; and the
civilized instinct finds a subtler pleasure in making use of its
antagonist than in confounding him.  mrs. dorset was, in fact, engaged in
a new sentimental experiment, of which mrs. fisher's late property, ned
silverton, was the rosy victim; and at such moments, as judy trenor had
once remarked, she felt a peculiar need of distracting her husband's
attention. dorset was as difficult to amuse as a savage; but even his
self-engrossment was not proof against lily's arts, or rather these were
especially adapted to soothe an uneasy egoism. her experience with percy
gryce stood her in good stead in ministering to dorset's humours, and if
the incentive to please was less urgent, the difficulties of her
situation were teaching her to make much of minor opportunities.

intima
 
 ___________________________
 
cy with the dorsets was not likely to lessen such difficulties on
the material side. mrs. dorset had none of judy trenor's lavish impulses,
and dorset's admiration was not likely to express itself in financial
"tips," even had lily cared to renew her experiences in that line. what
she required, for the moment, of the dorsets' friendship, was simply its
social sanction. she knew that people were beginning to talk of her; but
this fact did not alarm her as it had alarmed mrs. peniston. in her set
such gossip was not unusual, and a handsome girl who flirted with a
married man was merely assumed to be pressing to the
 
 ___________________________
 
week-end parties to the restrictions of a
dull season. since the holidays she had not urged lily to return to
bellomont, and the first time they met in town lily fancied there was a
shade of coldness in her manner.  was it merely the expression of her
displeasure at miss bart's neglect, or had disquieting rumours reached
her? the latter contingency seemed improbable, yet lily was not without a
sense of uneasiness. if her roaming sympathies had struck root anywhere,
it was in her friendship with judy trenor. she believed in the sincerity
of her friend's affection, though it sometimes showed itself in
self-interested ways, and she shrank with peculiar reluctance from any
risk of estranging it. but, aside from this, she was keenly conscious of
the way in which such an estrangement would react on herself. the fact
that gus trenor was judy's husband was at times lily's strongest reason
for disliking him, and for resenting the obligation under which he had
placed her. to set her doubts at rest, miss ba
 
 ___________________________
 
lminating
moment of her triumph: the moment when she had read in his eyes that no
philosophy was proof against her power. it would be pleasant to have that
sensation again . . . no one else could give it to her in its fulness;
and she could not bear to mar her mood of luxurious retrospection by an
act of definite refusal. she took up her pen and wrote hastily: "tomorrow
at four;" murmuring to herself, as she slipped the sheet into its
envelope: "i can easily put him off when tomorrow comes."



judy trenor's summons was very welcome to lily. it was the first time she
had received a direct communication from bellomont since the close of her
last visit there, and she was still visited by the dread of having
incurred judy's displeasure. but this characteristic command seemed to
reestablish their former relations; and lily smiled at the thought that
her friend had probably summoned her in order to hear about the brys'
entertainment. mrs. trenor had absented herself from the feast, perhaps
for the rea
 
 ___________________________
 
to have been absorbed by the
gormer set since her return from europe."

"that's all the more reason: she's been very unhappy."

"unhappy at being with the gormers?"

"oh, i don't defend her intimacy with the gormers; but that too is at an
end now, i think. you know people have been very unkind since bertha
dorset quarrelled with her."

"ah----" selden exclaimed, rising abruptly to walk to the window, where
he remained with his eyes on the darkening street while his cousin
continued to explain: "judy trenor and her own family have deserted her
too--and all because bertha dorset has said such horrible things. and she
is very poor--you know mrs. peniston cut her off with a small legacy,
after giving her to understand that she was to have everything."

"yes--i know," selden assented curtly, turning back into the room, but
only to stir about with restless steps in the circumscribed space between
door and window. "yes--she's been abominably treated; but it's
unfortunately the precise thing that a man w
 
 ___________________________
 
were inclined to insist a little on her connection
with the hatch case in order to show that they had been right.

gerty's quest, at any rate, brought up against a solid wall of
resistance; and even when carry fisher, momentarily penitent for her
share in the hatch affair, joined her efforts to miss farish's, they met
with no better success. gerty had tried to veil her failure in tender
ambiguities; but carry, always the soul of candour, put the case squarely
to her friend.

"i went straight to judy trenor; she has fewer prejudices than the
others, and besides she's always hated bertha dorset. but what have you
done to her, lily? at the very first word about giving you a start she
flamed out about some money you'd got from gus; i never knew her so hot
before. you know she'll let him do anything but spend money on his
friends: the only reason she's decent to me now is that she knows i'm not
hard up.--he speculated for you, you say? well, what's the harm? he had
no business to lose. he didn't lose?
 
 ___________________________
 
 remain under.  unfortunately i had spent the money before i
discovered my mistake; and so my legacy will have to go to pay it back.
that is the reason why i am trying to learn a trade."

she made the statement clearly, deliberately, with pauses between the
sentences, so that each should have time to sink deeply into her hearer's
mind. she had a passionate desire that some one should know the truth
about this transaction, and also that the rumour of her intention to
repay the money should reach judy trenor's ears. and it had suddenly
occurred to her that rosedale, who had surprised trenor's confidence, was
the fitting person to receive and transmit her version of the facts. she
had even felt a momentary exhilaration at the thought of thus relieving
herself of her detested secret; but the sensation gradually faded in the
telling, and as she ended her pallour was suffused with a deep blush of
misery.

rosedale continued to stare at her in wonder; but the wonder took the
turn she had least expected.
 
 ___________________________
 
ew still lingered, delaying their departure for europe, or passing
through town on their return from the south.  among them was mrs. van
osburgh, swaying majestically in her c-spring barouche, with mrs. percy
gryce at her side, and the new heir to the gryce millions enthroned
before them on his nurse's knees. they were succeeded by mrs. hatch's
electric victoria, in which that lady reclined in the lonely splendour of
a spring toilet obviously designed for company; and a moment or two later
came judy trenor, accompanied by lady skiddaw, who had come over for her
annual tarpon fishing and a dip into "the street."

this fleeting glimpse of her past served to emphasize the sense of
aimlessness with which lily at length turned toward home. she had nothing
to do for the rest of the day, nor for the days to come; for the season
was over in millinery as well as in society, and a week earlier mme.
regina had notified her that her services were no longer required. mme.
regina always reduced her staff on th