she remembered, but found she had erred in the
other direction. then she returned to her calculations; but figure as she
would, she could not conjure back the vanished three hundred dollars. it
was the sum she had set aside to pacify her dress-maker--unless she
should decide to use it as a sop to the jeweller. at any rate, she had so
many uses for it that its very insufficiency had caused her to play high
in the hope of doubling it.  but of course she had lost--she who needed
every penny, while bertha dorset, whose husband showered money on her,
must have pocketed at least five hundred, and judy trenor, who could have
afforded to lose a thousand a night, had left the table clutching such a
heap of bills that she had been unable to shake hands with her guests
when they bade her good night.

a world in which such things could be seemed a miserable place to lily
bart; but then she had never been able to understand the laws of a
universe which was so ready to leave her out of its calculations.

she beg
 
 ___________________________
 
x sets of children between
them!"

"when is lady cressida going?" lily enquired.

mrs. trenor cast up her eyes in despair. "my dear, if one only knew! i
was in such a hurry to get her away from maria that i actually forgot to
name a date, and gus says she told some one she meant to stop here all
winter."

"to stop here? in this house?"

"don't be silly--in america. but if no one else asks her--you know they
never go to hotels."

"perhaps gus only said it to frighten you."

"no--i heard her tell bertha dorset that she had six months to put in
while her husband was taking the cure in the engadine. you should have
seen bertha look vacant! but it's no joke, you know--if she stays here
all the autumn she'll spoil everything, and maria van osburgh will simply
exult."

at this affecting vision mrs. trenor's voice trembled with self-pity.

"oh, judy--as if any one were ever bored at bellomont!" miss bart
tactfully protested. "you know perfectly well that, if mrs. van osburgh
were to get all the right peopl
 
 ___________________________
 
e and leave you with all the wrong ones,
you'd manage to make things go off, and she wouldn't."

such an assurance would usually have restored mrs. trenor's complacency;
but on this occasion it did not chase the cloud from her brow.

"it isn't only lady cressida," she lamented. "everything has gone wrong
this week. i can see that bertha dorset is furious with me."

"furious with you? why?"

"because i told her that lawrence selden was coming; but he wouldn't,
after all, and she's quite unreasonable enough to think it's my fault."

miss bart put down her pen and sat absently gazing at the note she had
begun.

"i thought that was all over," she said.

"so it is, on his side. and of course bertha has been idle since.  but i
fancy she's out of a job just at present--and some one gave me a hint
that i had better ask lawrence. well, i did 
 
 ___________________________
 
s. the certainty
that she could marry percy gryce when she pleased had lifted a heavy load
from her mind, and her money troubles were too recent for their removal
not to leave a sense of relief which a less discerning intelligence might
have taken for happiness. her vulgar cares were at an end. she would be
able to arrange her life as she pleased, to soar into that empyrean of
security where creditors cannot penetrate. she would have smarter gowns
than judy trenor, and far, far more jewels than bertha dorset. she would
be free forever from the shifts, the expedients, the humiliations of the
relatively poor. instead of having to flatter, she would be flattered;
instead of being grateful, she would receive thanks. there were old
scores she could pay off as well as old benefits she could return. and
she had no doubts as to the extent of her power. she knew that mr. gryce
was of the small chary type most inaccessible to impulses and emotions.
he had the kind of character in which prudence is a vice, an
 
 ___________________________
 
on. her intentions in short had never been more definite; but poor
lily, for all the hard glaze of her exterior, was inwardly as malleable
as wax. her faculty for adapting herself, for entering into other
people's feelings, if it served her now and then in small contingencies,
hampered her in the decisive moments of life. she was like a water-plant
in the flux of the tides, and today the whole current of her mood was
carrying her toward lawrence selden. why had he come? was it to see
herself or bertha dorset?  it was the last question which, at that
moment, should have engaged her. she might better have contented herself
with thinking that he had simply responded to the despairing summons of
his hostess, anxious to interpose him between herself and the ill-humour
of mrs. dorset. but lily had not rested till she learned from mrs. trenor
that selden had come of his own accord.  "he didn't even wire me--he just
happened to find the trap at the station. perhaps it's not over with
bertha after all," mrs
 
 ___________________________
 
rway looking after her
with an air of puzzled amusement. the truth is that she was conscious of
a somewhat keen shock of disappointment. all her plans for the day had
been built on the assumption that it was to see her that selden had come
to bellomont. she had expected, when she came downstairs, to find him on
the watch for her; and she had found him, instead, in a situation which
might well denote that he had been on the watch for another lady. was it
possible, after all, that he had come for bertha dorset? the latter had
acted on the assumption to the extent of appearing at an hour when she
never showed herself to ordinary mortals, and lily, for the moment, saw
no way of putting her in the wrong. it did not occur to her that selden
might have been actuated merely by the desire to spend a sunday out of
town: women never learn to dispense with the sentimental motive in their
judgments of men. but lily was not easily disconcerted; competition put
her on her mettle, and she reflected that selden's c
 
 ___________________________
 
withdrawal
was checked by a sudden discovery: under the glare of mrs. peniston's
chandelier she had recognized the hand-writing of the letter. it was a
large disjointed hand, with a flourish of masculinity which but slightly
disguised its rambling weakness, and the words, scrawled in heavy ink on
pale-tinted notepaper, smote on lily's ear as though she had heard them
spoken.

at first she did not grasp the full import of the situation. she
understood only that before her lay a letter written by bertha dorset,
and addressed, presumably, to lawrence selden. there was no date, but the
blackness of the ink proved the writing to be comparatively recent.  the
packet in mrs. haffen's hand doubtless contained more letters of the same
kind--a dozen, lily conjectured from its thickness. the letter before her
was short, but its few words, which had leapt into her brain before she
was conscious of reading them, told a long history--a history over which,
for the last four years, the friends of the writer had sm
 
 ___________________________
 
unishes the offender
who is found out. and in this case there was no doubt of the issue. the
code of lily's world decreed that a woman's husband should be the only
judge of her conduct: she was technically above suspicion while she had
the shelter of his approval, or even of his indifference. but with a man
of george dorset's temper there could be no thought of condonation--the
possessor of his wife's letters could overthrow with a touch the whole
structure of her existence. and into what hands bertha dorset's secret
had been delivered! for a moment the irony of the coincidence tinged
lily's disgust with a confused sense of triumph. but the disgust
prevailed--all her instinctive resistances, of taste, of training, of
blind inherited scruples, rose against the other feeling. her strongest
sense was one of personal contamination.

she moved away, as though to put as much distance as possible between
herself and her visitor. "i know nothing of these letters," she said; "i
have no idea why you have bro
 
 ___________________________
 
and if you'd speak to mr. selden or to mr.
rosedale about getting haffen taken on again at the benedick--i seen you
talking to mr. rosedale on the steps that day you come out of mr.
selden's rooms----"

the blood rushed to lily's forehead. she understood now--mrs. haffen
supposed her to be the writer of the letters. in the first leap of her
anger she was about to ring and order the woman out; but an obscure
impulse restrained her. the mention of selden's name had started a new
train of thought. bertha dorset's letters were nothing to her--they might
go where the current of chance carried them! but selden was inextricably
involved in their fate.  men do not, at worst, suffer much from such
exposure; and in this instance the flash of divination which had carried
the meaning of the letters to lily's brain had revealed also that they
were appeals--repeated and therefore probably unanswered--for the renewal
of a tie which time had evidently relaxed.  nevertheless, the fact that
the correspondence had be
 
 ___________________________
 
llowed to fall into strange hands would
convict selden of negligence in a matter where the world holds it least
pardonable; and there were graver risks to consider where a man of
dorset's ticklish balance was concerned.

if she weighed all these things it was unconsciously: she was aware only
of feeling that selden would wish the letters rescued, and that therefore
she must obtain possession of them. beyond that her mind did not travel.
she had, indeed, a quick vision of returning the packet to bertha dorset,
and of the opportunities the restitution offered; but this thought lit up
abysses from which she shrank back ashamed.

meanwhile mrs. haffen, prompt to perceive her hesitation, had already
opened the packet and ranged its contents on the table.  all the letters
had been pieced together with strips of thin paper. some were in small
fragments, the others merely torn in half. though there were not many,
thus spread out they nearly covered the table. lily's glance fell on a
word here and there--th
 
 ___________________________
 
 luxury of her friends' surroundings by the whole extent
of that artistic sensibility which made her feel herself their superior;
in which every tint and line should combine to enhance her beauty and
give distinction to her leisure! once more the haunting sense of physical
ugliness was intensified by her mental depression, so that each piece of
the offending furniture seemed to thrust forth its most aggressive angle.

her aunt's words had told her nothing new; but they had revived the
vision of bertha dorset, smiling, flattered, victorious, holding her up
to ridicule by insinuations intelligible to every member of their little
group. the thought of the ridicule struck deeper than any other
sensation: lily knew every turn of the allusive jargon which could flay
its victims without the shedding of blood. her cheek burned at the
recollection, and she rose and caught up the letters. she no longer meant
to destroy them: that intention had been effaced by the quick corrosion
of mrs. peniston's words.

in
 
 ___________________________
 

the dinner gets cold, and i have dyspepsia. that silly ass silverton
brings them to the house--he writes poetry, you know, and bertha and he
are getting tremendously thick. she could write better than any of 'em if
she chose, and i don't blame her for wanting clever fellows about; all i
say is: 'don't let me see 'em eat!'"

the gist of this strange communication gave lily a distinct thrill of
pleasure. under ordinary circumstances, there would have been nothing
surprising in an invitation from bertha dorset; but since the bellomont
episode an unavowed hostility had kept the two women apart. now, with a
start of inner wonder, lily felt that her thirst for retaliation had died
out. if you would forgive your enemy, says the malay proverb, first
inflict a hurt on him; and lily was experiencing the truth of the
apothegm.  if she had destroyed mrs. dorset's letters, she might have
continued to hate her; but the fact that they remained in her possession
had fed her resentment to satiety.

she uttered a s
 
 ___________________________
 
d not imagined
that the fact of letting gus trenor make a little money for her would
ever disturb her self-complacency. and the fact in itself still seemed
harmless enough; only it was a fertile source of harmful complications.
as she exhausted the amusement of spending the money these complications
became more pressing, and lily, whose mind could be severely logical in
tracing the causes of her ill-luck to others, justified herself by the
thought that she owed all her troubles to the enmity of bertha dorset.
this enmity, however, had apparently expired in a renewal of friendliness
between the two women. lily's visit to the dorsets had resulted, for
both, in the discovery that they could be of use to each other; and the
civilized instinct finds a subtler pleasure in making use of its
antagonist than in confounding him.  mrs. dorset was, in fact, engaged in
a new sentimental experiment, of which mrs. fisher's late property, ned
silverton, was the rosy victim; and at such moments, as judy trenor had

 
 ___________________________
 
-and there might still be a note from selden, or
a message--or he might be there himself, on the other side of the door!
the announcement of his sailing might have been a mistake--it might be
another lawrence selden who had gone to havana--all these possibilities
had time to flash through her mind, and build up the conviction that she
was after all to see or hear from him, before the drawing-room door
opened to admit a servant carrying a telegram.

lily tore it open with shaking hands, and read bertha dorset's name below
the message: "sailing unexpectedly tomorrow. will you join us on a cruise
in mediterranean?"




                        book two


chapter 1

it came vividly to selden on the casino steps that monte carlo had, more
than any other place he knew, the gift of accommodating itself to each
man's humour. his own, at the moment, lent it a festive readiness of
welcome that might well, in a disenchanted eye, have turned to paint and
facility. so frank an appeal for participation--so outspo
 
 ___________________________
 
m bertha's, though hers too was desperate enough.
the difference was that bertha was in earnest only about herself, while
he was in earnest about her.  but now, at the actual crisis, this
difference seemed to throw the weight of destitution on bertha's side,
since at least he had her to suffer for, and she had only herself. at any
rate, viewed less ideally, all the disadvantages of such a situation were
for the woman; and it was to bertha that lily's sympathies now went out.
she was not fond of bertha dorset, but neither was she without a sense of
obligation, the heavier for having so little personal liking to sustain
it. bertha had been kind to her, they had lived together, during the last
months, on terms of easy friendship, and the sense of friction of which
lily had recently become aware seemed to make it the more urgent that she
should work undividedly in her friend's interest.

it was in bertha's interest, certainly, that she had despatched dorset to
consult with lawrence selden. once the gro
 
 ___________________________
 
sit down a moment."

she dropped to the seat without answering, but the electric lamp at the
bend of the path shed a gleam on the struggling misery of her face.
selden sat down beside her, waiting for her to speak, fearful lest any
word he chose should touch too roughly on her wound, and kept also from
free utterance by the wretched doubt which had slowly renewed itself
within him. what had brought her to this pass? what weakness had placed
her so abominably at her enemy's mercy? and why should bertha dorset have
turned into an enemy at the very moment when she so obviously needed the
support of her sex? even while his nerves raged at the subjection of
husbands to their wives, and at the cruelty of women to their kind,
reason obstinately harped on the proverbial relation between smoke and
fire. the memory of mrs. fisher's hints, and the corroboration of his own
impressions, while they deepened his pity also increased his constraint,
since, whichever way he sought a free outlet for sympathy, it was 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and she
bent a clouded face upon her friend.

"how can you talk so, lily? of course the money ought to have been yours,
but after all that makes no difference. the important thing----" gerty
paused, and then continued firmly: "the important thing is that you
should clear yourself--should tell your friends the whole truth."

"the whole truth?" miss bart laughed. "what is truth? where a woman is
concerned, it's the story that's easiest to believe. in this case it's a
great deal easier to believe bertha dorset's story than mine, because she
has a big house and an opera box, and it's convenient to be on good terms
with her."

miss farish still fixed her with an anxious gaze. "but what is your
story, lily? i don't believe any one knows it yet."

"my story?--i don't believe i know it myself. you see i never thought of
preparing a version in advance as bertha did--and if i had, i don't think
i should take the trouble to use it now."

but gerty continued with her quiet reasonableness: "i don't want a
vers
 
 ___________________________
 

least chance of gaining a hearing for her own, some obscure disdain and
reluctance would have restrained her.  she knew it was not by
explanations and counter-charges that she could ever hope to recover her
lost standing; but even had she felt the least trust in their efficacy,
she would still have been held back by the feeling which had kept her
from defending herself to gerty farish--a feeling that was half pride and
half humiliation. for though she knew she had been ruthlessly sacrificed
to bertha dorset's determination to win back her husband, and though her
own relation to dorset had been that of the merest good-fellowship, yet
she had been perfectly aware from the outset that her part in the affair
was, as carry fisher brutally put it, to distract dorset's attention from
his wife.  that was what she was "there for": it was the price she had
chosen to pay for three months of luxury and freedom from care.  her
habit of resolutely facing the facts, in her rare moments of
introspection, did not 
 
 ___________________________
 
----" he murmured, his head drooping again, and his irresolute hand
switching at the underbrush along the lane. but as lily made a movement
to pass on, he broke out with fresh vehemence: "miss bart, for god's sake
don't turn from me! we used to be good friends--you were always kind to
me--and you don't know how i need a friend now."

the lamentable weakness of the words roused a motion of pity in lily's
breast. she too needed friends--she had tasted the pang of loneliness;
and her resentment of bertha dorset's cruelty softened her heart to the
poor wretch who was after all the chief of bertha's victims.

"i still wish to be kind; i feel no ill-will toward you," she said.  "but
you must understand that after what has happened we can't be friends
again--we can't see each other."

"ah, you are kind--you're merciful--you always were!" he fixed his
miserable gaze on her. "but why can't we be friends--why not, when i've
repented in dust and ashes? isn't it hard that you should condemn me to
suffer for th
 
 ___________________________
 
wanted to paint you--why don't you let him?"

miss bart's immediate answer was to address a critical glance to the
reflection of the countenance under discussion. then she said, with a
slight touch of irritation: "i don't care to accept a portrait from paul
morpeth."

mrs. fisher mused. "n--no. and just now, especially--well, he can do you
after you're married." she waited a moment, and then went on: "by the
way, i had a visit from mattie the other day.  she turned up here last
sunday--and with bertha dorset, of all people in the world!"

she paused again to measure the effect of this announcement on her
hearer, but the brush in miss bart's lifted hand maintained its
unwavering stroke from brow to nape.

"i never was more astonished," mrs. fisher pursued. "i don't know two
women less predestined to intimacy--from bertha's standpoint, that is;
for of course poor mattie thinks it natural enough that she should be
singled out--i've no doubt the rabbit always thinks it is fascinating the
anaconda. well
 
 ___________________________
 
e her walk with selden had represented an
irresistible flight from just such a climax as the present excursion was
designed to bring about. but other memories importuned her also; the
recollection of similar situations, as skillfully led up to, but through
some malice of fortune, or her own unsteadiness of purpose, always
failing of the intended result. well, her purpose was steady enough now.
she saw that the whole weary work of rehabilitation must begin again, and
against far greater odds, if bertha dorset should succeed in breaking up
her friendship with the gormers; and her longing for shelter and security
was intensified by the passionate desire to triumph over bertha, as only
wealth and predominance could triumph over her. as the wife of
rosedale--the rosedale she felt it in her power to create--she would at
least present an invulnerable front to her enemy.

she had to draw upon this thought, as upon some fiery stimulant, to keep
up her part in the scene toward which rosedale was too frankly 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the case?--well, some people say you've got the neatest kind
of an answer in your hands: that george dorset would marry you tomorrow,
if you'd tell him all you know, and give him the chance to show the lady
the door. i daresay he would; but you don't seem to care for that
particular form of getting even, and, taking a purely business view of
the question, i think you're right. in a deal like that, nobody comes out
with perfectly clean hands, and the only way for you to start fresh is to
get bertha dorset to back you up, instead of trying to fight her."

he paused long enough to draw breath, but not to give her time for the
expression of her gathering resistance; and as he pressed on, expounding
and elucidating his idea with the directness of the man who has no doubts
of his cause, she found the indignation gradually freezing on her lip,
found herself held fast in the grasp of his argument by the mere cold
strength of its presentation. there was no time now to wonder how he had
heard of her obta
 
 ___________________________
 
ining the letters: all her world was dark outside the
monstrous glare of his scheme for using them. and it was not, after the
first moment, the horror of the idea that held her spell-bound, subdued
to his will; it was rather its subtle affinity to her own inmost
cravings. he would marry her tomorrow if she could regain bertha dorset's
friendship; and to induce the open resumption of that friendship, and the
tacit retractation of all that had caused its withdrawal, she had only to
put to the lady the latent menace contained in the packet so miraculously
delivered into her hands. lily saw in a flash the advantage of this
course over that which poor dorset had pressed upon her. the other plan
depended for its success on the infliction of an open injury, while this
reduced the transaction to a private understanding, of which n
 
 ___________________________
 
 a
gradual acquiescence in his plan, but a dangerously far-reaching
perception of the chances it offered; for as she continued to stand
before him without speaking, he broke out, with a quick return upon
himself: "you see how simple it is, don't you? well, don't be carried
away by the idea that it's too simple.  it isn't exactly as if you'd
started in with a clean bill of health. now we're talking let's call
things by their right names, and clear the whole business up. you know
well enough that bertha dorset couldn't have touched you if there hadn't
been--well--questions asked before--little points of interrogation, eh?
bound to happen to a good-looking girl with stingy relatives, i suppose;
anyhow, they did happen, and she found the ground prepared for her. do
you see where i'm coming out? you don't want these little questions
cropping up again.  it's one thing to get bertha dorset into line--but
what you want is to keep her there. you can frighten her fast enough--but
how are you going to keep he
 
 ___________________________
 
as poor miss jane silverton--she came to talk things over with me:
she and her sister want to do something to support themselves," gerty
explained, as lily followed her into the sitting-room.

"to support themselves? are they so hard up?" miss bart asked with a
touch of irritation: she had not come to listen to the woes of other
people.

"i'm afraid they have nothing left: ned's debts have swallowed up
everything. they had such hopes, you know, when he broke away from carry
fisher; they thought bertha dorset would be such a good influence,
because she doesn't care for cards, and--well, she talked quite
beautifully to poor miss jane about feeling as if ned were her younger
brother, and wanting to carry him off on the yacht, so that he might have
a chance to drop cards and racing, and take up his literary work again."

miss farish paused with a sigh which reflected the perplexity of her
departing visitor. "but that isn't all; it isn't even the worst. it seems
that ned has quarrelled with the dorsets;
 
 ___________________________
 


"that's all the more reason: she's been very unhappy."

"unhappy at being with the gormers?"

"oh, i don't defend her intimacy with the gormers; but that too is at an
end now, i think. you know people have been very unkind since bertha
dorset quarrelled with her."

"ah----" selden exclaimed, rising abruptly to walk to the window, where
he remained with his eyes on the darkening street while his cousin
continued to explain: "judy trenor and her own family have deserted her
too--and all because bertha dorset has said such horrible things. and she
is very poor--you know mrs. peniston cut her off with a small legacy,
after giving her to understand that she was to have everything."

"yes--i know," selden assented curtly, turning back into the room, but
only to stir about with restless steps in the circumscribed space between
door and window. "yes--she's been abominably treated; but it's
unfortunately the precise thing that a man who wants to show his sympathy
can't say to her."

his words caused gerty
 
 ___________________________
 
w that they had been right.

gerty's quest, at any rate, brought up against a solid wall of
resistance; and even when carry fisher, momentarily penitent for her
share in the hatch affair, joined her efforts to miss farish's, they met
with no better success. gerty had tried to veil her failure in tender
ambiguities; but carry, always the soul of candour, put the case squarely
to her friend.

"i went straight to judy trenor; she has fewer prejudices than the
others, and besides she's always hated bertha dorset. but what have you
done to her, lily? at the very first word about giving you a start she
flamed out about some money you'd got from gus; i never knew her so hot
before. you know she'll let him do anything but spend money on his
friends: the only reason she's decent to me now is that she knows i'm not
hard up.--he speculated for you, you say? well, what's the harm? he had
no business to lose. he didn't lose? then what on earth--but i never
could understand you, lily!"

the end of it was that, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 began to haunt her insidiously. it was of course impossible
to accept a loan from rosedale; but proximate possibilities hovered
temptingly before her. she was quite sure that he would come and see her
again, and almost sure that, if he did, she could bring him to the point
of offering to marry her on the terms she had previously rejected.  would
she still reject them if they were offered? more and more, with every
fresh mischance befalling her, did the pursuing furies seem to take the
shape of bertha dorset; and close at hand, safely locked among her
papers, lay the means of ending their pursuit. the temptation, which her
scorn of rosedale had once enabled her to reject, now insistently
returned upon her; and how much strength was left her to oppose it?

what little there was must at any rate be husbanded to the utmost; she
could not trust herself again to the perils of a sleepless night.
through the long hours of silence the dark spirit of fatigue and
loneliness crouched upon her breast, leaving 
 
 ___________________________
 
e offer he was so plainly ready to renew, had she not
sacrificed to one of those abstract notions of honour that might be
called the conventionalities of the moral life?  what debt did she owe to
a social order which had condemned and banished her without trial?  she
had never been heard in her own defence; she was innocent of the charge
on which she had been found guilty; and the irregularity of her
conviction might seem to justify the use of methods as irregular in
recovering her lost rights. bertha dorset, to save herself, had not
scrupled to ruin her by an open falsehood; why should she hesitate to
make private use of the facts that chance had put in her way? after all,
half the opprobrium of such an act lies in the name attached to it.  call
it blackmail and it becomes unthinkable; but explain that it injures no
one, and that the rights regained by it were unjustly forfeited, and he
must be a formalist indeed who can find no plea in its defence.

the arguments pleading for it with lily were th