ppeared entirely and was seen no more.

"overboard!" said the captain. "well, gentlemen, that saves the trouble
of putting him in irons."

but there we were, without a mate; and it was necessary, of course, to
advance one of the men. the boatswain, job anderson, was the likeliest
man aboard, and though he kept his old title, he served in a way as
mate. mr. trelawney had followed the sea, and his knowledge made him
very useful, for he often took a watch himself in easy weather. and the
coxswain, israel hands, was a careful, wily, old, experienced seaman who
could be trusted at a pinch with almost anything.

he was a great confidant of long john silver, and so the mention of
his name leads me on to speak of our ship's cook, barbecue, as the men
called him.

aboard ship he carried his crutch by a lanyard round his neck, to have
both hands as free as possible. it was something to see him wedge the
foot of the crutch against a bulkhead, and propped against it, yielding
to every movement of the ship, ge
 
 ___________________________
 
rstand the meaning of their terms. by a
"gentleman of fortune" they plainly meant neither more nor less than a
common pirate, and the little scene that i had overheard was the last
act in the corruption of one of the honest hands--perhaps of the last
one left aboard. but on this point i was soon to be relieved, for silver
giving a little whistle, a third man strolled up and sat down by the
party.

"dick's square," said silver.

"oh, i know'd dick was square," returned the voice of the coxswain,
israel hands. "he's no fool, is dick." and he turned his quid and spat.
"but look here," he went on, "here's what i want to know, barbecue: how
long are we a-going to stand off and on like a blessed bumboat? i've had
a'most enough o' cap'n smollett; he's hazed me long enough, by thunder!
i want to go into that cabin, i do. i want their pickles and wines, and
that."

"israel," said silver, "your head ain't much account, nor ever was. but
you're able to hear, i reckon; leastways, your ears is big enough.
now,
 
 ___________________________
 
ael was flint's gunner," said gray hoarsely.

at any risk, we put the boat's head direct for the landing-place. by
this time we had got so far out of the run of the current that we kept
steerage way even at our necessarily gentle rate of rowing, and i could
keep her steady for the goal. but the worst of it was that with the
course i now held we turned our broadside instead of our stern to the
hispaniola and offered a target like a barn door.

i could hear as well as see that brandy-faced rascal israel hands
plumping down a round-shot on the deck.

"who's the best shot?" asked the captain.

"mr. trelawney, out and away," said i.

"mr. trelawney, will you please pick me off one of these men, sir?
hands, if possible," said the captain.

trelawney was as cool as steel. he looked to the priming of his gun.

"now," cried the captain, "easy with that gun, sir, or you'll swamp the
boat. all hands stand by to trim her when he aims."

the squire raised his gun, the rowing ceased, and we leaned over to the
o
 
 ___________________________
 
y gully, opened it with my teeth,
and cut one strand after another, till the vessel swung only by two.
then i lay quiet, waiting to sever these last when the strain should be
once more lightened by a breath of wind.

all this time i had heard the sound of loud voices from the cabin, but
to say truth, my mind had been so entirely taken up with other thoughts
that i had scarcely given ear. now, however, when i had nothing else to
do, i began to pay more heed.

one i recognized for the coxswain's, israel hands, that had been flint's
gunner in former days. the other was, of course, my friend of the red
night-cap. both men were plainly the worse of drink, and they were still
drinking, for even while i was listening, one of them, with a drunken
cry, opened the stern window and threw out something, which i divined to
be an empty bottle. but they were not only tipsy; it was plain that they
were furiously angry. oaths flew like hailstones, and every now and
then there came forth such an explosion as i thou
 
 ___________________________
 
ike a live thing in the scuppers.

suddenly the hispaniola came right into the wind. the jibs behind me
cracked aloud, the rudder slammed to, the whole ship gave a sickening
heave and shudder, and at the same moment the main-boom swung inboard,
the sheet groaning in the blocks, and showed me the lee after-deck.

there were the two watchmen, sure enough: red-cap on his back, as stiff
as a handspike, with his arms stretched out like those of a crucifix and
his teeth showing through his open lips; israel hands propped against
the bulwarks, his chin on his chest, his hands lying open before him on
the deck, his face as white, under its tan, as a tallow candle.

for a while the ship kept bucking and sidling like a vicious horse, the
sails filling, now on one tack, now on another, and the boom swinging to
and fro till the mast groaned aloud under the strain. now and again too
there would come a cloud of light sprays over the bulwark and a heavy
blow of the ship's bows against the swell; so much heavier 
 
 ___________________________
 
own upon the
deck, his feet sliding ever the farther out, and the whole body canting
towards the stern, so that his face became, little by little, hid
from me; and at last i could see nothing beyond his ear and the frayed
ringlet of one whisker.

at the same time, i observed, around both of them, splashes of dark
blood upon the planks and began to feel sure that they had killed each
other in their drunken wrath.

while i was thus looking and wondering, in a calm moment, when the ship
was still, israel hands turned partly round and with a low moan writhed
himself back to the position in which i had seen him first. the moan,
which told of pain and deadly weakness, and the way in which his jaw
hung open went right to my heart. but when i remembered the talk i had
overheard from the apple barrel, all pity left me.

i walked aft until i reached the main-mast.

"come aboard, mr. hands," i said ironically.

he rolled his eyes round heavily, but he was too far gone to express
surprise. all he could do was
 
 ___________________________
 
rtion, was quieted by the great conquest i
had made. i should, i think, have had nothing left me to desire but for
the eyes of the coxswain as they followed me derisively about the deck
and the odd smile that appeared continually on his face. it was a smile
that had in it something both of pain and weakness--a haggard old man's
smile; but there was, besides that, a grain of derision, a shadow of
treachery, in his expression as he craftily watched, and watched, and
watched me at my work.




26

israel hands

the wind, serving us to a desire, now hauled into the west. we could run
so much the easier from the north-east corner of the island to the mouth
of the north inlet. only, as we had no power to anchor and dared not
beach her till the tide had flowed a good deal farther, time hung on our
hands. the coxswain told me how to lay the ship to; after a good many
trials i succeeded, and we both sat in silence over another meal.

"cap'n," said he at length with that same uncomfortable smile, "here's
my
 
 ___________________________
 
t again, for hands had got
involved with the dead body. the sudden canting of the ship had made the
deck no place for running on; i had to find some new way of escape,
and that upon the instant, for my foe was almost touching me. quick as
thought, i sprang into the mizzen shrouds, rattled up hand over hand,
and did not draw a breath till i was seated on the cross-trees.

i had been saved by being prompt; the dirk had struck not half a foot
below me as i pursued my upward flight; and there stood israel hands
with his mouth open and his face upturned to mine, a perfect statue of
surprise and disappointment.

now that i had a moment to myself, i lost no time in changing the
priming of my pistol, and then, having one ready for service, and to
make assurance doubly sure, i proceeded to draw the load of the other
and recharge it afresh from the beginning.

my new employment struck hands all of a heap; he began to see the dice
going against him, and after an obvious hesitation, he also hauled
himself hea