ilight
or early morning rambles; on wintry nights he lay at the judge’s feet
before the roaring library fire; he carried the judge’s grandsons on his
back, or rolled them in the grass, and guarded their footsteps through
wild adventures down to the fountain in the stable yard, and even
beyond, where the paddocks were, and the berry patches. among the
terriers he stalked imperiously, and toots and ysabel he utterly
ignored, for he was king,--king over all creeping, crawling, flying
things of judge miller’s place, humans included.

his father, elmo, a huge st. bernard, had been the judge’s inseparable
companion, and buck bid fair to follow in the way of his father. he was
not so large,--he weighed only one hundred and forty pounds,--for his
mother, shep, had been a scotch shepherd dog. nevertheless, one hundred
and forty pounds, to which was added the dignity that comes of good
living and universal respect, enabled him to carry himself in right
royal fashion. during the four years since his 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of club and fang, whoso took such
things into account was a fool, and in so far as he observed them he
would fail to prosper.

not that buck reasoned it out. he was fit, that was all, and
unconsciously he accommodated himself to the new mode of life. all his
days, no matter what the odds, he had never run from a fight. but
the club of the man in the red sweater had beaten into him a more
fundamental and primitive code. civilized, he could have died for a
moral consideration, say the defence of judge miller’s riding-whip; but
the completeness of his decivilization was now evidenced by his ability
to flee from the defence of a moral consideration and so save his
hide. he did not steal for joy of it, but because of the clamor of his
stomach. he did not rob openly, but stole secretly and cunningly, out of
respect for club and fang. in short, the things he did were done because
it was easier to do them than not to do them.

his development (or retrogression) was rapid. his muscles became hard as
iro
 
 ___________________________
 
it
was good to loaf around, after the fish was eaten, for an hour or so
with the other dogs, of which there were fivescore and odd. there were
fierce fighters among them, but three battles with the fiercest brought
buck to mastery, so that when he bristled and showed his teeth they got
out of his way.

best of all, perhaps, he loved to lie near the fire, hind legs crouched
under him, fore legs stretched out in front, head raised, and eyes
blinking dreamily at the flames. sometimes he thought of judge miller’s
big house in the sun-kissed santa clara valley, and of the cement
swimming-tank, and ysabel, the mexican hairless, and toots, the japanese
pug; but oftener he remembered the man in the red sweater, the death of
curly, the great fight with spitz, and the good things he had eaten or
would like to eat. he was not homesick. the sunland was very dim and
distant, and such memories had no power over him. far more potent were
the memories of his heredity that gave things he had never seen before
a 
 
 ___________________________
 
rhound, with eyes that laughed and a boundless good nature.

to buck’s surprise these dogs manifested no jealousy toward him. they
seemed to share the kindliness and largeness of john thornton. as buck
grew stronger they enticed him into all sorts of ridiculous games, in
which thornton himself could not forbear to join; and in this fashion
buck romped through his convalescence and into a new existence. love,
genuine passionate love, was his for the first time. this he had never
experienced at judge miller’s down in the sun-kissed santa clara valley.
with the judge’s sons, hunting and tramping, it had been a working
partnership; with the judge’s grandsons, a sort of pompous guardianship;
and with the judge himself, a stately and dignified friendship. but love
that was feverish and burning, that was adoration, that was madness, it
had taken john thornton to arouse.

this man had saved his life, which was something; but, further, he was
the ideal master. other men saw to the welfare of their 