er expectation.

"i thought we were an old family; but this is all new!" she said, in
her artlessness.  she wished that she had not fallen in so readily
with her mother's plans for "claiming kin," and had endeavoured to
gain assistance nearer home.


the d'urbervilles--or stoke-d'urbervilles, as they at first called
themselves--who owned all this, were a somewhat unusual family to
find in such an old-fashioned part of the country.  parson tringham
had spoken truly when he said that our shambling john durbeyfield was
the only really lineal representative of the old d'urberville family
existing in the county, or near it; he might have added, what he knew
very well, that the stoke-d'urbervilles were no more d'urbervilles of
the true tree then he was himself.  yet it must be admitted that this
family formed a very good stock whereon to regraft a name which sadly
wanted such renovation.

when old mr simon stoke, latterly deceased, had made his fortune as
an honest merchant (some said money-lender) in the no
 
 ___________________________
 
s how would she be able to face her parents?

she reached a turnpike-gate which stood upon the highway to the
village.  it was thrown open by a stranger, not by the old man who
had kept it for many years, and to whom she had been known; he had
probably left on new year's day, the date when such changes were
made.  having received no intelligence lately from her home, she
asked the turnpike-keeper for news.

"oh--nothing, miss," he answered.  "marlott is marlott still.  folks
have died and that.  john durbeyfield, too, hev had a daughter
married this week to a gentleman-farmer; not from john's own house,
you know; they was married elsewhere; the gentleman being of that
high standing that john's own folk was not considered well-be-doing
enough to have any part in it, the bridegroom seeming not to know
how't have been discovered that john is a old and ancient nobleman
himself by blood, with family skillentons in their own vaults to
this day, but done out of his property in the time o' the romans.
however,
 
 ___________________________
 
ingsbere, but instead of
doing so had gone on to another place they mentioned.  by this time
clare abhorred the house for ceasing to contain tess, and hastened
away from its hated presence without once looking back.

his way was by the field in which he had first beheld her at the
dance.  it was as bad as the house--even worse.  he passed on through
the churchyard, where, amongst the new headstones, he saw one of a
somewhat superior design to the rest.  the inscription ran thus:


  in memory of john durbeyfield, rightly d'urberville, of
  the once powerful family of that name, and direct
  descendant through an illustrious line from sir pagan
  d'urberville, one of the knights of the conqueror.  died
  march 10th, 18--

                how are the mighty fallen.


some man, apparently the sexton, had observed clare standing there,
and drew nigh.  "ah, sir, now that's a man who didn't want to lie
here, but wished to be carried to kingsbere, where his ancestors be."

"and why didn't they respect his wis