
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>





1599


the tragedy of julius caesar

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  julius caesar, roman statesman and general
  octavius, triumvir after caesar's death, later augustus caesar,
    first emperor of rome
  mark antony, general and friend of caesar, a triumvir after his
death
  lepidus, third member of the triumvirate
  marcus brutus, leader of the conspiracy against caesar
  cassius, instigator of the conspiracy
  casca,          conspirator against caesar
  trebonius,           "          "     "
  caius ligarius,      "          "     "
  decius brutus,       "          "     "
  metellus cimber,     "          "     "
  cinna,               "          "     "
  calpurnia, wife of caesar
  portia, wife of brutus
  cicero,     senator
  popilius,      "
  popilius lena, "
  flavius, tribune
  marullus, tribu
 
 ___________________________
 
ne
  cato,     supportor of brutus
  lucilius,     "     "    "
  titinius,     "     "    "
  messala,      "     "    "
  volumnius,    "     "    "
  artemidorus, a teacher of rhetoric
  cinna, a poet
  varro,     servant to brutus
  clitus,       "    "     "
  claudio,      "    "     "
  strato,       "    "     "
  lucius,       "    "     "
  dardanius,    "    "     "
  pindarus, servant to cassius
  the ghost of caesar
  a soothsayer
  a poet
  senators, citizens, soldiers, commoners, messengers, and
servants




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon univers
 
 ___________________________
 
er; let no images
    be hung with caesar's trophies. i'll about
    and drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    so do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    these growing feathers pluck'd from caesar's wing
    will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    who else would soar above the view of men
    and keep us all in servile fearfulness.              exeunt.




scene ii.
a public place.

flourish. enter caesar; antony, for the course; calpurnia,
portia,
decius, cicero, brutus, cassius, and casca; a great crowd
follows,
among them a soothsayer.

  caesar. calpurnia!
  casca. peace, ho! caesar speaks.
                                                   music ceases.
  caesar. calpurnia!
  calpurnia. here, my lord.
  caesar. stand you directly in antonio's way,
    when he doth run his course. antonio!
  antony. caesar, my lord?
  caesar. forget not in your speed, antonio,
    to touch calpurnia, for our elders say
    the barren, touched in this holy chas
 
 ___________________________
 
off their sterile curse.
  antony. i shall remember.
    when caesar says "do this," it is perform'd.
  caesar. set on, and leave no ceremony out.           flourish.
  soothsayer. caesar!
  caesar. ha! who calls?
  casca. bid every noise be still. peace yet again!
  caesar. who is it in the press that calls on me?
    i hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,
    cry "caesar." speak, caesar is turn'd to hear.
  soothsayer. beware the ides of march.
  caesar. what man is that?
  brutus. a soothsayer you beware the ides of march.
  caesar. set him before me let me see his face.
  cassius. fellow, come from the throng; look upon caesar.
  caesar. what say'st thou to me now? speak once again.
  soothsayer. beware the ides of march.
  caesar. he is a dreamer; let us leave him. pass.
                      sennet. exeunt all but brutus and cassius.
  cassius. will you go see the order of the course?
  brutus. not i.
  cassius. i pray you, do.
  brutus. i am not gamesome; 
 
 ___________________________
 
i do lack some part
    of that quick spirit that is in antony.
    let me not hinder, cassius, your desires;
    i'll leave you.
  cassius. brutus, i do observe you now of late;
    i have not from your eyes that gentleness
    and show of love as i was wont to have;
    you bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
    over your friend that loves you.
  brutus. cassius,
    be not deceived; if i have veil'd my look,
    i turn the trouble of my countenance
    merely upon myself. vexed i am
    of late with passions of some difference,
    conceptions only proper to myself,
    which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors;
    but let not therefore my good friends be grieved-
    among which number, cassius, be you one-
    nor construe any further my neglect
    than that poor brutus with himself at war
    forgets the shows of love to ot
 
 ___________________________
 
her men.
  cassius. then, brutus, i have much mistook your passion,
    by means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
    thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
    tell me, good brutus, can you see your face?
  brutus. no, cassius, for the eye sees not itself
    but by reflection, by some other things.
  cassius. 'tis just,
    and it is very much lamented, brutus,
    that you have no such mirrors as will turn
    your hidden worthiness into your eye
    that you might see your shadow. i have heard
    where many of the best respect in rome,
    except immortal caesar, speaking of brutus
    and groaning underneath this age's yoke,
    have wish'd that noble brutus had his eyes.
  brutus. into what dangers would you lead me, cassius,
    that you would have me seek into myself
    for that which is not in me?
  cassius. therefore, good brutus
 
 ___________________________
 
, be prepared to hear,
    and since you know you cannot see yourself
    so well as by reflection, i your glass
    will modestly discover to yourself
    that of yourself which you yet know not of.
    and be not jealous on me, gentle brutus;
    were i a common laugher, or did use
    to stale with ordinary oaths my love
    to every new protester, if you know
    that i do fawn on men and hug them hard
    and after scandal them, or if you know
    that i profess myself in banqueting
    to all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
                                             flourish and shout.
  brutus. what means this shouting? i do fear the people
    choose caesar for their king.
  cassius. ay, do you fear it?
    th
 
 ___________________________
 
en must i think you would not have it so.
  brutus. i would not, cassius, yet i love him well.
    but wherefore do you hold me here so long?
    what is it that you would impart to me?
    if it be aught toward the general good,
    set honor in one eye and death i' the other
    and i will look on both indifferently.
    for let the gods so speed me as i love
    the name of honor more than i fear death.
  cassius. i know that virtue to be in you, brutus,
    as well as i do know your outward favor.
    well, honor is the subject of my story.
    i cannot tell what you and other men
    think of this life, but, for my single self,
    i had as lief not be as live to be
    in awe of such a thing as i myself.
    i was born free as caesar, so were you;
    we both have fed as well, and we can both
    endure the winter's cold as well as he.
    for once, upon a raw and gusty day,
    the troubled tiber chafing with her shores,
    ca
 
 ___________________________
 
coward lips did from their color fly,
    and that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
    did lose his luster. i did hear him groan.
    ay, and that tongue of his that bade the romans
    mark him and write his speeches in their books,
    alas, it cried, "give me some drink, titinius,"
    as a sick girl. ye gods! it doth amaze me
    a man of such a feeble temper should
    so get the start of the majestic world
    and bear the palm alone. shout.                    flourish.
  brutus. another general shout!
    i do believe that these applauses are
    for some new honors that are heap'd on caesar.
  cassius. why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
    like a colossus, and we petty men
    walk under his huge legs and peep about
    to find ourselves dishonorable graves.
    men at some time are masters of their fates:
    the fault, dear brutus, is not in our stars,
    but in ourselves that we are underlings.
    brutus and caesar: what should be in that "ca
 
 ___________________________
 
esar"?
    why should that name be sounded more than yours?
    write them together, yours is as fair a name;
    sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
    weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,
    "brutus" will start a spirit as soon as "caesar."
    now, in the names of all the gods at once,
    upon what meat doth this our caesar feed
    that he is grown so great? age, thou art shamed!
    rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
    when went there by an age since the great flood
    but it was famed with more than with one man?
    when could they say till now that talk'd of rome
    that her wide walls encompass'd but one man?
    now is it rome indeed, and room enough,
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  when there is in it but one only man.
    o, you and i have heard our fathers say
    there was a brutus once that would have brook'd
    the eternal devil to keep his state in rome
    as easily as a king.
  brutus. that you do love me, i am nothing jealous;
    what you would work me to, i have some aim.
    how i have thought of this and of these times,
    i shall recount hereafter; for this present,
    i would not, so with love i might entreat you,
    be any further moved. what you have said
    i will consider; what you have to say
    i will with patience hear, and find a time
    both meet to hear and answer such high things.
    till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
    brutus ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d rather be a villager
    than to repute himself a son of rome
    under these hard conditions as this time
    is like to lay upon us.
  cassius. i am glad that my weak words
    have struck but thus much show of fire from brutus.

            re-enter caesar and his train.

  brutus. the games are done, and caesar is returning.
  cassius. as they pass by, pluck casca by the sleeve,
    and he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
    what hath proceeded worthy note today.
  brutus. i will do so. but, look you, cassius,
    the angry spot doth glow on caesar's brow,
    and all the rest look like a chidden train:
    calpurnia's cheek is pale, and cicero
    looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
    as we have seen him in the capitol,
    being cross'd in conference by some senators.
  cassius. casca will tell us what the matter is.
  caesar. antonio!
  antony. caesar?
  caesar. let me have men about me that are fat,
    sleek-headed men, and such as sleep
 
 ___________________________
 
ould be moved to smile at anything.
    such men as he be never at heart's ease
    whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
    and therefore are they very dangerous.
    i rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
    than what i fear, for always i am caesar.
    come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
    and tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
              sennet. exeunt caesar and all his train but casca.
  casca. you pull'd me by the cloak; would you speak with me?
  brutus. ay, casca, tell us what hath chanced today
    that caesar looks so sad.
  casca. why, you were with him, were you not?
  brutus. i should not then ask casca what had chanced.
  casca. why, there was a crown offered him, and being offered
him,
     he put it by with the back of his hand, thus, and then the
     people fell ashouting.
  brutus. what was the second noise for?
  casca. why, for that too.
  cassius. they shouted thrice. what was the last cry for?
  casca. why, for that 
 
 ___________________________
 
too.
  brutus. was the crown offered him thrice?
  casca. ay, marry, wast, and he put it by thrice, every time
gentler
    than other, and at every putting by mine honest neighbors
    shouted.
  cassius. who offered him the crown?
  casca. why, antony.
  brutus. tell us the manner of it, gentle casca.
  casca. i can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it. it was
    mere foolery; i did not mark it. i saw mark antony offer him
a
    crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these
    coronets) and, as i told you, he put it by once. but for all
    that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it. then he
offered
    it to him again; then he put it by again. but, to my
thinking, he
    was very loath to lay his fingers off it. and 
 
 ___________________________
 
t hooted and clapped their chopped
hands
    and threw up their sweaty nightcaps and uttered such a deal
of
    stinking breath because caesar refused the crown that it had
    almost choked caesar, for he swounded and fell down at it.
and
    for mine own part, i durst not laugh for fear of opening my
lips
    and receiving the bad air.
  cassius. but, soft, i pray you, what, did caesars wound?
  casca. he fell down in the marketplace and foamed at mouth and
was
    speechless.
  brutus. 'tis very like. he hath the falling sickness.
  cassius. no, caesar hath it not, but you, and i,
    and honest casca, we have the falling sickness.
  casca. i know not what you mean by that, but i am sure caesar
fell
    down. if the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him
    according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to
do
    the players in the theatre, i am no true man.
  brutus. what said he when he came unto himself?
  casca. marry, before he fell down, when 
 
 ___________________________
 
upation, if i would not have taken him at a word, i would
i
    might go to hell among the rogues. and so he fell. when he
came
    to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything
amiss,
    he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity.
three or
    four wenches where i stood cried, "alas, good soul!" and
forgave
    him with all their hearts. but there's no heed to be taken of
    them; if caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would have
done
    no less.
  brutus. and after that he came, thus sad, away?
  casca. ay.
  cassius. did cicero say anything?
  casca. ay, he spoke greek.
  cassius. to what effect?
  casca. nay, an i tell you that, i'll ne'er look you i' the face
    again; but those that understood him smiled at one another
and
    shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was greek to me.
i
    could tell you more news too: marullus and flavius, for
pulling
    scarfs off caesar's images, are put to silence. fare you
well.
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 there was more foolery yet, if could remember it.
  cassius. will you sup with me tonight, casca?
  casca. no, i am promised forth.
  cassius. will you dine with me tomorrow?
  casca. ay, if i be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner
worth
    the eating.
  cassius. good, i will expect you.
  casca. do so, farewell, both.                            exit.
  brutus. what a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
    he was quick mettle when he went to school.
  cassius. so is he now in execution
    of any bold or noble enterprise,
    however he puts on this tardy form.
    this rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
    which gives men stomach to digest his words
    with better appetite.
  brutus. and so it is. for this time i will leave you.
    tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
    i will come home to you, or, if you will,
    come home to
 
 ___________________________
 
 me and i will wait for you.
  cassius. i will do so. till then, think of the world.
                                                    exit brutus.
    well, brutus, thou art noble; yet, i see
    thy honorable mettle may be wrought
    from that it is disposed; therefore it is meet
    that noble minds keep ever with their likes;
    for who so firm that cannot be seduced?
    caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves brutus.
    if i were brutus now and he were cassius,
    he should not humor me. i will this night,
    in several hands, in at his windows throw,
    as if they came from several citizens,
    writings, all tending to the great opinion
    that rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
    caesar's ambition shall be glanced at.
    and after this let caesar seat him sure;
    for we will shake him, or worse days endure.           exit.




scene iii.
a street. thunder and lightning.

enter, from opposite 
 
 ___________________________
 
mes one in haste.
  cassius. 'tis cinna, i do know him by his gait;
    he is a friend. cinna, where haste you so?
  cinna. to find out you. who's that? metellus cimber?
  cassius. no, it is casca, one incorporate
    to our attempts. am i not stay'd for, cinna?
  cinna. i am glad on't. what a fearful night is this!
    there's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
  cassius. am i not stay'd for? tell me.
  cinna. yes, you are.
    o cassius, if you could
    but win the noble brutus to our party-
  cassius. be you content. good cinna, take this paper,
    and look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    where brutus may but find it; and throw this
    in at his window; set this up with wax
    upon old brutus' statue. all this done,
    repair to pompey's porch, where you shall find us.
    is decius brutus and trebonius there?
  cinna. all but metellus cimber, and he's gone
    to seek you at your house. well, i will hie
    and so bestow these papers as you bade
 
 ___________________________
 
 me.
  cassius. that done, repair to pompey's theatre.
                                                     exit cinna.
    come, casca, you and i will yet ere day
    see brutus at his house. three parts of him
    is ours already, and the man entire
    upon the next encounter yields him ours.
  casca. o, he sits high in all the people's hearts,
    and that which would appear offense in us,
    his countenance, like richest alchemy,
    will change to virtue and to worthiness.
  cassius. him and his worth and our great need of him
    you have right well conceited. let us go,
    for it is after midnight, and ere day
    we will awake him and be sure of him
 
 ___________________________
 
ete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.

enter brutus in his orchard.

  brutus. what, lucius, ho!
    i cannot, by the progress of the stars,
    give guess how near to day. lucius, i say!
    i would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
    when, lucius, when? awake, i say! what, lucius!

                            enter lucius.

  lucius. call'd you, my lord?
  brutus. get me a taper in my study, lucius.
    when it is lighted, come and call me here.
  lucius. i will, my lord.                                 exit.
  brutus. it m
 
 ___________________________
 
is, augmented,
    would run to these and these extremities;
    and therefore think him as a serpent's egg
    which hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous,
    and kill him in the shell.

                        re-enter lucius.

  lucius. the taper burneth in your closet, sir.
    searching the window for a flint i found
    this paper thus seal'd up, and i am sure
    it did not lie there when i went to bed.
                                           gives him the letter.
  brutus. get you to bed again, it is not day.
    is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of march?
  lucius. i know not, sir.
  brutus. look in the calendar and bring me word.
  lucius. i will, sir.                                     exit.
  brutus. the exhalations whizzing in the air
    give so much light that i may read by them.
                                     opens the letter and reads.
    "brutus, thou sleep'st: awake and see thyself!
    shall rome, etc. speak, strike, redress!"

    "b
 
 ___________________________
 
rutus, thou sleep'st: awake!"
    such instigations have been often dropp'd
    where i have took them up.
    "shall rome, etc." thus must i piece it out.
    shall rome stand under one man's awe? what, rome?
    my ancestors did from the streets of rome
    the tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king.
    "speak, strike, redress!" am i entreated
    to speak and strike? o rome, i make thee promise,
    if the redress will follow, thou receivest
    thy full petition at the hand of brutus!

                        re-enter lucius.

  lucius. sir, march is wasted fifteen days.
                                                knocking within.
  brutus. 'tis good. go to the gate, somebody knocks.
                                                    exit lucius.
    since cassius first did whet me against caesar
    i have not slept.
    between the acting of a dreadful thing
    and the first motion, all the interim is
    like a phantasma or a hideous dream;
    the gen
 
 ___________________________
 
ius and the mortal instruments
    are then in council, and the state of man,
    like to a little kingdom, suffers then
    the nature of an insurrection.

                         re-enter lucius.

  lucius. sir, 'tis your brother cassius at the door,
    who doth desire to see you.
  brutus. is he alone?
  lucius. no, sir, there are more with him.
  brutus. do you know them?
  lucius. no, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,
    and half their faces buried in their cloaks,
    that by no means i may discover them
    by any mark of favor.
  brutus. let 'em enter.                            exit lucius.
    they are the faction. o conspiracy,
    shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
    when evils are most free? o, then, by day
    where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
    to mask thy monstrous visage? seek none
 
 ___________________________
 
, conspiracy;
    hide it in smiles and affability;
    for if thou path, thy native semblance on,
    not erebus itself were dim enough
    to hide thee from prevention.

    enter the conspirators, cassius, casca, decius, cinna,
                metellus cimber, and trebonius.

  cassius. i think we are too bold upon your rest.
    good morrow, brutus, do we trouble you?
  brutus. i have been up this hour, awake all night.
    know i these men that come along with you?
  cassius. yes, every man of them, and no man here
    but honors you, and every one doth wish
    you had but that opinion of yourself
    which every noble roman bears of you.
    this is trebonius.
  brutus. he is welcome hither.
  cassius. this, decius brutus.
  brutus. he is welcome too.
cassius. this, casca; this, cinna; and this, metellus cimber.
  brutus. they are all welcome.
    what
 
 ___________________________
 
ast. doth not the day break here?
  casca. no.
  cinna. o, pardon, sir, it doth, and yongrey lines
    that fret the clouds are messengers of day.
  casca. you shall confess that you are both deceived.
    here, as i point my sword, the sun arises,
    which is a great way growing on the south,
    weighing the youthful season of the year.
    some two months hence up higher toward the north
    he first presents his fire, and the high east
    stands as the capitol, directly here.
  brutus. give me your hands all over, one by one.
  cassius. and let us swear our resolution.
  brutus. no, not an oath. if not the face of men,
    the sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse-
    if these be motives weak, break off betimes,
    and every man hence to his idle bed;
    so let high-sighted tyranny range on
    till each man drop by lottery. but if these,
    as i am sure they do, bear fire enough
    to kindle cowards and to steel with valor
    the melting spirits of women
 
 ___________________________
 
cle
    of any promise that hath pass'd from him.
  cassius. but what of cicero? shall we sound him?
    i think he will stand very strong with us.
  casca. let us not leave him out.
  cinna. no, by no means.
  metellus. o, let us have him, for his silver hairs
    will purchase us a good opinion,
    and buy men's voices to commend our deeds.
    it shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
    our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
    but all be buried in his gravity.
  brutus. o, name him not; let us not break with him,
    for he will never follow anything
    that other men begin.
  cassius. then leave him out.
  casca. indeed he is not fit.
  decius. shall no man else be touch'd but only caesar?
  cassius. decius, well urged. i think it is not meet
    mark antony, so well beloved of caesar,
    should outlive caesar. we shall find of him
    a shrewd contriver; and you know his means,
    if he improve them, may well stretch so far
    as to annoy us 
 
 ___________________________
 
all, which to prevent,
    let antony and caesar fall together.
  brutus. our course will seem too bloody, caius cassius,
    to cut the head off and then hack the limbs
    like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
    for antony is but a limb of caesar.
    let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, caius.
    we all stand up against the spirit of caesar,
    and in the spirit of men there is no blood.
    o, that we then could come by caesar's spirit,
    and not dismember caesar! but, alas,
    caesar must bleed for it! and, gentle friends,
    let's kill
 
 ___________________________
 
ss fit for hounds;
    and let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
    stir up their servants to an act of rage
    and after seem to chide 'em. this shall make
    our purpose necessary and not envious,
    which so appearing to the common eyes,
    we shall be call'd purgers, not murderers.
    and for mark antony, think not of him,
    for he can do no more than caesar's arm
    when caesar's head is off.
  cassius. yet i fear him,
    for in the ingrated love he bears to caesar-
  brutus. alas, good cassius, do not think of him.
    if he love caesar, all that he can do
    is to himself, take thought and die for caesar.
    and that were much he should, for he is given
    to sports, to wildness, and much company.
  trebonius. there is no fear in him-let him not die,
    for he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
                                                  clock strikes.
  brutus. peace, count the clock.
  cassius. the clock hath stricken three.
  trebonius.
 
 ___________________________
 
decius. never fear that. if he be so resolved,
    i can o'ersway him, for he loves to hear
    that unicorns may be betray'd with trees,
    and bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
    lions with toils, and men with flatterers;
    but when i tell him he hates flatterers,
    he says he does, being then most flattered.
    let me work;
    for i can give his humor the true bent,
    and i will bring him to the capitol.
  cassius. nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
  brutus. by the eighth hour. is that the utter most?
  cinna. be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
  metellus. caius ligarius doth bear caesar hard,
    who rated him for speaking well of pompey.
    i wonder none of you have thought of him.
  brutus. now, good metellus, go along by him.
    he loves me well, and i have given him reasons;
    send him but hither, and i'll fashion him.
  cassius. the morning comes upon 's. we'll leave you, brutus,
    and, friends, disperse yourselves, but
 
 ___________________________
 
 all remember
    what you have said and show yourselves true romans.
  brutus. good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily;
    let not our looks put on our purposes,
    but bear it as our roman actors do,
    with untired spirits and formal constancy.
    and so, good morrow to you every one.
                                          exeunt all but brutus.
    boy! lucius! fast asleep? it is no matter.
    enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber;
    thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
    which busy care draws in the brains of men;
    therefore thou sleep'st so sound.

                           enter portia.

  portia. brutus, my lord!
  brutus. portia, what mean you? wherefore rise you now?
    it is not for your health thus to commit
    your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
  portia. nor for yours neither. have ungently
 
 ___________________________
 
, brutus,
    stole from my bed; and yesternight at supper
    you suddenly arose and walk'd about,
    musing and sighing, with your arms across;
    and when i ask'd you what the matter was,
    you stared upon me with ungentle looks.
    i urged you further; then you scratch'd your head,
    and too impatiently stamp'd with your foot.
    yet i insisted, yet you answer'd not,
    but with an angry waiter of your hand
    gave sign for me to leave you. so i did,
    fearing to strengthen th
 
 ___________________________
 
at impatience
    which seem'd too much enkindled, and withal
    hoping it was but an effect of humor,
    which sometime hath his hour with every man.
    it will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep,
    and, could it work so much upon your shape
    as it hath much prevail'd on your condition,
    i should not know you, brutus. dear my lord,
    make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
  brutus. i am not well in health, and that is all.
  portia. brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
    he would embrace the means to come by it.
  brutus. why, so i do. good portia, go to bed.
  portia. is brutus sick, and is it physical
    to walk unbraced and suck up the humors
    of the dank morning? what, is brutus sick,
    and will he steal out of his wholesome bed
    to dare the vile contagion of the night
    and tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
    to add unto his sickness? no, my brutus,
    you have some sick offense within your m
 
 ___________________________
 
ind,
    which by the right and virtue of my place
    i ought to know of; and, upon my knees,
    i charm you, by my once commended beauty,
    by all your vows of love and that great vow
    which did incorporate and make us one,
    that you unfold to me, yourself, your half,
    why you are heavy and what men tonight
    have had resort to you; for here have been
    some six or seven, who did hide their faces
    even from darkness.
  brutus. kneel not, gentle portia.
  portia. i should not need, if you were gentle brutus.
    within the bond of marriage, tell me, brutus,
    is it excepted i should know no secrets
    that appertain to you? am i yourself
    but, as it were, in sort or limitation,
    to keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
    and talk to you sometimes? dwell i but in the suburbs
    of your good pleasure? if it be no more,
    portia is brutus' harlot, not his wife.
  brutus. you are my true and h
 
 ___________________________
 
onorable wife,
    as dear to me as are the ruddy drops
    that visit my sad heart.
  portia. if this were true, then should i know this secret.
    i grant i am a woman, but withal
    a woman that lord brutus took to wife.
    i grant i am a woman, but withal
    a woman well reputed, cato's daughter.
    think you i am no stronger than my sex,
    being so father'd and so husbanded?
    tell me your counsels, i will not disclose 'em.
    i have made strong proof of my constancy,
    giving myself a voluntary wound
    here in the thigh. can i bear that with patience
    and not my husband's secrets?
  brutus. o ye gods,
    render me worthy of this noble wife! knocking within.
    hark,
 
 ___________________________
 
 hark, one knocks. portia, go in awhile,
    and by and by thy bosom shall partake
    the secrets of my heart.
    all my engagements i will construe to thee,
    all the charactery of my sad brows.
    leave me with haste. [exit portia.] lucius, who's that
knocks?

                  re-enter lucius with ligarius.

  lucius. here is a sick man that would speak with you.
  brutus. caius ligarius, that metellus spake of.
    boy, stand aside. caius ligarius, how?
  ligarius. vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
  brutus. o, what a time have you chose out, brave caius,
    to wear a kerchief! would you were not sick!
  ligarius. i am not sick, if brutus have in hand
    any exploit worthy the name of honor.
  brutus. such an exploit have i in hand, ligarius,
    had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
  ligarius. by all the gods that romans bow before,
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 i here discard my sickness! soul of rome!
    brave son, derived from honorable loins!
    thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up
    my mortified spirit. now bid me run,
    and i will strive with things impossible,
    yea, get the better of them. what's to do?
  brutus. a piece of work that will make sick men whole.
  ligarius. but are not some whole that we must make sick?
  brutus. that must we also. what it is, my caius,
    i shall unfold to thee, as we are going
    to whom it must be done.
  ligarius. set on your foot,
    and with a heart new-fired i follow you,
    to do i know not what; but it sufficeth
    that brutus leads me on.
  brutus. follow me then.                                exeunt.




scene ii.
caesar's house. thunder and lightning.

enter caesar, in his nightgown.

  caesar. nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight.
    thr
 
 ___________________________
 
ble.
    and caesar shall go forth.
  calpurnia. alas, my lord,
    your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
    do not go forth today. call it my fear
    that keeps you in the house and not your own.
    we'll send mark antony to the senate house,
    and he shall say you are not well today.
    let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
  caesar. mark antony shall say i am not well,
    and, for thy humor, i will stay at home.

                        enter decius.

    here's decius brutus, he shall tell them so.
  decius. caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy caesar!
    i come to fetch you to the senate house.
  caesar. and you are come in very happy time
    to bear my greeting to the senators
    and tell them that i will not come today.
    cannot, is false, and that i dare not, falser:
    i will not come today. tell them so, decius.
  calpurnia. say he is sick.
  caesar. shall caesar send a lie?
    have i in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far
    to be afeard t
 
 ___________________________
 
der'd, for someone to say
    "break up the senate till another time,
    when caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams."
    if caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
    "lo, caesar is afraid"?
    pardon me, caesar, for my dear dear love
    to your proceeding bids me tell you this,
    and reason to my love is liable.
  caesar. how foolish do your fears seem now, calpurnia!
    i am ashamed i did yield to them.
    give me my robe, for i will go.

         enter publius, brutus, ligarius, metellus, casca,
                     trebonius, and cinna.

    and look where publius is come to fetch me.
  publius. good morrow,caesar.
  caesar. welcome, publius.
    what, brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?
    good morrow, casca. caius ligarius,
    caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
    as that same ague which hath made you lean.
    what is't o'clock?
  brutus. caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
  caesar. i thank you for your pains and courtesy.

                
 
 ___________________________
 
aesar.
  caesar. bid them prepare within.
    i am to blame to be thus waited for.
    now, cinna; now, metellus; what, trebonius,
    i have an hour's talk in store for you;
    remember that you call on me today;
    be near me, that i may remember you.
  trebonius. caesar, i will. [aside.] and so near will i be
    that your best friends shall wish i had been further.
  caesar. good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
    and we like friends will straightway go together.
  brutus. [aside.] that every like is not the same, o caesar,
    the heart of brutus yearns to think upon!            exeunt.




scene iii.
a street near the capitol.

enter artemidorus, reading paper.

  artemidorus. "caesar, beware of brutus; take heed of cassius;
come
    not near casca; have an eye to cinna; trust not trebonius;
mark
    well metellus cimber; decius brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged caius ligarius. there is but one mind in all these
men,
    and it is 
 
 ___________________________
 
u. security gives way to conspiracy. the mighty gods
    defend thee!
                                        thy lover, artemidorus."
    here will i stand till caesar pass along,
    and as a suitor will i give him this.
    my heart laments that virtue cannot live
    out of the teeth of emulation.
    if thou read this, o caesar, thou mayest live;
    if not, the fates with traitors do contrive.           exit.




scene iv.
another part of the same street, before the house of brutus.

enter portia and lucius.

  portia. i prithee, boy, run to the senate house;
    stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
    why dost thou stay?
  lucius. to know my errand, madam.
  portia. i would have had thee there, and here again,
    ere i can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
    o constancy, be strong upon my side!
    set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue!
    i have a man's mind, but a woman's might.
    how hard it is for women to keep counsel!
    art
 
 ___________________________
 
st thou any harm's intended towards him?
  soothsayer. none that i know will be, much that i fear may
chance.
    good morrow to you. here the street is narrow,
    the throng that follows caesar at the heels,
    of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
    will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
    i'll get me to a place more void and there
    speak to great caesar as he comes along.               exit.
  portia. i must go in. ay me, how weak a thing
    the heart of woman is! o brutus,
    the heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
    sure, the boy heard me. brutus hath a suit
    that caesar will not grant. o, i grow faint.
    run, lucius, and commend me to my lord;
    say i am merry. come to me again,
    and bring me word what he doth say to thee.
                                               exeunt severally.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by proj
 
 ___________________________
 
e mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
rome. before the capitol; the senate sitting above.
a crowd of people, among them artemidorus and the soothsayer.

flourish. enter caesar, brutus, cassius, casca, decius, metellus,
trebonius, cinna, antony, lepidus, popilius, publius, and others.

  caesar. the ides of march are come.
  soothsayer. ay, caesar, but not gone.
  a hail, caesar! read this schedule.
  decius. trebonius doth desire you to o'er read,
    at your best leisure, this his humble suit.
  artemidorus. o caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit
    that touches caesar nearer. read it, great caesar.
  caesar. what touches us ourself shall be last served.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 artemidorus. delay not, caesar; read it instantly.
  caesar. what, is the fellow mad?
  publius. sirrah, give place.
  cassius. what, urge you your petitions in the street?
    come to the capitol.

      caesar goes up to the senate house, the rest follow.

  popilius. i wish your enterprise today may thrive.
  cassius. what enterprise, popilius?
  popilius. fare you well.
                                             advances to caesar.
  brutus. what said popilius lena?
  cassius. he wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
    i fear our purpose is discovered.
  brutus. look, how he makes to caesar. mark him.
  cassius. casca,
    be sudden, for we fear prevention.
    brutus, what shall be done? if this be known,
    cassius or caesar never shall turn back,
    for i will slay myself.
  brutus. cassius, be constant.
    popilius lena speaks not of our purposes;
    for, look, he smiles, and caesar doth not change.
  cas
 
 ___________________________
 
sius. trebonius knows his time, for, look you, brutus,
    he draws mark antony out of the way.
                                    exeunt antony and trebonius.
  decius. where is metellus cimber? let him
    and presently prefer his suit to caesar.
  brutus. he is address'd; press near and second him.
  cinna. casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
  caesar. are we all ready? what is now amiss
    that caesar and his senate must redress?
  metellus. most high, most mighty, and most puissant caesar,
    metellus cimber throws before thy seat
    an humble heart.                                     kneels.
  caesar. i must prevent thee, cimber.
    these couchings and these lowly courtesies
    might fire the blood of ordinary men

 
 ___________________________
 
rom the true quality
    with that which melteth fools- i mean sweet words,
    low-crooked court'sies, and base spaniel-fawning.
    thy brother by decree is banished.
    if thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
    i spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
    know, caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
    will he be satisfied.
  metellus. is there no voice more worthy than my own,
    to sound more sweetly in great caesar's ear
    for the repealing of my banish'd brother?
  brutus. i kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, caesar,
    desiring thee that publius cimber may
    have an immediate freedom of repeal.
  caesar. what, brutus?
  cassius. pardon, caesar! caesar, pardon!
    as low as to thy foot doth cassius fall
    to beg enfranchisement for publius cimber.
  caesar. i could be well moved, if i were as you;
    if i could pray to move, prayers would move me;
    but i am constant as the northern star,
    of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
    there
 
 ___________________________
 
oth hold his place.
    so in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
    and men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
    yet in the number i do know but one
    that unassailable holds on his rank,
    unshaked of motion; and that i am he,
    let me a little show it, even in this;
    that i was constant cimber should be banish'd,
    and constant do remain to keep him so.
  cinna. o caesar-
  caesar. hence! wilt thou lift up olympus?
  decius. great caesar-
  caesar. doth not brutus bootless kneel?
  casca. speak, hands, for me!
                        casca first, then the other conspirators
                                  and marcus brutus stab caesar.
  caesar. et tu, brute?- then fall, caesar! dies.
  cinna. liberty! freedom! tyranny is dead!
    run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
  cassius. some to the common pulpits and cry out
    "liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
  brutus. people and senators, be not affrighted,
    fly not, stand sti
 
 ___________________________
 
ll; ambition's debt is paid.
  casca. go to the pulpit, brutus.
  decius. and cassius too.
  brutus. where's publius?
  cinna. here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
  metellus. stand fast together, lest some friend of caesar's
    should chance-
  brutus. talk not of standing. publius, good cheer,
    there is no harm intended to your person,
    nor to no roman else. so tell them, publius.
  cassius. and leave us, publius, lest that the people
    rushing on us should do your age some mischief.
  brutus. do so, and let no man abide this deed
    but we the doers.

                        re-enter trebonius.

  cassius. where is antony?
  trebonius. fled to his house amazed.
    men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
    
 
 ___________________________
 
as it were doomsday.
  brutus. fates, we will know your pleasures.
    that we shall die, we know; 'tis but the time
    and drawing days out that men stand upon.
  cassius. why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
    cuts off so many years of fearing death.
  brutus. grant that, and then is death a benefit;
    so are we caesar's friends that have abridged
    his time of fearing death. stoop, romans, stoop,
    and let us bathe our hands in caesar's blood
    up to the elbows, and besmear our swords;
    then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
    and waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
    let's all cry, "peace, freedom, and liberty!"
  cassius. stoop then, and wash. how many ages hence
    shall this our lofty scene be acted over
    i
 
 ___________________________
 
n states unborn and accents yet unknown!
  brutus. how many times shall caesar bleed in sport,
    that now on pompey's basis lies along
    no worthier than the dust!
  cassius. so oft as that shall be,
    so often shall the knot of us be call'd
    the men that gave their country liberty.
  decius. what, shall we forth?
  cassius. ay, every man away.
    brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
    with the most boldest and best hearts of rome.

                        enter a servant.

  brutus. soft, who comes here? a friend of antony's.
  servant. thus, brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
    thus did mark antony bid me fall down,
    and, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
    brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
    caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
    say i love brutus and i honor him;
    say i fear'd caes
 
 ___________________________
 
ar, honor'd him, and loved him.
    if brutus will vouchsafe that antony
    may safely come to him and be resolved
    how caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
    mark antony shall not love caesar dead
    so well as brutus living, but will follow
    the fortunes and affairs of noble brutus
    thorough the hazards of this untrod state
    with all true faith. so says my master antony.
  brutus. thy master is a wise and valiant roman;
    i never thought him worse.
    tell him, so please him come unto this place,
    he shall be satisfied and, by my honor,
    depart untouch'd.
  servant. i'll fetch him presently.                       exit.
  brutus. i know that we shall have him well to friend.
  cassius. i wish we may, but yet have i a mind
    that fears him much, and my misgiving still
    falls shrewdly to the purpose.

                          re-enter antony.

 
 
 ___________________________
 
 brutus. but here comes antony. welcome, mark antony.
  antony. o mighty caesar! dost thou lie so low?
    are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
    shrunk to this little measure? fare thee well.
    i know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
    who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
    if i myself, there is no hour so fit
    as caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument
    of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
    with the most noble blood of all this world.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  i do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
    now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
    fulfill your pleasure. live a thousand years,
    i shall not find myself so apt to die;
    no place will please me so, no means of death,
    as here by caesar, and by you cut off,
    the choice and master spirits of this age.
  brutus. o antony, beg not your death of us!
    though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
    as, by our hands and this our present act
    you see we do, yet see you but our hands
    and this the bleeding business they have done.
    our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
    and pity to the general wrong of rome-
    as fire drives out fire, so pity pity-
    hath done this deed on caesar. for your part,
    to you our swords have leaden points, mark antony;
    our arms in strength 
 
 ___________________________
 
of malice, and our hearts
    of brothers' temper, do receive you in
    with all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
  cassius. your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    in the disposing of new dignities.
  brutus. only be patient till we have appeased
    the multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    and then we will deliver you the cause
    why i, that did love caesar when i struck him,
    have thus proceeded.
  antony. i doubt not of your wisdom.
    let each man render me his bloody hand.
    first, marcus brutus, will i shake with you;
    next, caius cassius, do i take your hand;
    now, decius brutus, yours; now yours, metellus;
    yours, cinna; and, my valiant casca, yours;
    t
 
 ___________________________
 
this:
    then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
  cassius. i blame you not for praising caesar so;
    but what compact mean you to have with us?
    will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
    or shall we on, and not depend on you?
  antony. therefore i took your hands, but was indeed
    sway'd from the point by looking down on caesar.
    friends am i with you all and love you all,
    upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
    why and wherein caesar was dangerous.
  brutus. or else were this a savage spectacle.
    our reasons are so full of good regard
    that were you, antony, the son of caesar,
    you should be satisfied.
  antony. that's all i seek;
    and am moreover suitor that i may
    produce his body to the marketplace,
    and in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
    speak in the order of his funeral.
  brutus. you shall, mark antony.
  cassius. brutus, a word with you.
    [aside to brutus.] you know not what you do. do not consent
    t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat antony speak in his funeral.
    know you how much the people may be moved
    by that which he will utter?
  brutus. by your pardon,
    i will myself into the pulpit first,
    and show the reason of our caesar's death.
    what antony shall speak, i will protest
    he speaks by leave and by permission,
    and that we are contented caesar shall
    have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
    it shall advantage more than do us wrong.
  cassius. i know not what may fall; i like it not.
  brutus. mark antony, here, take you caesar's body.
    you shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
    b
 
 ___________________________
 
ut speak all good you can devise of caesar,
    and say you do't by our permission,
    else shall you not have any hand at all
    about his funeral. and you shall speak
    in the same pulpit whereto i am going,
    after my speech is ended.
  antony. be it so,
    i do desire no more.
  brutus. prepare the body then, and follow us.
                                          exeunt all but antony.
  antony. o, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
    that i am meek and gentle with these butchers!
    thou art the ruins of the noblest man
    that ever lived in the tide of times.
    woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
    over thy wounds now do i prophesy
    (which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
    to beg the voice and utterance of my tongue)
    a cur
 
 ___________________________
 
 rome, a dangerous rome,
    no rome of safety for octavius yet;
    hie hence, and tell him so. yet stay awhile,
    thou shalt not back till i have borne this corse
    into the marketplace. there shall i try,
    in my oration, how the people take
    the cruel issue of these bloody men,
    according to the which thou shalt discourse
    to young octavius of the state of things.
    lend me your hand.                exeunt with caesar's body.




scene ii.
the forum.

enter brutus and cassius, and a throng of citizens.

  citizens. we will be satisfied! let us be satisfied!
  brutus. then follow me and give me audience, friends.
    cassius, go you into the other street
    and part the numbers.
    those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
    those that will follow cassius, go with him;
    and public reasons shall be rendered
    of caesar's death.
  first citizen. i will hear brutus speak.
  second citizen. i will hear cassius and compare their rea
 
 ___________________________
 
sons,
    when severally we hear them rendered.
                               exit cassius, with some citizens.
                                    brutus goes into the pulpit.
  third citizen. the noble brutus is ascended. silence!
  brutus. be patient till the last.
    romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for my cause, and be
    silent, that you may hear. believe me for mine honor, and
have
    respect to mine honor, that you may believe. censure me in
your
    wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge.
if
    there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of caesar's,
to
    him i say that brutus' love to caesar was no less than his.
if
    then that friend demand why brutus rose against caesa
 
 ___________________________
 
as
    valiant, i honor him; but as he was ambitious, i slew him.
there
    is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his
valor,
    and death for his ambition. who is here so base that would be
a
    bondman? if any, speak, for him have i offended. who is here
so
    rude that would not be a roman? if any, speak, for him have i
    offended. who is here so vile that will not love his country?
if
    any, speak, for him have i offended. i pause for a reply.
  all. none, brutus, none.
  brutus. then none have i offended. i have done no more to
caesar
    than you shall do to brutus. the question of his death is
    enrolled in the capitol, his glory not extenuated, wherein he
was
    worthy, nor his offenses enforced, for which he suffered
death.

              enter antony and others, with caesar's body.

    here comes his body, mourned by mark antony, who, though he
had
    no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying,
a
    place in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the commonwealth, as which of you shall not? with
this i
    depart- that, as i slew my best lover for the good of rome, i
    have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my
country
    to need my death.
  all. live, brutus, live, live!
  first citizen. bring him with triumph home unto his house.
  second citizen. give him a statue with his ancestors.
  third citizen. let him be caesar.
  fourth citizen. caesar's better parts
    shall be crown'd in brutus.
  first citizen. we'll bring him to his house with shouts and
    clamors.
  brutus. my countrymen-
  second citizen. peace! silence! brutus speaks.
  first citizen. peace, ho!
  brutus. good countrymen, let me depart alone,
    and, for my sake, stay here with antony.
    do grace to caesar's corse, and grace his speech
    tending to caesar's glories, which mark antony,
    by our permission, is allow'd to make.
    i do entreat you, not a man depart,
    save i alone, till anton
 
 ___________________________
 
y have spoke.                  exit.
  first citizen. stay, ho, and let us hear mark antony.
  third citizen. let him go up into the public chair;
    we'll hear him. noble antony, go up.
  antony. for brutus' sake, i am beholding to you.
                                           goes into the pulpit.
  fourth citizen. what does he say of brutus?
  third citizen. he says, for brutus' sake,
    he finds himself beholding to us all.
  fourth citizen. 'twere best he speak no harm of brutus here.
  first citizen. this caesar was a tyrant.
  third citizen. nay, that's certain.
    we are blest that rome is rid of him.
  second citizen. peace! let us hear what antony can say.
  antony. you gentle romans-
  all. peace, ho! let us hear him.
  antony. friends, romans, countrymen, lend me your ears!
    i come to bury caesar, not to praise him.
    the evil that men do lives after them,
    the good is oft interred with their bones;
    so let it be with caesar. the noble bru
 
 ___________________________
 
tus
    hath told you caesar was ambitious;
    if it were so, it was a grievous fault,
    and grievously hath caesar answer'd it.
    here, under leave of brutus and the rest-
    for brutus is an honorable man;
    so are they all, all honorable men-
    come i to speak in caesar's funeral.
    he was my friend, faithful and just to me;
    but brutus says he was ambitious,
    and brutus is an honorable man.
    he hath brought many captives home to rome,
    whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
    did this in caesar seem ambitious?
    when that the poor have cried, caesar hath wept;
    ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
    yet brutus says he was ambitious,
    and brutus is an honorable man.
    you all did see that on the lupercal
    i thrice presented him a kingly crown,
    which he did thrice refuse. was this ambition?
    yet brutus says he w
 
 ___________________________
 
as ambitious,
    and sure he is an honorable man.
    i speak not to disprove what brutus spoke,
    but here i am to speak what i do know.
    you all did love him once, not without cause;
    what cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
    o judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
    and men have lost their reason. bear with me;
    my heart is in the coffin there with caesar,
    and i must pause till it come back to me.
  first citizen. methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
  second citizen. if thou consider rightly of the matter,
    caesar has had gr
 
 ___________________________
 
citizen. if it be found so, some will dear abide it.
  second citizen. poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with
weeping.
  third citizen. there's not a nobler man in rome than antony.
  fourth citizen. now mark him, he begins again to speak.
  antony. but yesterday the word of caesar might
    have stood against the world. now lies he there,
    and none so poor to do him reverence.
    o masters! if i were disposed to stir
    your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
    i should do brutus wrong and cassius wrong,
    who, you all know, are honorable men.
    i will not do them wrong; i rather choose
    to wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
    than i will wrong such honorable men.
    but here's a parchment with the seal of caesar;
    i found it in his closet, 'tis his will.
    let but the commons hear this testament-
    which, pardon me, i do not mean to read-
    and they would go and kiss dead caesar's wounds
    and dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
 
 ___________________________
 
d citizen. room for antony, most noble antony.
  antony. nay, press not so upon me, stand far off.
  all. stand back; room, bear back!
  antony. if you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
    you all do know this mantle. i remember
    the first time ever caesar put it on;
    'twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
    that day he overcame the nervii.
    look, in this place ran cassius' dagger through;
    see what a rent the envious casca made;
    through this the well-beloved brutus stabb'd;
    and as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
    mark how the blood of caesar follow'd it,
    as rushing out of doors, to be resolved
    if brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
    for brutus, as you know, was caesar's angel.
    judge, o you gods, how dearly caesar loved him!
    this was the most unkindest cut of all;
    for when the noble caesar saw him stab,
    ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
    quite vanquish'd him. then burst his mighty heart,
    and,
 
 ___________________________
 
e there! hear the noble antony.
  second citizen. we'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die
with
    him.
  antony. good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
    to such a sudden flood of mutiny.
    they that have done this deed are honorable.
    what private griefs they have, alas, i know not,
    that made them do it. they are wise and honorable,
    and will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
    i come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
    i am no orator, as brutus is;
    but, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
    that love my friend, and that they know full well
    that gave me public leave to speak of him.
    for i have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
    action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
    to stir men's blood. i only speak right on;
    i tell you that which you yourselves do know;
    show you sweet caesar's wounds, poor dumb mouths,
    and bid them speak for me. but were i brutus,
    and brutus antony, there wer
 
 ___________________________
 
e an antony
    would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue
    in every wound of caesar that should move
    the stones of rome to rise and mutiny.
  all. we'll mutiny.
  first citizen. we'll burn the house of brutus.
  third citizen. away, then! come, seek the conspirators.
  antony. yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.
  all. peace, ho! hear antony, most noble antony!
  antony. why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
    wherein hath caesar thus deserved your loves?
    alas, you know not; i must tell you then.
    you have forgot the will i told you of.
  all. most true, the will! let's stay and hear the will.
  antony. here is the will, and under caesar's seal.
    to every roman 
 
 ___________________________
 
             exeunt citizens with the body.
  antony. now let it work. mischief, thou art afoot,
    take thou what course thou wilt.

                        enter a servant.

    how now, fellow?
  servant. sir, octavius is already come to rome.
  antony. where is he?
  servant. he and lepidus are at caesar's house.
  antony. and thither will i straight to visit him.
    he comes upon a wish. fortune is merry,
    and in this mood will give us anything.
  servant. i heard him say brutus and cassius
    are rid like madmen through the gates of rome.
  antony. be like they had some notice of the people,
    how i had moved them. bring me to octavius.          exeunt.




scene iii.
a street.

enter cinna the poet.

  cinna. i dreamt tonight that i did feast with caesar,
    and things unluckily charge my fantasy.
    i have no will to wander forth of doors,
    yet something leads me forth.

                        enter citizens.

  first citizen. what is yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ird citizen. your name, sir, truly.
  cinna. truly, my name is cinna.
  first citizen. tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.
  cinna. i am cinna the poet, i am cinna the poet.
  fourth citizen. tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his
bad
    verses.
  cinna. i am not cinna the conspirator.
  fourth citizen. it is no matter, his name's cinna. pluck but
his
    name out of his heart, and turn him going.
  third citizen. tear him, tear him! come, brands, ho,
firebrands. to
    brutus', to cassius'; burn all. some to decius' house, and
some
    to casca's, some to ligarius'. away, go!             exeunt.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distribut
 
 ___________________________
 
store of provender.
    it is a creature that i teach to fight,
    to wind, to stop, to run directly on,
    his corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.
    and, in some taste, is lepidus but so:
    he must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;
    a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
    on objects, arts, and imitations,
    which, out of use and staled by other men,
    begin his fashion. do not talk of him
    but as a property. and now, octavius,
    listen great things. brutus and cassius
    are levying powers; we must straight make head;
    therefore let our alliance be combined,
    our best friends made, our means stretch'd;
    and let us presently go sit in council,
    how covert matters may be best disclosed,
    and open perils surest answered.
  octavius. let us do so, for we are at the stake,
    and bay'd about with many enemies;
    and some that smile have in their hearts, i fear,
    millions of mischiefs.                               exeun
 
 ___________________________
 
t.




scene ii.
camp near sardis. before brutus' tent. drum.

enter brutus, lucilius, lucius, and soldiers; titinius and
pindarus meet them.

  brutus. stand, ho!
  lucilius. give the word, ho, and stand.
  brutus. what now, lucilius, is cassius near?
  lucilius. he is at hand, and pindarus is come
    to do you salutation from his master.
  brutus. he greets me well. your master, pindarus,
    in his own change, or by ill officers,
    hath given me some worthy cause to wish
    things done undone; but if he be at hand,
    i shall be satisfied.
  pindarus. i do not doubt
    but that my noble master will appear
    such as he is, full of regard and honor.
  brutus. he is not doubted. a word, lucilius,
    how he received you. let me be resolved.
  lucilius. with courtesy and with respect enough,
    but not with such familiar
 
 ___________________________
 
 instances,
    nor with such free and friendly conference,
    as he hath used of old.
  brutus. thou hast described
    a hot friend cooling. ever note, lucilius,
    when love begins to sicken and decay
    it useth an enforced ceremony.
    there are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
    but hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
    make gallant show and promise of their mettle;
    but when they should endure the bloody spur,
    they fall their crests and like deceitful jades
    sink in the trial. comes his army on?
  lucilius. they meant his night in sard is to be quart
 
 ___________________________
 
er'd;
    the greater part, the horse in general,
    are come with cassius.                     low march within.
  brutus. hark, he is arrived.
    march gently on to meet him.

                  enter cassius and his powers.

  cassius. stand, ho!
  brutus. stand, ho! speak the word along.
  first soldier. stand!
  second soldier. stand!
  third soldier. stand!
  cassius. most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
  brutus. judge me, you gods! wrong i mine enemies?
    and, if not so, how should i wrong a brother?
  cassius. brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
    and when you do them-
  brutus. cassius, be content,
    speak your griefs softly, i do know you well.
    before the eyes of both our armies here,
    which should perceive nothing but love from us,
    let us not wrangle. bid them move away;
    then in my tent, cassius, enlarge your griefs,
    and i will give you audience.
  ca
 
 ___________________________
 
ssius. pindarus,
    bid our commanders lead their charges off
    a little from this ground.
  brutus. lucilius, do you the like, and let no man
    come to our tent till we have done our conference.
    let lucius and titinius guard our door.             exeunt.




scene iii.
brutus' tent.

enter brutus and cassius.

  cassius. that you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
    you have condemn'd and noted lucius pella
    for taking bribes here of the sardians,
    wherein my letters, praying on his side,
    because i knew the man, were slighted off.
  brutus. you wrong'd yourself to write in such a case.
  cassius. in such a time as this it is not meet
    that every nice offense should bear his comment.
  brutus. let me tell you, cassius, you yourself
    are much condemn'd to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve an itching palm,
    to sell and mart your offices for gold
    to undeservers.
  cassius. i an itching palm?
    you know that you are brutus that speaks this,
    or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
  brutus. the name of cassius honors this corruption,
    and chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
  cassius. chastisement?
  brutus. remember march, the ides of march remember.
    did not great julius bleed for justice' sake?
    what villain touch'd his body, that did stab,
    and not for justice? what, shall one of us,
    that struck the foremost man of all this world
    but for supporting robbers, shall we now
    contaminate our fingers with base bribes
    and sell the mighty space of our large honors
    for so much trash as may be grasped thus?
    i had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
    than such 
 
 ___________________________
 
a roman.
  cassius. brutus, bait not me,
    i'll not endure it. you forget yourself
    to hedge me in. i am a soldier, i,
    older in practice, abler than yourself
    to make conditions.
  brutus. go to, you are not, cassius.
  cassius. i am.
  brutus. i say you are not.
  cassius. urge me no more, i shall forget myself;
    have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.
  brutus. away, slight man!
  cassius. is't possible?
  brutus. hear me, for i will speak.
    must i give way and room to your rash choler?
    shall i be frighted when a madman stares?
  cassius. o gods, ye gods! must i endure all this?
  brutus. all this? ay, more. fret till your proud heart break.
    go show your slaves how choleric you are,
    and make your bondmen tremble. must i bouge?
    must i observe you? must i stand and crouch
    under your testy humor? by the gods,
    you shall digest the venom of your spleen,
    though it do s
 
 ___________________________
 
plit you, for, from this day forth,
    i'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
    when you are waspish.
  cassius. is it come to this?
  brutus. you say you are a better soldier:
    let it appear so, make your vaunting true,
    and it shall please me well. for mine own part,
    i shall be glad to learn of noble men.
  cassius. you wrong me every way, you wrong me, brutus.
    i said, an elder soldier, not a better.
    did i say "better"?
  brutus. if you did, i care not.
  cassius. when caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
  brutus. peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.
  cassius. i durst not?
  brutus. no.
  cassius. what, durst not tempt him?
  brutus. for your life you durst not.
  cassius. do not presume too much upon my love;
    i may do that i shall be sorry for.
  brutus. you have done that you should be sorry for.
    there is no terror, cassius, in your threats,
    for i am arm'd so strong in h
 
 ___________________________
 
e as the idle wind
    which i respect not. i did send to you
    for certain sums of gold, which you denied me,
    for i can raise no money by vile means.
    by heaven, i had rather coin my heart
    and drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
    from the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
    by any indirection. i did send
    to you for gold to pay my legions,
    which you denied me. was that done like cassius?
    should i have answer'd caius cassius so?
    when marcus brutus grows so covetous
    to lock such rascal counters from his friends,
    be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
    dash him to pieces!
  cassius. i denied you not.
  brutus. you did.
  cassius. i did not. he was but a fool
    that brought my answer back. brutus hath rived my heart.
    a friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
    but brutus makes mine greater than they are.
  brutus. i do not, till you practise them on me.
  cassius. you love me not.
  brutus. i do not 
 
 ___________________________
 
like your faults.
  cassius. a friendly eye could never see such faults.
  brutus. a flatterer's would not, though they do appear
    as huge as high olympus.
  cassius. come, antony, and young octavius, come,
    revenge yourselves alone on cassius,
    for cassius is aweary of the world:
    hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
    check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
    set in a notebook, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
    to cast into my teeth. o, i could weep
    my spirit from mine eyes! there is my dagger,
    and here my naked breast; wit
 
 ___________________________
 
hin, a heart
    dearer than pluto's mine, richer than gold.
    if that thou best a roman, take it forth;
    i, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
    strike, as thou didst at caesar, for i know,
    when thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
    than ever thou lovedst cassius.
  brutus. sheathe your dagger.
    be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
    do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
    o cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,
    that carries anger as the flint bears fire,
    who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark
    and straight is cold again.
  cassius. hath cassius lived
    to be but mirth and laughter to his brutus,
    when grief and blood ill-temper'd vexeth him?
  brutus. when i spoke that, i was ill-temper'd too.
  cassius. do you confe
 
 ___________________________
 
ss so much? give me your hand.
  brutus. and my heart too.
  cassius. o brutus!
  brutus. what's the matter?
  cassius. have not you love enough to bear with me
    when that rash humor which my mother gave me
    makes me forgetful?
  brutus. yes, cassius, and from henceforth,
    when you are overearnest with your brutus,
    he'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
  poet. [within.] let me go in to see the generals.
    there is some grudge between 'em, 'tis not meet
    they be alone.
  lucilius. [within.] you shall not come to them.
  poet. [within.] nothing but death shall stay me.

      enter poet, followed by lucilius, titinius, and lucius.

  cassius. how now, what's the matter?
  poet. for shame, you generals! what do you mean?
    love, and be friends, as two such men should be;

 
 ___________________________
 
    for i have seen more years, i'm sure, than ye.
  cassius. ha, ha! how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
  brutus. get you hence, sirrah; saucy fellow, hence!
  cassius. bear with him, brutus; 'tis his fashion.
  brutus. i'll know his humor when he knows his time.
    what should the wars do with these jigging fools?
    companion, hence!
  cassius. away, away, be gone!                       exit poet.
  brutus. lucilius and titinius, bid the commanders
    prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
  cassius. and come yourselves and bring messala with you
    immediately to us.             exeunt lucilius and titinius.
  brutus. lucius, a bowl of wine!                   exit lucius.
  cassius. i did not think you could have been so angry.
  brutus. o cassius, i am sick of many griefs.
  cassius. of your philosophy you make no use,
    if you give place to accidental evils.
  brutus. no man be
 
 ___________________________
 
ars sorrow better. portia is dead.
  cassius. ha? portia?
  brutus. she is dead.
  cassius. how 'scaped killing when i cross'd you so?
    o insupportable and touching loss!
    upon what sickness?
  brutus. impatient of my absence,
    and grief that young octavius with mark antony
    have made themselves so strong- for with her death
    that tidings came- with this she fell distract,
    and (her attendants absent) swallow'd fire.
  cassius. and died so?
  brutus. even so.
  cassius. o ye immortal gods!

               re-enter lucius, with wine and taper.

  brutus. speak no more of her. give me a bowl of wine.
    in this i bury all unkindness, cassius.              drinks.
  cassius. my heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
  fill, lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
  i cannot drink too much of brutus' love.               drinks.
  brutus. come in, titinius!                        exit lucius.

                 re-enter titinius, 
 
 ___________________________
 
with messala.

    welcome, good messala.
    now sit we close about this taper here,
    and call in question our necessities.
  cassius. portia, art thou gone?
  brutus. no more, i pray you.
    messala, i have here received letters
    that young octavius and mark antony
    come down upon us with a mighty power,
    bending their expedition toward philippi.
  messala. myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.
  brutus. with what addition?
  messala. that by proscription and bills of outlawry
    octavius, antony, and lepidus
    have put to death an hundred senators.
  brutus. there in our letters do not well agree;
    mine speak of seventy senators that died
    by their proscriptions, cicero being one.
  cassius. cicero one!
  messala. cicero is dead,
    and by that order of proscription.
    had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
  brutus. no, messala.
  messala. nor nothing in your l
 
 ___________________________
 
etters writ of her?
  brutus. nothing, messala.
  messala. that, methinks, is strange.
  brutus. why ask you? hear you aught of her in yours?
  messala. no, my lord.
  brutus. now, as you are a roman, tell me true.
  messala. then like a roman bear the truth i tell:
    for certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
  brutus. why, farewell, portia. we must die, messala.
    with meditating that she must die once
    i have the patience to endure it now.
  messala. even so great men great losses should endure.
  cassius. i have as much of this in art as you,
    but yet my nature could not bear it so.
  brutus. well, to our work alive. what do you think
    of marching to philippi presently?
  cassius. i do not think it good.
  brutus. your reason?
  cassius. this it is:
    'tis better that the enemy see
 
 ___________________________
 
k us;
    so shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
    doing himself offense, whilst we lying still
    are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
  brutus. good reasons must of force give place to better.
    the people 'twixt philippi and this ground
    do stand but in a forced affection,
    for they have grudged us contribution.
    the enemy, marching along by them,
    by them shall make a fuller number up,
    come on refresh'd, new-added, and encouraged;
    from which advantage shall we cut him off
    if at philippi we do face him there,
    these people at our back.
  cassius. hear me, good brother.
  brutus. under your pard
 
 ___________________________
 
our cause is ripe:
    the enemy increaseth every day;
    we, at the height, are ready to decline.
    there is a tide in the affairs of men
    which taken at the flood leads on to fortune;
    omitted, all the voyage of their life
    is bound in shallows and in miseries.
    on such a full sea are we now afloat,
    and we must take the current when it serves,
    or lose our ventures.
  cassius. then, with your will, go on;
    we'll along ourselves and meet them at philippi.
  brutus. the deep of night is crept upon our talk,
    and nature must obey necessity,
    which we will niggard with a little rest.
    there is no more to say?
  cassius. no more. good night.
    early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
  brutus. lucius!

                       re-enter lucius.

    my gown.                                        exit lucius.
    farewell, good messala;
    good night, titinius; noble, noble cassius,
    good night and good repose.
  cassius. o my dear br
 
 ___________________________
 
other!
    this was an ill beginning of the night.
    never come such division 'tween our souls!
    let it not, brutus.
  brutus. everything is well.
  cassius. good night, my lord.
  brutus. good night, good brother.
  titinius. messala. good night, lord brutus.
  brutus. farewell, everyone.
                                          exeunt all but brutus.

               re-enter lucius, with the gown.

    give me the gown. where is thy instrument?
  lucius. here in the tent.
  brutus. what, thou speak'st drowsily?
    poor knave, i blame thee not, thou art o'erwatch'd.
    call claudio and some other of my men,
    i'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
  lucius. varro and claudio!

                   enter varro and claudio.

  varro. calls my lord?
  brutus. i pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
    it may be i s
 
 ___________________________
 
hall raise you by and by
    on business to my brother cassius.
  varro. so please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
  brutus. i would not have it so. lie down, good sirs.
    it may be i shall otherwise bethink me.
    look lucius, here's the book i sought for so;
    i put it in the pocket of my gown.
                                     varro and claudio lie down.
  lucius. i was sure your lordship did not give it me.
  brutus. bear with me, good boy, i am much forgetful.
    canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
    and touch thy instrument a strain or two?
  lucius. ay, my lord, an't please you.
  brutus. it does, my boy.
    i trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
  lucius. it is my duty, sir.
  brutus. i should not urge thy duty past thy might;
    i know young bloods look for a time of rest.
  lucius. i have slept, my lord, already.
  brutus. it was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
  
 
 ___________________________
 
 let me see; is not the leaf turn'd down
    where i left reading? here it is, i think.        sits down.

                 enter the ghost of caesar.

    how ill this taper burns! ha, who comes here?
    i think it is the weakness of mine eyes
    that shapes this monstrous apparition.
    it comes upon me. art thou anything?
    art thou some god, some angel, or some devil
    that makest my blood cold and my hair to stare?
    speak to me what thou art.
  ghost. thy evil spirit, brutus.
  brutus. why comest thou?
  ghost. to tell thee thou shalt see me at philippi.
  brutus. well, then i shall see thee again?
  ghost. ay, at philippi.
  brutus. why, i will see thee at philippi then.     exit ghost.
    now i have taken heart thou vanishest.
    ill spirit, i would hold more talk with thee.
    boy! lucius! varro! claudio! sirs, awake!
    claudio!
  lucius. the strings, my lord, are false.
  brutus. he thinks he still is at his instrument.
    lucius, awake!
  lu
 
 ___________________________
 
cius. my lord?
  brutus. didst thou dream, lucius, that thou so criedst out?
  lucius. my lord, i do not know that i did cry.
  brutus. yes, that thou didst. didst thou see anything?
  lucius. nothing, my lord.
  brutus. sleep again, lucius. sirrah claudio!
    [to varro.] fellow thou, awake!
  varro. my lord?
  claudio. my lord?
  brutus. why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
  varro. claudio. did we, my lord?
  brutus. ay, saw you anything?
  varro. no, my lord, i saw nothing.
  claudio. nor i, my lord.
  brutus. go and commend me to my brother cassius;
    bid him set on his powers betimes before,
    and we will follow.
  varro. claudio. it shall be done, my lord.             exeunt.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 'tis not so.

                    enter a messenger.

  messenger. prepare you, generals.
    the enemy comes on in gallant show;
    their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
    and something to be done immediately.
  antony. octavius, lead your battle softly on,
    upon the left hand of the even field.
  octavius. upon the right hand i, keep thou the left.
  antony. why do you cross me in this exigent?
  octavius. i do not cross you, but i will do so.

      march. drum. enter brutus, cassius, and their army;
           lucilius, titinius, messala, and others.

  brutus. they stand, and would have parley.
  cassius. stand fast, titinius; we must out and talk.
  octavius. mark antony, shall we give sign of battle?
  antony. no, caesar, we will answer on their charge.
    make forth, the generals would have some words.
  octavius. stir not until the signal not until the signal.
  brutus. words before blows. is it so, countrymen?
  octavius. not that we love words be
 
 ___________________________
 
tter, as you do.
  brutus. good words are better than bad strokes, octavius.
  antony. in your bad strokes, brutus, you give good words.
    witness the hole you made in caesar's heart,
    crying "long live! hail, caesar!"
  cassius. antony,
    the posture of your blows are yet unknown;
    but for your words, they rob the hybla bees,
    and leave them honeyless.
  antony. not stingless too.
  brutus. o, yes, and soundless too,
    for you have stol'n their buzzing, antony,
    and very wisely threat before you sting.
  antony. villains! you did not so when your vile daggers
    hack'd one another in the sides of caesar.
    you show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
    and bow'd like bondmen, kissing caesar's feet;
    whilst damned casca, like a cur, behind
    strooke caesar on the neck. o you flatterers!
  cassius. flatterers? now, brutus, thank yourself.
    th
 
 ___________________________
 
is tongue had not offended so today,
    if cassius might have ruled.
  octavius. come, come, the cause. if arguing make us sweat,
    the proof of it will turn to redder drops.
    look,
    i draw a sword against conspirators;
    when think you that the sword goes up again?
    never, till caesar's three and thirty wounds
    be well avenged, or till another caesar
    have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
  brutus. caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,
    unless thou bring'st them with thee.
  octavius. so i hope,
    i was not born to die on brutus' sword.
  brutus. o, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
  cassius. a peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
    join'd with a masker and a reveler!
  antony. old cassius still!
  octavius. come, antony, away!
    defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
    if you dare fight
 
 ___________________________
 
 today, come to the field;
    if not, when you have stomachs.
                        exeunt octavius, antony, and their army.
  cassius. why, now, blow and, swell billow, and swim bark!
    the storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
  brutus. ho, lucilius! hark, a word with you.
  lucilius. [stands forth.] my lord?
                             brutus and lucilius converse apart.
  cassius. messala!
  messala. [stands forth.] what says my general?
  cassius. messala,
    this is my birthday, as this very day
    was cassius born. give me thy hand, messala.
    be thou my witness that, against my will,
    as pompey was, am i compell'd to set
    upon one battle all our liberties.
    you know that i held epicurus strong,
    and his opinion. now i change my mind,
    and partly credit things that do presage.
    coming from sardi
 
 ___________________________
 
rom our soldiers' hands,
    who to philippi here consorted us.
    this morning are they fled away and gone,
    and in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
    fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,
    as we were sickly prey. their shadows seem
    a canopy most fatal, under which
    our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
  messala. believe not so.
  cassius. i but believe it partly,
    for i am fresh of spirit and resolved
    to meet all perils very constantly.
  brutus. even so, lucilius.
  cassius. now, most noble brutus,
    the gods today stand friendly that we may,
    lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
    but, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
    let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    if we do lose this battle, then is this
    the very last time we shall speak together.
    what are you then determined to do?
  brutus. even by the rule of that philosophy
    by which i did blame cato for the death
    which he 
 
 ___________________________
 
did give himself- i know not how,
    but i do find it cowardly and vile,
    for fear of what might fall, so to prevent
    the time of life- arming myself with patience
    to stay the providence of some high powers
    that govern us below.
  cassius. then, if we lose this battle,
    you are contented to be led in triumph
    thorough the streets of rome?
  brutus. no, cassius, no. think not, thou noble roman,
    that ever brutus will go bound to rome;
    he bears too great a mind. but this same day
    must end that work the ides of march begun.
    and whether we shall meet again i know not.
    therefore our everlasting farewell take.
    forever, and forever, farewell, cassius!
    if we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
    if not, why then this parting was well made.
  cassius. forever and forever farewell, brutus!
    if we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
    if not, 'tis true this parting was wel
 
 ___________________________
 
l made.
  brutus. why then, lead on. o, that a man might know
    the end of this day's business ere it come!
    but it sufficeth that the day will end,
    and then the end is known. come, ho! away!           exeunt.




scene ii.
the field of battle.

alarum. enter brutus and messala.

  brutus. ride, ride, messala, ride, and give these bills
    unto the legions on the other side.             loud alarum.
    let them set on at once, for i perceive
    but cold demeanor in octavia's wing,
    and sudden push gives them the overthrow.
    ride, ride, messala. let them all come down.         exeunt.




scene iii.
another part of the field.

alarums. enter cassius and titinius.

  cassius. o, look, titinius, look, the villains fly!
    myself have to mine own turn'd ene
 
 ___________________________
 
my.
    this ensign here of mine was turning back;
    i slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  titinius. o cassius, brutus gave the word too early,
    who, having some advantage on octavius,
    took it too eagerly. his soldiers fell to spoil,
    whilst we by antony are all enclosed.

                       enter pindarus.

  pindarus. fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    mark antony is in your tents, my lord;
    fly, therefore, noble cassius, fly far off.
  cassius. this hill is far enough. look, look, titinius:
    are those my tents where i perceive the fire?
  titinius. they are, my lor
 
 ___________________________
 
now,
    guide thou the sword. [pindarus stabs him.] caesar, thou art
      revenged,
    even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  dies.
  pindarus. so, i am free, yet would not so have been,
    durst i have done my will. o cassius!
    far from this country pindarus shall run,
    where never roman shall take note of him.              exit.

                re-enter titinius with messala.

  messala. it is but change, titinius, for octavius
    is overthrown by noble brutus' power,
    as cassius' legions are by antony.
  titinius. these tidings would well comfort cassius.
  messala. where did you leave him?
  titinius. all disconsolate,
    with pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
  messala. is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  titinius. he lies not like the living. o my heart!
  messala. is not that he?
  titinius. no, this was he, messala,
    but cassius is no more. o setting sun,
    as in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
    so in his
 
 ___________________________
 
ers come; our deeds are done!
    mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
  messala. mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
    o hateful error, melancholy's child,
    why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    the things that are not? o error, soon conceived,
    thou never comest unto a happy birth,
    but kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
  titinius. what, pindarus! where art thou, pindarus?
  messala. seek him, titinius, whilst i go to meet
    the noble brutus, thrusting this report
    into his ears. i may say "thrusting" it,
    for piercing steel and darts envenomed
    shall be as welcome to the ears of brutus
    as tidings of this sight.
  titinius. hie you, messala,
    and i will seek for pindarus the while.        exit messala.
    why didst thou send me forth, brave cassius?
    did i not meet thy friends? and did not they
    put on my brows this wreath of victory,
    and bid me give it thee? didst thou not hear their shouts?
 
 
 ___________________________
 
   alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!
    but, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
    thy brutus bid me give it thee, and i
    will do his bidding. brutus, come apace,
    and see how i regarded caius cassius.
    by your leave, gods, this is a roman's part.
    come, cassius' sword, and find titinius' heart.
                                                  kills himself.

       alarum. re-enter messala, with brutus, young cato,
                         and others.

  brutus. where, where, messala, doth his body lie?
  messala. lo, yonder, and titinius mourning it.
  brutus. titinius' face is upward.
  cato. he is slain.
  brutus. o julius caesar, thou art mighty yet!
    thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
    in our own proper entrails.                     low alarums.
  cato. brave titinius!
    look whe'er he have not crown'd dead cassius!
  brutus. are yet two romans living such 
 
 ___________________________
 
  i shall find time, cassius, i shall find time.
    come therefore, and to thasos send his body;
    his funerals shall not be in our camp,
    lest it discomfort us. lucilius, come,
    and come, young cato; let us to the field.
    labio and flavio, set our battles on.
    'tis three o'clock, and romans, yet ere night
    we shall try fortune in a second fight.              exeunt.




scene iv.
another part of the field.

alarum. enter, fighting, soldiers of both armies; then brutus,
young cato,
lucilius, and others.

  brutus. yet, countrymen, o, yet hold up your heads!
  cato. what bastard doth not? who will go with me?
    i will proclaim my name about the field.
    i am the son of marcus cato, ho!
    a foe to tyrants, and my country's friend.
    i am the son of marcus cato, ho!
  brutus. and i am brutus, marcus brutus, i;
    brutus, my country's friend; know me for brutus!       exit.
  lucilius. o young and noble cato, art thou down?
    why, now thou
 
 ___________________________
 
 diest as bravely as titinius,
    and mayst be honor'd, being cato's son.
  first soldier. yield, or thou diest.
  lucilius. only i yield to die.
    [offers money.] there is so much that thou wilt kill me
straight:
    kill brutus, and be honor'd in his death.
  first soldier. we must not. a noble prisoner!
  second soldier. room, ho! tell antony, brutus is ta'en.
  first soldier. i'll tell the news. here comes the general.

                         enter antony.

    brutus is ta'en, brutus is ta'en, my lord.
  antony. where is he?
  lucilius. safe, antony, brutus is safe enough.
    i dare assure thee that no enemy
    shall ever take alive the noble brutus;
    the gods defend him from so great a shame!
    when you do find him, or alive or dead,
    he will be found like brutus, like himself.
  antony. this is not brutus, friend, but, i assure you,
    a prize no less in worth. keep this man safe,
    give him all kindness; i had rather have
    such
 
 ___________________________
 
 men my friends than enemies. go on,
    and see wheer brutus be alive or dead,
    and bring us word unto octavius' tent
    how everything is chanced.                           exeunt.




scene v.
another part of the field.

enter brutus, dardanius, clitus, strato, and volumnius.

  brutus. come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
  clitus. statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
    he came not back. he is or ta'en or slain.
  brutus. sit thee down, clitus. slaying is the word:
    it is a deed in fashion. hark thee, clitus.        whispers.
  clitus. what, i, my lord? no, not for all the world.
  brutus. peace then, no words.
  clitus. i'll rather kill myself.
  brutus. hark thee, dardanius.                        whispers.
  dardanius. shall i do such a deed?
  clitus. o dardanius!
  dardanius. o clitus!
  clitus. what ill request did brutus make to thee?
  dardanius. to kill him, clitus. look, he meditates.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
clitus. now is that noble vessel full of grief,
    that it runs over even at his eyes.
  brutus. come hither, good volumnius, list a word.
  volumnius. what says my lord?
  brutus. why, this, volumnius:
    the ghost of caesar hath appear'd to me
    two several times by night; at sardis once,
    and this last night here in philippi fields.
    i know my hour is come.
  volumnius. not so, my lord.
  brutus. nay i am sure it is, volumnius.
    thou seest the world, volumnius, how it goes;
    our enemies have beat us to the pit;            low alarums.
    it is more worthy to leap in ourselves
    than tarry till they push us. good volumnius,
    thou know'st that we two went to school together;
    even for that our love of old, i prithee,
    hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst i run on it.
  volumnius. that's not an office for a friend, my lord.
                                          
 
 ___________________________
 
         alarum still.
  clitus. fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
  brutus. farewell to you, and you, and you, volumnius.
    strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
    farewell to thee too, strato. countrymen,
    my heart doth joy that yet in all my life
    i found no man but he was true to me.
    i shall have glory by this losing day,
    more than octavius and mark antony
    by this vile conquest shall attain unto.
    so, fare you well at once, for brutus' tongue
    hath almost ended his life's history.
    night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest
    that have but labor'd to attain this hour.
                            alarum. cry within, "fly, fly, fly!"
  clitus. fly, my lord, fly.
  brutus. hence! i will follow.
                        exeunt clitus, dardanius, and volumnius.
    i prithee, strato, stay thou by thy lord.
    thou art a fellow of a good respect;
    thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
    hold th
 
 ___________________________
 
en my sword, and turn away thy face,
    while i do run upon it. wilt thou, strato?
  strato. give me your hand first. fare you well, my lord.
  brutus. farewell, good strato.              runs on his sword.
    caesar, now be still;
    i kill'd not thee with half so good a will.            dies.

     alarum. retreat. enter octavius, antony, messala,
                 lucilius, and the army.

  octavius. what man is that?
  messala. my master's man. strato, where is thy master?
  strato. free from the bondage you are in, messala:
    the conquerors can but make a fire of him;
    for brutus only overcame himself,
    and no man el
 
 ___________________________
 
se hath honor by his death.
  lucilius. so brutus should be found. i thank thee, brutus,
    that thou hast proved lucilius' saying true.
  octavius. all that served brutus, i will entertain them.
    fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
  strato. ay, if messala will prefer me to you.
  octavius. do so, good messala.
  messala. how died my master, strato?
  strato. i held the sword, and he did run on it.
  messala. octavius, then take him to follow thee
    that did the latest service to my master.
  antony. this was the noblest roman of them all.
    all the conspirators, save only he,
    did that they did in envy of great caesar;
    he only, i