of the triumvirate
  marcus brutus, leader of the conspiracy against caesar
  cassius, instigator of the conspiracy
  casca,          conspirator against caesar
  trebonius,           "          "     "
  caius ligarius,      "          "     "
  decius brutus,       "          "     "
  metellus cimber,     "          "     "
  cinna,               "          "     "
  calpurnia, wife of caesar
  portia, wife of brutus
  cicero,     senator
  popilius,      "
  popilius lena, "
  flavius, tribune
  marullus, tribune
  cato,     supportor of brutus
  lucilius,     "     "    "
  titinius,     "     "    "
  messala,      "     "    "
  volumnius,    "     "    "
  artemidorus, a teacher of rhetoric
  cinna, a poet
  varro,     servant to brutus
  clitus,       "    "     "
  claudio,      "    "     "
  strato,       "    "     "
  lucius,       "    "     "
  dardanius,    "    "     "
  pindarus, servant to cassius
  the ghost of caesar
  a soothsayer
  a poe
 
 ___________________________
 
 project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



scene: rome, the conspirators' camp near sardis,  and the plains
of philippi.


act i. scene i.
rome. a street.

enter flavius, marullus, and certain commoners.

  flavius. hence, home, you idle creatures, get you home.
    is this a holiday? what, know you not,
    being mechanical, you ought not walk
    upon a laboring day without the sign
    of your profession? speak, what trade art thou?
  first commoner. why, sir, a carpenter.
  marullus. where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
    what dost thou with thy best apparel on?
    you, sir, what trade are you?
  second commoner. truly, sir, in respect of 
 
 ___________________________
 
, a cobbler.
  marullus. but what trade art thou? answer me directly.
  second commoner. a trade, sir, that, i hope, i may use with a
safe
    conscience, which is indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
  marullus. what trade, thou knave? thou naughty knave, what
trade?
  second commoner. nay, i beseech you, sir, be not out with me;
yet,
    if you be out, sir, i can mend you.
  marullus. what mean'st thou by that? mend me, thou saucy
fellow!
  second commoner. why, sir, cobble you.
  flavius. thou art a cobbler, art thou?
  second commoner. truly, sir, all that i live by is with the
awl; i
    meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's matters, but
with
    awl. i am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when they are
in
    great danger, i recover them. as proper men as ever trod upon
    neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
  flavius. but wherefore art not in thy shop today?
    why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
  second commoner. truly, sir, t
 
 ___________________________
 

    have you not made an universal shout
    that tiber trembled underneath her banks
    to hear the replication of your sounds
    made in her concave shores?
    and do you now put on your best attire?
    and do you now cull out a holiday?
    and do you now strew flowers in his way
    that comes in triumph over pompey's blood?
    be gone!
    run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
    pray to the gods to intermit the plague
    that needs must light on this ingratitude.
  flavius. go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault,
    assemble all the poor men of your sort,
    draw them to tiber banks, and weep your tears
    into the channel, till the lowest stream
    do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
                                           exeunt all commoners.
    see whether their basest metal be not moved;
    they vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
    go you down that way towards the capitol;
    this way will i. disrobe the images
    if you
 
 ___________________________
 
 do find them deck'd with ceremonies.
  marullus. may we do so?
    you know it is the feast of lupercal.
  flavius. it is no matter; let no images
    be hung with caesar's trophies. i'll about
    and drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    so do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    these growing feathers pluck'd from caesar's wing
    will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    who else would soar above the view of men
    and keep us all in servile fearfulness.              exeunt.




scene ii.
a public place.

flourish. enter caesar; antony, for the course; calpurnia,
portia,
d
 
 ___________________________
 
f
    them; if caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would have
done
    no less.
  brutus. and after that he came, thus sad, away?
  casca. ay.
  cassius. did cicero say anything?
  casca. ay, he spoke greek.
  cassius. to what effect?
  casca. nay, an i tell you that, i'll ne'er look you i' the face
    again; but those that understood him smiled at one another
and
    shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was greek to me.
i
    could tell you more news too: marullus and flavius, for
pulling
    scarfs off caesar's images, are put to silence. fare you
well.
    there was more foolery yet, if could remember it.
  cassius. will you sup with me tonight, casca?
  casca. no, i am promised forth.
  cassius. will you dine with me tomorrow?
  casca. ay, if i be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner
worth
    the eating.
  cassius. good, i will expect you.
  casca. do so, farewell, both.                            exit.
  brutus. what a blunt fellow is this gr