r download time or for membership.>>





1599


the tragedy of julius caesar

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  julius caesar, roman statesman and general
  octavius, triumvir after caesar's death, later augustus caesar,
    first emperor of rome
  mark antony, general and friend of caesar, a triumvir after his
death
  lepidus, third member of the triumvirate
  marcus brutus, leader of the conspiracy against caesar
  cassius, instigator of the conspiracy
  casca,          conspirator against caesar
  trebonius,           "          "     "
  caius ligarius,      "          "     "
  decius brutus,       "          "     "
  metellus cimber,     "          "     "
  cinna,               "          "     "
  calpurnia, wife of caesar
  portia, wife of brutus
  cicero,     senator
  popilius,      "
  popilius lena, "
  flavius, tribune
  marullus, tribune
  cato,     supportor of brutus
  lucilius,     "     "    "
  titinius,     "     " 
 
 ___________________________
 
  be hung with caesar's trophies. i'll about
    and drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    so do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    these growing feathers pluck'd from caesar's wing
    will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    who else would soar above the view of men
    and keep us all in servile fearfulness.              exeunt.




scene ii.
a public place.

flourish. enter caesar; antony, for the course; calpurnia,
portia,
decius, cicero, brutus, cassius, and casca; a great crowd
follows,
among them a soothsayer.

  caesar. calpurnia!
  casca. peace, ho! caesar speaks.
                                                   music ceases.
  caesar. calpurnia!
  calpurnia. here, my lord.
  caesar. stand you directly in antonio's way,
    when he doth run his course. antonio!
  antony. caesar, my lord?
  caesar. forget not in your speed, antonio,
    to touch calpurnia, for our elders say
    the barren, touched in this holy chase,
    shake off th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir sterile curse.
  antony. i shall remember.
    when caesar says "do this," it is perform'd.
  caesar. set on, and leave no ceremony out.           flourish.
  soothsayer. caesar!
  caesar. ha! who calls?
  casca. bid every noise be still. peace yet again!
  caesar. who is it in the press that calls on me?
    i hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,
    cry "caesar." speak, caesar is turn'd to hear.
  soothsayer. beware the ides of march.
  caesar. what man is that?
  brutus. a soothsayer you beware the ides of march.
  caesar. set him before me let me see his face.
  cassius. fellow, come from the throng; look upon caesar.
  caesar. what say'st thou to me now? speak once again.
  sooths
 
 ___________________________
 
 a time
    both meet to hear and answer such high things.
    till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
    brutus had rather be a villager
    than to repute himself a son of rome
    under these hard conditions as this time
    is like to lay upon us.
  cassius. i am glad that my weak words
    have struck but thus much show of fire from brutus.

            re-enter caesar and his train.

  brutus. the games are done, and caesar is returning.
  cassius. as they pass by, pluck casca by the sleeve,
    and he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
    what hath proceeded worthy note today.
  brutus. i will do so. but, look you, cassius,
    the angry spot doth glow on caesar's brow,
    and all the rest look like a chidden train:
    calpurnia's cheek is pale, and cicero
    looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
    as we have seen him in the capitol,
    being cross'd in conference by some senators.
  cassius. casca will tell us what the matter is.
  caesar
 
 ___________________________
 
ch a sort
    as if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit
    that could be moved to smile at anything.
    such men as he be never at heart's ease
    whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
    and therefore are they very dangerous.
    i rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
    than what i fear, for always i am caesar.
    come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
    and tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
              sennet. exeunt caesar and all his train but casca.
  casca. you pull'd me by the cloak; would you speak with me?
  brutus. ay, casca, tell us what hath chanced today
    that caesar looks so sad.
  casca. why, you were with him, were you not?
  brutus. i should not then ask casca what had chanced.
  casca. why, there was a crown offered him, and being offered
him,
     he put it by with the back of his hand, thus, and then the
     people fell ashouting.
  brutus. what was the second noise for?
  casca. why, for that too.
  cassius
 
 ___________________________
 
. they shouted thrice. what was the last cry for?
  casca. why, for that too.
  brutus. was the crown offered him thrice?
  casca. ay, marry, wast, and he put it by thrice, every time
gentler
    than other, and at every putting by mine honest neighbors
    shouted.
  cassius. who offered him the crown?
  casca. why, antony.
  brutus. tell us the manner of it, gentle casca.
  casca. i can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it. it was
    mere foolery; i did not mark it. i saw mark antony offer him
a
    crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these
    coronets) and, as i told you, he put it by once. but for all
    that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it. then he
offered
    it to him again; then he put it by again. but, to my
thinking, he
    was very loath to lay his fingers off it. and then he offered
it
    the third time; he put it
 
 ___________________________
 
 the third time by; and still as he
    refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chopped
hands
    and threw up their sweaty nightcaps and uttered such a deal
of
    stinking breath because caesar refused the crown that it had
    almost choked caesar, for he swounded and fell down at it.
and
    for mine own part, i durst not laugh for fear of opening my
lips
    and receiving the bad air.
  cassius. but, soft, i pray you, what, did caesars wound?
  casca. he fell down in the marketplace and foamed at mouth and
was
    speechless.
  brutus. 'tis very like. he hath the falling sickness.
  cassius. no, caesar hath it not, but you, and i,
    and honest casca, we have the falling sickness.
  casca. i know not what you mean by that, but i am sure caesar
fell
    down. if the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him
    according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to
do
    the players in the theatre, i am no true man.
  br
 
 ___________________________
 
utus. what said he when he came unto himself?
  casca. marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common
    herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his
doublet
    and offered them his throat to cut. an had been a man of any
    occupation, if i would not have taken him at a word, i would
i
    might go to hell among the rogues. and so he fell. when he
came
    to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything
amiss,
    he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity.
three or
    four wenches wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ere i stood cried, "alas, good soul!" and
forgave
    him with all their hearts. but there's no heed to be taken of
    them; if caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would have
done
    no less.
  brutus. and after that he came, thus sad, away?
  casca. ay.
  cassius. did cicero say anything?
  casca. ay, he spoke greek.
  cassius. to what effect?
  casca. nay, an i tell you that, i'll ne'er look you i' the face
    again; but those that understood him smiled at one another
and
    shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was greek to me.
i
    could tell you more news too: marullus and flavius, for
pulling
    scarfs off caesar's images, are put to silence. fare you
well.
    there was more foolery yet, if could remember it.
  cassius. will you sup with me tonight, casca?
  casca. no, i am promised forth.
  cassius. will you din
 
 ___________________________
 
e with me tomorrow?
  casca. ay, if i be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner
worth
    the eating.
  cassius. good, i will expect you.
  casca. do so, farewell, both.                            exit.
  brutus. what a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
    he was quick mettle when he went to school.
  cassius. so is he now in execution
    of any bold or noble enterprise,
    however he puts on this tardy form.
    this rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
    which gives men stomach to digest his words
    with better appetite.
  brutus. and so it is. for this time i will leave you.
    tomorrow, if you please to speak with m
 
 ___________________________
 
d he were cassius,
    he should not humor me. i will this night,
    in several hands, in at his windows throw,
    as if they came from several citizens,
    writings, all tending to the great opinion
    that rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
    caesar's ambition shall be glanced at.
    and after this let caesar seat him sure;
    for we will shake him, or worse days endure.           exit.




scene iii.
a street. thunder and lightning.

enter, from opposite sides, casca, with his sword drawn, and
cicero.

  cicero. good even, casca. brought you caesar home?
    why are you breathless, and why stare you so?
  casca. are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
    shakes like a thing unfirm? o cicero,
    i have seen tempests when the scolding winds
    have rived the knotty oaks, and i have seen
    the ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
    to be exalted with the threatening clouds,
    but never till tonight, never till now,
    did i go th
 
 ___________________________
 
rough a tempest dropping fire.
    either there is a civil strife in heaven,
    or else the world too saucy with the gods
    incenses them to send destruction.
  cicero. why, saw you anything more wonderful?
  casca. a common slave- you know him well by sight-
    held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
    like twenty torches join'd, and yet his hand
    not sensible of fire remain'd unscorch'd.
    besides- i ha' not since put up my sword-
    against the capitol i met a lion,
    who glaz'd upon me and went surly by
    without annoying me. and there were drawn
    upon a heap a hundred ghastly women
    transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
    men all in fire walk up and do
 
 ___________________________
 
rd of night did sit
    even at noonday upon the marketplace,
    howling and shrieking. when these prodigies
    do so conjointly meet, let not men say
    "these are their reasons; they are natural":
    for i believe they are portentous things
    unto the climate that they point upon.
  cicero. indeed, it is a strange-disposed time.
    but men may construe things after their fashion,
    clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
    comes caesar to the capitol tomorrow?
  casca. he doth, for he did bid antonio
    send word to you he would be there tomorrow.
  cicero. good then, casca. this disturbed sky
    is not to walk in.
  casca. farewell, cicero.                          exit cicero.

                        enter cassius.

  cassius. who's there?
  casca. a roman.
  cassius. casca, by your voice.
  casca. your ear is good. cassius, what night is this!
  cassius. a very pleasing night to honest men.
  casca. who ever knew the heavens menace so?
  
 
 ___________________________
 
cassius. those that have known the earth so full of faults.
    for my part, i have walk'd about the streets,
    submitting me unto the perilous night,
    and thus unbraced, casca, as you see,
    have bared my bosom to the thunderstone;
    and when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open
    the breast of heaven, i did present myself
    even in the aim and very flash of it.
  casca. but wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
    it is the part of men to fear and tremble
    when the most mighty gods by tokens send
    such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
  cassius. you are dull, casca, and those sparks of life
    that should be in a roman you do want,
    or else you use not. you look pale and gaze
    and put on fear and cast yourself in wonder
    to see the strange impatience of the heavens.
    but if you would consider the true cause
    why all the
 
 ___________________________
 
se fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
    why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
    why old men, fools, and children calculate,
    why all these things change from their ordinance,
    their natures, and preformed faculties
    to monstrous quality, why, you shall find
    that heaven hath infused them with these spirits
    to make them instruments of fear and warning
    unto some monstrous state.
    now could i, casca, name to thee a man
    most like this dreadful night,
    that thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
    as doth the lion in the capitol,
    a man no mightier than thyself or me
    in personal action, yet prodigious grown
    and fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
  casca. 'tis caesar that you mean, is it not, cassius?
  cassius. let it be who it is, for romans now
    have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
    but, woe the while! our fathers' minds are dead,
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  and we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits;
    our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
  casca. indeed they say the senators tomorrow
    mean to establish caesar as a king,
    and he shall wear his crown by sea and land
    in every place save here in italy.
  cassius. i know where i will wear this dagger then:
    cassius from bondage will deliver cassius.
    therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
    therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
    nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
    nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron
    can be retentive to th
 
 ___________________________
 
e strength of spirit;
    but life, being weary of these worldly bars,
    never lacks power to dismiss itself.
    if i know this, know all the world besides,
    that part of tyranny that i do bear
    i can shake off at pleasure.                  thunder still.
  casca. so can i.
    so every bondman in his own hand bears
    the power to cancel his captivity.
  cassius. and why should caesar be a tyrant then?
    poor man! i know he would not be a wolf
    but that he sees the romans are but sheep.
    he were no lion, were not romans hinds.
    those that with haste will make a mighty fire
    begin it with weak straws. what trash is rome,
    what rubbish, and what offal, when it serves
    for the base matter to illuminate
    so vile a thing a
 
 ___________________________
 
s caesar? but, o grief,
    where hast thou led me? i perhaps speak this
    before a willing bondman; then i know
    my answer must be made. but i am arm'd,
    and dangers are to me indifferent.
  casca. you speak to casca, and to such a man
    that is no fleering tell-tale. hold, my hand.
    be factious for redress of all these griefs,
    and i will set this foot of mine as far
    as who goes farthest.
  cassius. there's a bargain made.
    now know you, casca, i have moved already
    some certain of the noblest-minded romans
    to undergo with me an enterprise
    of honorable-dangerous consequence;
    and i do know by this, they stay for me
    in pompey's porch. for now, this fearful night,
    there is no stir or walking in the streets,
    and the complexion of the element
    in favor's like the work we have in hand,
    most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.

                       enter cinna.

  casca. stand close awhile, for
 
 ___________________________
 
 here comes one in haste.
  cassius. 'tis cinna, i do know him by his gait;
    he is a friend. cinna, where haste you so?
  cinna. to find out you. who's that? metellus cimber?
  cassius. no, it is casca, one incorporate
    to our attempts. am i not stay'd for, cinna?
  cinna. i am glad on't. what a fearful night is this!
    there's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
  cassius. am i not stay'd for? tell me.
  cinna. yes, you are.
    o cassius, if you could
    but win the noble brutus to our party-
  cassius. be you content. good cinna, take this paper,
    and look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    where brutus may but find it; and throw this
    in at his window; 
 
 ___________________________
 
set this up with wax
    upon old brutus' statue. all this done,
    repair to pompey's porch, where you shall find us.
    is decius brutus and trebonius there?
  cinna. all but metellus cimber, and he's gone
    to seek you at your house. well, i will hie
    and so bestow these papers as you bade me.
  cassius. that done, repair to pompey's theatre.
                                                     exit cinna.
    come, casca, you and i will yet ere day
    see brutus at his house. three parts of him
    is ours already, and the man entire
    upon the next encounter yields him ours.
  casca. o, he sits high in all the people's hearts,
    and that which would appear offense in us,
    his countenance, like richest alchemy,
    will change to virtue and to worthiness.
  cassius. him and his worth and our great need of him
    you have right well conceited. let us go,
    for it is after midnight, and ere d
 
 ___________________________
 
'em enter.                            exit lucius.
    they are the faction. o conspiracy,
    shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
    when evils are most free? o, then, by day
    where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
    to mask thy monstrous visage? seek none, conspiracy;
    hide it in smiles and affability;
    for if thou path, thy native semblance on,
    not erebus itself were dim enough
    to hide thee from prevention.

    enter the conspirators, cassius, casca, decius, cinna,
                metellus cimber, and trebonius.

  cassius. i think we are too bold upon your rest.
    good morrow, brutus, do we trouble you?
  brutus. i have been up this hour, awake all night.
    know i these men that come along with you?
  cassius. yes, every man of them, and no man here
    but honors you, and every one doth wish
    you had but that opinion of yourself
    which every noble roman bears of you.
    this is trebonius.
  brutus. he is welcome hi
 
 ___________________________
 
ther.
  cassius. this, decius brutus.
  brutus. he is welcome too.
cassius. this, casca; this, cinna; and this, metellus cimber.
  brutus. they are all welcome.
    what watchful cares do interpose themselves
    betwixt your eyes and night?
  cassius. shall i entreat a word?                 they whisper.
  decius. here lies the east. doth not the day break here?
  casca. no.
  cinna. o, pardon, sir, it doth, and yongrey lines
    that fret the clouds are messengers of day.
  casca. you shall confess that you are both deceived.
    here, as i point my sword, the sun arises,
    which is a great way growing on the south,
    weighing the youthful season of the year.
    some two months hence up higher toward the north
    he first presents his fire, and the high east
    stands as the capitol, directly here.
  brutus. give me your hands all over, one by one.
  cassius. and let us swear our resolution.
  brutus. no, not an oath. if not the face of men,
    the suf
 
 ___________________________
 
ures as men doubt; but do not stain
    the even virtue of our enterprise,
    nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
    to think that or our cause or our performance
    did need an oath; when every drop of blood
    that every roman bears, and nobly bears,
    is guilty of a several bastardy
    if he do break the smallest particle
    of any promise that hath pass'd from him.
  cassius. but what of cicero? shall we sound him?
    i think he will stand very strong with us.
  casca. let us not leave him out.
  cinna. no, by no means.
  metellus. o, let us have him, for his silver hairs
    will purchase us a good opinion,
    and buy men's voices to commend our deeds.
    it shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
    our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
    but all be buried in his gravity.
  brutus. o, name him not; let us not break with him,
    for he will never follow anything
    that other men begin.
  cassius. then leave him out.
  casca.
 
 ___________________________
 
   "break up the senate till another time,
    when caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams."
    if caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
    "lo, caesar is afraid"?
    pardon me, caesar, for my dear dear love
    to your proceeding bids me tell you this,
    and reason to my love is liable.
  caesar. how foolish do your fears seem now, calpurnia!
    i am ashamed i did yield to them.
    give me my robe, for i will go.

         enter publius, brutus, ligarius, metellus, casca,
                     trebonius, and cinna.

    and look where publius is come to fetch me.
  publius. good morrow,caesar.
  caesar. welcome, publius.
    what, brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?
    good morrow, casca. caius ligarius,
    caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
    as that same ague which hath made you lean.
    what is't o'clock?
  brutus. caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
  caesar. i thank you for your pains and courtesy.

                           enter antony.

 
 ___________________________
 
.] and so near will i be
    that your best friends shall wish i had been further.
  caesar. good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
    and we like friends will straightway go together.
  brutus. [aside.] that every like is not the same, o caesar,
    the heart of brutus yearns to think upon!            exeunt.




scene iii.
a street near the capitol.

enter artemidorus, reading paper.

  artemidorus. "caesar, beware of brutus; take heed of cassius;
come
    not near casca; have an eye to cinna; trust not trebonius;
mark
    well metellus cimber; decius brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged caius ligarius. there is but one mind in all these
men,
    and it is bent against caesar. if thou beest not immortal,
look
    about you. security gives way to conspiracy. the mighty gods
    defend thee!
                                        thy lover, artemidorus."
    here will i stand till caesar pass along,
    and as a suitor will i give him this.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
ty
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
rome. before the capitol; the senate sitting above.
a crowd of people, among them artemidorus and the soothsayer.

flourish. enter caesar, brutus, cassius, casca, decius, metellus,
trebonius, cinna, antony, lepidus, popilius, publius, and others.

  caesar. the ides of march are come.
  soothsayer. ay, caesar, but not gone.
  a hail, caesar! read this schedule.
  decius. trebonius doth desire you to o'er read,
    at your best leisure, this his humble suit.
  artemidorus. o caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit
    that touches caesar nearer. read it, great caesar.
  caesar. what touches us ourself shall be last served.
  artemidorus. de
 
 ___________________________
 
ur petitions in the street?
    come to the capitol.

      caesar goes up to the senate house, the rest follow.

  popilius. i wish your enterprise today may thrive.
  cassius. what enterprise, popilius?
  popilius. fare you well.
                                             advances to caesar.
  brutus. what said popilius lena?
  cassius. he wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
    i fear our purpose is discovered.
  brutus. look, how he makes to caesar. mark him.
  cassius. casca,
    be sudden, for we fear prevention.
    brutus, what shall be done? if this be known,
    cassius or caesar never shall turn back,
    for i will slay myself.
  brutus. cassius, be constant.
    popilius lena speaks not of our purposes;
    for, look, he smiles, and caesar doth not change.
  cassius. trebonius knows his time, for, look you, brutus,
    he draws mark antony out of the way.
                                    exeunt antony and trebonius.
  decius. where is metellus
 
 ___________________________
 
 cimber? let him
    and presently prefer his suit to caesar.
  brutus. he is address'd; press near and second him.
  cinna. casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
  caesar. are we all ready? what is now amiss
    that caesar and his senate must redress?
  metellus. most high, most mighty, and most puissant caesar,
    metellus cimber throws before thy seat
    an humble heart.                                     kneels.
  caesar. i must prevent thee, cimber.
    these couchings and these lowly courtesies
    might fire the blood of ordinary men
    and turn preordinance and first decree
    into the law 
 
 ___________________________
 
o in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
    and men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
    yet in the number i do know but one
    that unassailable holds on his rank,
    unshaked of motion; and that i am he,
    let me a little show it, even in this;
    that i was constant cimber should be banish'd,
    and constant do remain to keep him so.
  cinna. o caesar-
  caesar. hence! wilt thou lift up olympus?
  decius. great caesar-
  caesar. doth not brutus bootless kneel?
  casca. speak, hands, for me!
                        casca first, then the other conspirators
                                  and marcus brutus stab caesar.
  caesar. et tu, brute?- then fall, caesar! dies.
  cinna. liberty! freedom! tyranny is dead!
    run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
  cassius. some to the common pulpits and cry out
    "liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
  brutus. people and senators, be not affrighted,
    fly not, stand still; ambition's debt is pa
 
 ___________________________
 
id.
  casca. go to the pulpit, brutus.
  decius. and cassius too.
  brutus. where's publius?
  cinna. here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
  metellus. stand fast together, lest some friend of caesar's
    should chance-
  brutus. talk not of standing. publius, good cheer,
    there is no harm intended to your person,
    nor to no roman else. so tell them, publius.
  cassius. and leave us, publius, lest that the people
    rushing on us should do your age some mischief.
  brutus. do so, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
dignities.
  brutus. only be patient till we have appeased
    the multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    and then we will deliver you the cause
    why i, that did love caesar when i struck him,
    have thus proceeded.
  antony. i doubt not of your wisdom.
    let each man render me his bloody hand.
    first, marcus brutus, will i shake with you;
    next, caius cassius, do i take your hand;
    now, decius brutus, yours; now yours, metellus;
    yours, cinna; and, my valiant casca, yours;
    though last, not least in love, yours, good trebonius.
    gentlemen all- alas, what shall i say?
    my credit now stands on such slippery ground,
    that one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
    either a coward or a flatterer.
    that i did love thee, caesar, o, 'tis true!
    if then thy spirit look upon us now,
    shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
    to see thy antony making his peace,
    shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
    most noble! in
 
 ___________________________
 
 from the hearse, stand from the body.
  second citizen. room for antony, most noble antony.
  antony. nay, press not so upon me, stand far off.
  all. stand back; room, bear back!
  antony. if you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
    you all do know this mantle. i remember
    the first time ever caesar put it on;
    'twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
    that day he overcame the nervii.
    look, in this place ran cassius' dagger through;
    see what a rent the envious casca made;
    through this the well-beloved brutus stabb'd;
    and as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
    mark how the blood of caesar follow'd it,
    as rushing out of doors, to be resolved
    if brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
    for brutus, as you know, was caesar's angel.
    judge, o you gods, how dearly caesar loved him!
    this was the most unkindest cut of all;
    for when the noble caesar saw him stab,
    ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
    quite vanqui
 
 ___________________________
 
 first citizen. tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.
  cinna. i am cinna the poet, i am cinna the poet.
  fourth citizen. tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his
bad
    verses.
  cinna. i am not cinna the conspirator.
  fourth citizen. it is no matter, his name's cinna. pluck but
his
    name out of his heart, and turn him going.
  third citizen. tear him, tear him! come, brands, ho,
firebrands. to
    brutus', to cassius'; burn all. some to decius' house, and
some
    to casca's, some to ligarius'. away, go!             exeunt.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes b
 
 ___________________________
 
are yet unknown;
    but for your words, they rob the hybla bees,
    and leave them honeyless.
  antony. not stingless too.
  brutus. o, yes, and soundless too,
    for you have stol'n their buzzing, antony,
    and very wisely threat before you sting.
  antony. villains! you did not so when your vile daggers
    hack'd one another in the sides of caesar.
    you show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
    and bow'd like bondmen, kissing caesar's feet;
    whilst damned casca, like a cur, behind
    strooke caesar on the neck. o you flatterers!
  cassius. flatterers? now, brutus, thank yourself.
    this tongue had not offended so today,
    if cassius might have ruled.
  octavius. come, come, the cause. if arguing make us sweat,
    the proof of it will turn to redder drops.
    look,
    i draw a sword against conspirators;
    when think you that the sword goes up again?
    never, till caesar's three and thirty wounds
    be well avenged, or till anot