etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>





1599


the tragedy of julius caesar

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  julius caesar, roman statesman and general
  octavius, triumvir after caesar's death, later augustus caesar,
    first emperor of rome
  mark antony, general and friend of caesar, a triumvir after his
death
  lepidus, third member of the triumvirate
  marcus brutus, leader of the conspiracy against caesar
  cassius, instigator of the conspiracy
  casca,          conspirator against caesar
  trebonius,           "          "     "
  caius ligarius,      "          "     "
  decius brutus,       "          "     "
  metellus cimber,     "
 
 ___________________________
 
    that mothers shall but smile when they behold
    their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;
    all pity choked with custom of fell deeds,
    and caesar's spirit ranging for revenge,
    with ate by his side come hot from hell,
    shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
    cry "havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war,
    that this foul deed shall smell above the earth
    with carrion men, groaning for burial.

                        enter a servant.

    you serve octavius caesar, do you not?
  servant. i do, mark antony.
  antony. caesar did write for him to come to rome.
  servant. he did receive his letters, and is coming,
    and bid me say to you by word of mouth-
    o caesar!                                     sees the body.
  antony. thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
    passion, i see, is catching, for mine eyes,
    seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
    began to water. is thy master coming?
  servant. he lies tonight withi
 
 ___________________________
 
n seven leagues of rome.
  antony. post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced.
    here is a mourning rome, a dangerous rome,
    no rome of safety for octavius yet;
    hie hence, and tell him so. yet stay awhile,
    thou shalt not back till i have borne this corse
    into the marketplace. there shall i try,
    in my oration, how the people take
    the cruel issue of these bloody men,
    according to the which thou shalt discourse
    to young octavius of the state of things.
    lend me your hand.                exeunt with caesar's body.




scene ii.
the forum.

enter brutus and cassius, and a throng of citizens.

  citizens. we will be satisfied! let us be satisfied!
  brutus. then follow me and give me audience, friends.
    cassius, go you into the other street
    and part the numbers.
    those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
    those that will follow cassius, go with him;
    and public reasons shall be 
 
 ___________________________
 
way, away!
    we'll burn his body in the holy place
    and with the brands fire the traitors' houses.
    take up the body.
  second citizen. go fetch fire.
  third citizen. pluck down benches.
  fourth citizen. pluck down forms, windows, anything.
                                  exeunt citizens with the body.
  antony. now let it work. mischief, thou art afoot,
    take thou what course thou wilt.

                        enter a servant.

    how now, fellow?
  servant. sir, octavius is already come to rome.
  antony. where is he?
  servant. he and lepidus are at caesar's house.
  antony. and thither will i straight to visit him.
    he comes upon a wish. fortune is merry,
    and in this mood will give us anything.
  servant. i heard him say brutus and cassius
    are rid like madmen through the gates of rome.
  antony. be like they had some notice of the people,
    how i had moved them. bring me to octavius.          exeunt.




scene iii.
a street.

ent
 
 ___________________________
 
iam
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iv. scene i.
a house in rome. antony, octavius, and lepidus, seated at a
table.

  antony. these many then shall die, their names are prick'd.
  octavius. your brother too must die; consent you, lepidus?
  lepidus. i do consent-
  octavius. prick him down, antony.
  lepidus. upon condition publius shall not live,
    who is your sister's son, mark antony.
  antony. he shall not live; look, with a spot i damn him.
    but, lepidus, go you to caesar's house,
    fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
    how to cut off some
 
 ___________________________
 
 charge in legacies.
  lepidus. what, shall i find you here?
  octavius. or here, or at the capitol.            exit lepidus.
  antony. this is a slight unmeritable man,
    meet to be sent on errands. is it fit,
    the three-fold world divided, he should stand
    one of the three to share it?
  octavius. so you thought him,
    and took his voice who should be prick'd to die
    in our black sentence and proscription.
  antony. octavius, i have seen more days than you,
    and though we lay these honors on this man
    to ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,
    he shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
    to groan and sweat under the business,
    either led or driven, as we point the way;
    and having brought our treasure where we will,
    then take we down his load and turn him off,
    like to the empty ass, to shake his ears
    and graze in commons.
  octavius. you may do your will,
    but he's 
 
 ___________________________
 
a tried and valiant soldier.
  antony. so is my horse, octavius, and for that
    i do appoint him store of provender.
    it is a creature that i teach to fight,
    to wind, to stop, to run directly on,
    his corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.
    and, in some taste, is lepidus but so:
    he must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;
    a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
    on objects, arts, and imitations,
    which, out of use and staled by other men,
    begin his fashion. do not talk of him
    but as a property. and now,
 
 ___________________________
 
 octavius,
    listen great things. brutus and cassius
    are levying powers; we must straight make head;
    therefore let our alliance be combined,
    our best friends made, our means stretch'd;
    and let us presently go sit in council,
    how covert matters may be best disclosed,
    and open perils surest answered.
  octavius. let us do so, for we are at the stake,
    and bay'd about with many enemies;
    and some that smile have in their hearts, i fear,
    millions of mischiefs.                               exeunt.




scene ii.
camp near sardis. before brutus' tent. drum.

enter brutus, lucilius, lucius, and soldiers; titinius and
pindarus meet them.

  brutus. stand, ho!
  lucilius. give the word, ho, and stand.
  brutus. what now, lucilius, is cassius near?
  lucilius. he is at hand, and pin
 
 ___________________________
 
cassius. i did not. he was but a fool
    that brought my answer back. brutus hath rived my heart.
    a friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
    but brutus makes mine greater than they are.
  brutus. i do not, till you practise them on me.
  cassius. you love me not.
  brutus. i do not like your faults.
  cassius. a friendly eye could never see such faults.
  brutus. a flatterer's would not, though they do appear
    as huge as high olympus.
  cassius. come, antony, and young octavius, come,
    revenge yourselves alone on cassius,
    for cassius is aweary of the world:
    hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
    check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
    set in a notebook, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
    to cast into my teeth. o, i could weep
    my spirit from mine eyes! there is my dagger,
    and here my naked breast; within, a heart
    dearer than pluto's mine, richer than gold.
    if that thou best a roman, take it forth;
    i, that d
 
 ___________________________
 
    exit lucius.
  cassius. i did not think you could have been so angry.
  brutus. o cassius, i am sick of many griefs.
  cassius. of your philosophy you make no use,
    if you give place to accidental evils.
  brutus. no man bears sorrow better. portia is dead.
  cassius. ha? portia?
  brutus. she is dead.
  cassius. how 'scaped killing when i cross'd you so?
    o insupportable and touching loss!
    upon what sickness?
  brutus. impatient of my absence,
    and grief that young octavius with mark antony
    have made themselves so strong- for with her death
    that tidings came- with this she fell distract,
    and (her attendants absent) swallow'd fire.
  cassius. and died so?
  brutus. even so.
  cassius. o ye immortal gods!

               re-enter lucius, with wine and taper.

  brutus. speak no more of her. give me a bowl of wine.
    in this i bury all unkindness, cassius.              drinks.
  cassius. my heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
  fill, lu
 
 ___________________________
 
cius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
  i cannot drink too much of brutus' love.               drinks.
  brutus. come in, titinius!                        exit lucius.

                 re-enter titinius, with messala.

    welcome, good messala.
    now sit we close about this taper here,
    and call in question our necessities.
  cassius. portia, art thou gone?
  brutus. no more, i pray you.
    messala, i have here received letters
    that young octavius and mark antony
    come down upon us with a mighty power,
    bending their expedition toward philippi.
  messala. myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.
  brutus. with what addition?
  messala. that by proscription and bills of outlawry
    octavius, antony, and lepidus
    have put to death an hundred senators.
  brutus. there in our letters do not well agree;
    mine speak of seventy senators that died
    by their proscriptions, cicero being one.
  cassius. cicero one!
  
 
 ___________________________
 
akespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
the plains of philippi.

enter octavius, antony, and their army.

  octavius. now, antony, our hopes are answered.
    you said the enemy would not come down,
    but keep the hills and upper regions.
    it proves not so. their battles are at hand;
    they mean to warn us at philippi here,
    answering before we do demand of them.
  antony. tut, i am in their bosoms, and i know
    wherefore they do it. they could be content
    to visit other places, and come down
    with fearful bravery, thinking by this face
    to
 
 ___________________________
 
 fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
    but 'tis not so.

                    enter a messenger.

  messenger. prepare you, generals.
    the enemy comes on in gallant show;
    their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
    and something to be done immediately.
  antony. octavius, lead your battle softly on,
    upon the left hand of the even field.
  octavius. upon the right hand i, keep thou the left.
  antony. why do you cross me in this exigent?
  octavius. i do not cross you, but i will do so.

      march. drum. enter brutus, cassius, and their army;
           lucilius, titinius, messala, and others.

  brutus. they stand, and would have parley.
  cassius. stand fast, titinius; we must out and talk.
  octavius. mark antony, shall we give sign of battle?
  antony. no, caesar, we will answer on their charge.
    make forth, the generals would have some words.
  octavius. stir not until the signal not until the signal.
  brutus. words 
 
 ___________________________
 
before blows. is it so, countrymen?
  octavius. not that we love words better, as you do.
  brutus. good words are better than bad strokes, octavius.
  antony. in your bad strokes, brutus, you give good words.
    witness the hole you made in caesar's heart,
    crying "long live! hail, caesar!"
  cassius. antony,
    the posture of your blows are yet unknown;
    but for your words, they rob the hybla bees,
    and leave them honeyless.
  antony. not stingless too.
  brutus. o, yes, and soundless too,
    for you have stol'n their buzzing, antony,
    and very wisely threat before you sting.
  antony. villains! you did not so w
 
 ___________________________
 
hen your vile daggers
    hack'd one another in the sides of caesar.
    you show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
    and bow'd like bondmen, kissing caesar's feet;
    whilst damned casca, like a cur, behind
    strooke caesar on the neck. o you flatterers!
  cassius. flatterers? now, brutus, thank yourself.
    this tongue had not offended so today,
    if cassius might have ruled.
  octavius. come, come, the cause. if arguing make us sweat,
    the proof of it will turn to redder drops.
    look,
    i draw a sword against conspirators;
    when think you that the sword goes up again?
    never, till caesar's three and thirty wounds
    be well avenged, or till another caesar
    have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
  brutus. caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,
    unless thou bring'st them with thee.
  octavius. so i hope,
    i was not born to die 
 
 ___________________________
 
on brutus' sword.
  brutus. o, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
  cassius. a peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
    join'd with a masker and a reveler!
  antony. old cassius still!
  octavius. come, antony, away!
    defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
    if you dare fight today, come to the field;
    if not, when you have stomachs.
                        exeunt octavius, antony, and their army.
  cassius. why, now, blow and, swell billow, and swim bark!
    the storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
  brutus. ho, lucilius! hark, a word with you.
  lucilius. [stands forth.] my lord?
                             brutus and lucilius converse apart.
  cassius. messala!
  messala. [stands forth.] what says my general?
  cassius. messala,
    this is my birthday, as this very day
    was cassius born. give me thy hand, messala.
    be thou my witness that
 
 ___________________________
 
a's wing,
    and sudden push gives them the overthrow.
    ride, ride, messala. let them all come down.         exeunt.




scene iii.
another part of the field.

alarums. enter cassius and titinius.

  cassius. o, look, titinius, look, the villains fly!
    myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.
    this ensign here of mine was turning back;
    i slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  titinius. o cassius, brutus gave the word too early,
    who, having some advantage on octavius,
    took it too eagerly. his soldiers fell to spoil,
    whilst we by antony are all enclosed.

                       enter pindarus.

  pindarus. fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    mark antony is in your tents, my lord;
    fly, therefore, noble cassius, fly far off.
  cassius. this hill is far enough. look, look, titinius:
    are those my tents where i perceive the fire?
  titinius. they are, my lord.
  cassius. titinius, if thou lovest me,
    mount thou my horse 
 
 ___________________________
 
and when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    guide thou the sword. [pindarus stabs him.] caesar, thou art
      revenged,
    even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  dies.
  pindarus. so, i am free, yet would not so have been,
    durst i have done my will. o cassius!
    far from this country pindarus shall run,
    where never roman shall take note of him.              exit.

                re-enter titinius with messala.

  messala. it is but change, titinius, for octavius
    is overthrown by noble brutus' power,
    as cassius' legions are by antony.
  titinius. these tidings would well comfort cassius.
  messala. where did you leave him?
  titinius. all disconsolate,
    with pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
  messala. is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  titinius. he lies not like the living. o my heart!
  messala. is not that he?
  titinius. no, this was he, messala,
    but cassius is no more. o setting sun,
    as in thy red rays thou
 
 ___________________________
 
.
    i dare assure thee that no enemy
    shall ever take alive the noble brutus;
    the gods defend him from so great a shame!
    when you do find him, or alive or dead,
    he will be found like brutus, like himself.
  antony. this is not brutus, friend, but, i assure you,
    a prize no less in worth. keep this man safe,
    give him all kindness; i had rather have
    such men my friends than enemies. go on,
    and see wheer brutus be alive or dead,
    and bring us word unto octavius' tent
    how everything is chanced.                           exeunt.




scene v.
another part of the field.

enter brutus, dardanius, clitus, strato, and volumnius.

  brutus. come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
  clitus. statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
    he came not back. he is or ta'en or slain.
  brutus. sit thee down, clitus. slaying is the word:
    it is a deed in fashion. hark thee, clitus.        whispers.
  clitus. what, i, my lord? no,
 
 ___________________________
 
t i run on it.
  volumnius. that's not an office for a friend, my lord.
                                                   alarum still.
  clitus. fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
  brutus. farewell to you, and you, and you, volumnius.
    strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
    farewell to thee too, strato. countrymen,
    my heart doth joy that yet in all my life
    i found no man but he was true to me.
    i shall have glory by this losing day,
    more than octavius and mark antony
    by this vile conquest shall attain unto.
    so, fare you well at once, for brutus' tongue
    hath almost ended his life's history.
    night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest
    that have but labor'd to attain this hour.
                            alarum. cry within, "fly, fly, fly!"
  clitus. fly, my lord, fly.
  brutus. hence! i will follow.
                        exeunt clitus, dardanius, and volumnius.
    i prithee, strato, stay thou by thy lord.
 
 ___________________________
 

    thou art a fellow of a good respect;
    thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
    hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    while i do run upon it. wilt thou, strato?
  strato. give me your hand first. fare you well, my lord.
  brutus. farewell, good strato.              runs on his sword.
    caesar, now be still;
    i kill'd not thee with half so good a will.            dies.

     alarum. retreat. enter octavius, antony, messala,
                 lucilius, and the army.

  octavius. what man is that?
  messala. my master's man. strato, where is thy master?
  strato. free from the bondage you are in, messala:
    the conquerors can but make a fire of him;
    for brutus only overcame himself,
    and no man else hath honor by his death.
  lucilius. so brutus should be found. i thank thee, brutus,
    that thou hast proved lucilius' saying true.
  octavius. all that served brutus, i will enter
 
 ___________________________
 
tain them.
    fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
  strato. ay, if messala will prefer me to you.
  octavius. do so, good messala.
  messala. how died my master, strato?
  strato. i held the sword, and he did run on it.
  messala. octavius, then take him to follow thee
    that did the latest service to my master.
  antony. this was the noblest roman of them all.
    all the conspirators, save only he,
    did that they did in envy of great caesar;
    he only, in a general honest thought
    and common good to all, made one of them.
    his life was gentle, and the elements
    so mix'd in him that nature might stand up
    and say to all the world, "this was a man!"
  octavius. according to his virtue let us use him
