sonae

  julius caesar, roman statesman and general
  octavius, triumvir after caesar's death, later augustus caesar,
    first emperor of rome
  mark antony, general and friend of caesar, a triumvir after his
death
  lepidus, third member of the triumvirate
  marcus brutus, leader of the conspiracy against caesar
  cassius, instigator of the conspiracy
  casca,          conspirator against caesar
  trebonius,           "          "     "
  caius ligarius,      "          "     "
  decius brutus,       "          "     "
  metellus cimber,     "          "     "
  cinna,               "          "     "
  calpurnia, wife of caesar
  portia, wife of brutus
  cicero,     senator
  popilius,      "
  popilius lena, "
  flavius, tribune
  marullus, tribune
  cato,     supportor of brutus
  lucilius,     "     "    "
  titinius,     "     "    "
  messala,      "     "    "
  volumnius,    "     "    "
  artemidorus, a teacher of rhetoric
  cinna, a poet
  varro,    
 
 ___________________________
 
s. it is no matter; let no images
    be hung with caesar's trophies. i'll about
    and drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    so do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    these growing feathers pluck'd from caesar's wing
    will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    who else would soar above the view of men
    and keep us all in servile fearfulness.              exeunt.




scene ii.
a public place.

flourish. enter caesar; antony, for the course; calpurnia,
portia,
decius, cicero, brutus, cassius, and casca; a great crowd
follows,
among them a soothsayer.

  caesar. calpurnia!
  casca. peace, ho! caesar speaks.
                                                   music ceases.
  caesar. calpurnia!
  calpurnia. here, my lord.
  caesar. stand you directly in antonio's way,
    when he doth run his course. antonio!
  antony. caesar, my lord?
  caesar. forget not in your speed, antonio,
    to touch calpurnia, for our elders say
    the barren, touched i
 
 ___________________________
 
here's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
  cassius. am i not stay'd for? tell me.
  cinna. yes, you are.
    o cassius, if you could
    but win the noble brutus to our party-
  cassius. be you content. good cinna, take this paper,
    and look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    where brutus may but find it; and throw this
    in at his window; set this up with wax
    upon old brutus' statue. all this done,
    repair to pompey's porch, where you shall find us.
    is decius brutus and trebonius there?
  cinna. all but metellus cimber, and he's gone
    to seek you at your house. well, i will hie
    and so bestow these papers as you bade me.
  cassius. that done, repair to pompey's theatre.
                                                     exit cinna.
    come, casca, you and i will yet ere day
    see brutus at his house. three parts of him
    is ours already, and the man entire
    upon the next encounter yields him ours.
  casca. o, he sits high i
 
 ___________________________
 
er.                            exit lucius.
    they are the faction. o conspiracy,
    shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
    when evils are most free? o, then, by day
    where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
    to mask thy monstrous visage? seek none, conspiracy;
    hide it in smiles and affability;
    for if thou path, thy native semblance on,
    not erebus itself were dim enough
    to hide thee from prevention.

    enter the conspirators, cassius, casca, decius, cinna,
                metellus cimber, and trebonius.

  cassius. i think we are too bold upon your rest.
    good morrow, brutus, do we trouble you?
  brutus. i have been up this hour, awake all night.
    know i these men that come along with you?
  cassius. yes, every man of them, and no man here
    but honors you, and every one doth wish
    you had but that opinion of yourself
    which every noble roman bears of you.
    this is trebonius.
  brutus. he is welcome hither.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 cassius. this, decius brutus.
  brutus. he is welcome too.
cassius. this, casca; this, cinna; and this, metellus cimber.
  brutus. they are all welcome.
    what watchful cares do interpose themselves
    betwixt your eyes and night?
  cassius. shall i entreat a word?                 they whisper.
  decius. here lies the east. doth not the day break here?
  casca. no.
  cinna. o, pardon, sir, it doth, and yongrey lines
    that fret the clouds are messengers of day.
  casca. you shall confess that you are both deceived.
    here, as i point my sword, the sun arises,
    which is a great way growing on the south,
    weighing the youthful season of the year.
    some two months hence up higher toward the north
    he first presents his fire, and the high east
    stands as the capitol, d
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  cinna. no, by no means.
  metellus. o, let us have him, for his silver hairs
    will purchase us a good opinion,
    and buy men's voices to commend our deeds.
    it shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
    our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
    but all be buried in his gravity.
  brutus. o, name him not; let us not break with him,
    for he will never follow anything
    that other men begin.
  cassius. then leave him out.
  casca. indeed he is not fit.
  decius. shall no man else be touch'd but only caesar?
  cassius. decius, well urged. i think it is not meet
    mark antony, so well beloved of caesar,
    should outlive caesar. we shall find of him
    a shrewd contriver; and you know his means,
    if he improve them, may well stretch so far
    as to annoy us all, which to prevent,
    let antony and caesar fall together.
  brutus. our course will seem too bloody, caius cassius,
    to cut the head off and then hack the limbs
    like wr
 
 ___________________________
 

  brutus. peace, count the clock.
  cassius. the clock hath stricken three.
  trebonius. 'tis time to part.
  cassius. but it is doubtful yet
    whether caesar will come forth today or no,
    for he is superstitious grown of late,
    quite from the main opinion he held once
    of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
    it may be these apparent prodigies,
    the unaccustom'd terror of this night,
    and the persuasion of his augurers
    may hold him from the capitol today.
  decius. never fear that. if he be so resolved,
    i can o'ersway him, for he loves to hear
    that unicorns may be betray'd with trees,
    and bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
    lions with toils, and men with flatterers;
    but when i tell him he hates flatterers,
    he says he does, being then most flattered.
    let me work;
    for i can give his humor the true bent,
    and i will bring him to the capitol.
  cassius. nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
  brutus
 
 ___________________________
 
nd i the elder and more terrible.
    and caesar shall go forth.
  calpurnia. alas, my lord,
    your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
    do not go forth today. call it my fear
    that keeps you in the house and not your own.
    we'll send mark antony to the senate house,
    and he shall say you are not well today.
    let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
  caesar. mark antony shall say i am not well,
    and, for thy humor, i will stay at home.

                        enter decius.

    here's decius brutus, he shall tell them so.
  decius. caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy caesar!
    i come to fetch you to the senate house.
  caesar. and you are come in very happy time
    to bear my greeting to the senators
    and tell them that i will not come today.
    cannot, is false, and that i dare not, falser:
    i will not come today. tell them so, decius.
  calpurnia. say he is sick.
  caesar. shall caesar send a lie?
    have i in conquest stretch'd mine a
 
 ___________________________
 
rm so far
    to be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
    decius, go tell them caesar will not come.
  decius. most mighty caesar, let me know some cause,
    lest i be laugh'd at when i tell them so.
  caesar. the cause is in my will: i will not come,
    that is enough to satisfy the senate.
    but, for your private satisfaction,
    because i love you, i will let you know.
    calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home;
    she dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
    which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
    did run pure blood, and many lusty romans
    came smiling and did bathe th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir hands in it.
    and these does she apply for warnings and portents
    and evils imminent, and on her knee
    hath begg'd that i will stay at home today.
  decius. this dream is all amiss interpreted;
    it was a vision fair and fortunate.
    your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
    in which so many smiling romans bathed,
    signifies that from you great rome shall suck
    reviving blood, and that great men shall press
    for tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
    this by calpurnia's dream is signified.
  caesar. and this way have you well expounded it.
  decius. i have, when you have heard what i can say.
    and know it now,
 
 ___________________________
 

  caesar. good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
    and we like friends will straightway go together.
  brutus. [aside.] that every like is not the same, o caesar,
    the heart of brutus yearns to think upon!            exeunt.




scene iii.
a street near the capitol.

enter artemidorus, reading paper.

  artemidorus. "caesar, beware of brutus; take heed of cassius;
come
    not near casca; have an eye to cinna; trust not trebonius;
mark
    well metellus cimber; decius brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged caius ligarius. there is but one mind in all these
men,
    and it is bent against caesar. if thou beest not immortal,
look
    about you. security gives way to conspiracy. the mighty gods
    defend thee!
                                        thy lover, artemidorus."
    here will i stand till caesar pass along,
    and as a suitor will i give him this.
    my heart laments that virtue cannot live
    out of the teeth of emulation.
   
 
 ___________________________
 
h permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
rome. before the capitol; the senate sitting above.
a crowd of people, among them artemidorus and the soothsayer.

flourish. enter caesar, brutus, cassius, casca, decius, metellus,
trebonius, cinna, antony, lepidus, popilius, publius, and others.

  caesar. the ides of march are come.
  soothsayer. ay, caesar, but not gone.
  a hail, caesar! read this schedule.
  decius. trebonius doth desire you to o'er read,
    at your best leisure, this his humble suit.
  artemidorus. o caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit
    that touches caesar nearer. read it, great caesar.
  caesar. what touches us ourself shall be last served.
  artemidorus. delay not,
 
 ___________________________
 
rk him.
  cassius. casca,
    be sudden, for we fear prevention.
    brutus, what shall be done? if this be known,
    cassius or caesar never shall turn back,
    for i will slay myself.
  brutus. cassius, be constant.
    popilius lena speaks not of our purposes;
    for, look, he smiles, and caesar doth not change.
  cassius. trebonius knows his time, for, look you, brutus,
    he draws mark antony out of the way.
                                    exeunt antony and trebonius.
  decius. where is metellus cimber? let him
    and presently prefer his suit to caesar.
  brutus. he is address'd; press near and second him.
  cinna. casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
  caesar. are we all ready? what is now amiss
    that caesar and his senate must redress?
  metellus. most high, most mighty, and most puissant caesar,
    metellus cimber throws before thy seat
    an humble heart.                                     kneels.
  caesar. i must prevent thee, cimber.
 
 ___________________________
 
h shine;
    but there's but one in all doth hold his place.
    so in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
    and men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
    yet in the number i do know but one
    that unassailable holds on his rank,
    unshaked of motion; and that i am he,
    let me a little show it, even in this;
    that i was constant cimber should be banish'd,
    and constant do remain to keep him so.
  cinna. o caesar-
  caesar. hence! wilt thou lift up olympus?
  decius. great caesar-
  caesar. doth not brutus bootless kneel?
  casca. speak, hands, for me!
                        casca first, then the other conspirators
                                  and marcus brutus stab caesar.
  caesar. et tu, brute?- then fall, caesar! dies.
  cinna. liberty! freedom! tyranny is dead!
    run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
  cassius. some to the common pulpits and cry out
    "liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
  brutus. people and senators, 
 
 ___________________________
 
be not affrighted,
    fly not, stand still; ambition's debt is paid.
  casca. go to the pulpit, brutus.
  decius. and cassius too.
  brutus. where's publius?
  cinna. here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
  metellus. stand fast together, lest some friend of caesar's
    should chance-
  brutus. talk not of standing. publius, good cheer,
    there is no harm intended to your person,
    nor to no roman else. so tell them, publius.
  cassius. and leave us, publius, lest that the people
    rushing on us should do your age some mischief.
  brutus. do so, and let no man abide this deed
    but w
 
 ___________________________
 
d waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
    let's all cry, "peace, freedom, and liberty!"
  cassius. stoop then, and wash. how many ages hence
    shall this our lofty scene be acted over
    in states unborn and accents yet unknown!
  brutus. how many times shall caesar bleed in sport,
    that now on pompey's basis lies along
    no worthier than the dust!
  cassius. so oft as that shall be,
    so often shall the knot of us be call'd
    the men that gave their country liberty.
  decius. what, shall we forth?
  cassius. ay, every man away.
    brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
    with the most boldest and best hearts of rome.

                        enter a servant.

  brutus. soft, who comes here? a friend of antony's.
  servant. thus, brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
    thus did mark antony bid me fall down,
    and, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
    brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
    caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and lov
 
 ___________________________
 
sius. your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    in the disposing of new dignities.
  brutus. only be patient till we have appeased
    the multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    and then we will deliver you the cause
    why i, that did love caesar when i struck him,
    have thus proceeded.
  antony. i doubt not of your wisdom.
    let each man render me his bloody hand.
    first, marcus brutus, will i shake with you;
    next, caius cassius, do i take your hand;
    now, decius brutus, yours; now yours, metellus;
    yours, cinna; and, my valiant casca, yours;
    though last, not least in love, yours, good trebonius.
    gentlemen all- alas, what shall i say?
    my credit now stands on such slippery ground,
    that one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
    either a coward or a flatterer.
    that i did love thee, caesar, o, 'tis true!
    if then thy spirit look upon us now,
    shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
    to see thy antony makin
 
 ___________________________
 
inna. truly, my name is cinna.
  first citizen. tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.
  cinna. i am cinna the poet, i am cinna the poet.
  fourth citizen. tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his
bad
    verses.
  cinna. i am not cinna the conspirator.
  fourth citizen. it is no matter, his name's cinna. pluck but
his
    name out of his heart, and turn him going.
  third citizen. tear him, tear him! come, brands, ho,
firebrands. to
    brutus', to cassius'; burn all. some to decius' house, and
some
    to casca's, some to ligarius'. away, go!             exeunt.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited co