alking with m. valenod and the sub-prefect,
happened to turn into the little wood; she saw julien lying on the
ground and thought him dead. she was so overcome as to make m. valenod
jealous.

his alarm was premature. julien admired madame de renal's looks, but
hated her for her beauty; it was the first reef on which his fortune
had nearly foundered. he spoke to her as seldom as possible, in the
hope of making her forget the impulse which, at their first encounter,
had led him to kiss her hand.

elisa, madame de renal's maid, had not failed to fall in love with the
young tutor; she often spoke of him to her mistress. miss elisa's love
had brought upon julien the hatred of one of the footmen. one day he
heard this man say to elisa: 'you won't speak to me any more, since
that greasy tutor has been in the house.' julien did not deserve the
epithet; but, with the instinct of a good-looking youth, became doubly
attentive to his person. m. valenod's hatred was multiplied
accordingly. he said in pu
 
 ___________________________
 
blic that so much concern with one's
appearance was not becoming in a young cleric. barring the cassock,
julien now wore clerical attire.

madame de renal observed that he was speaking more often than before
to miss elisa; she learned that these conversations were due to the
limitations of julien's extremely small wardrobe. he had so scanty a
supply of linen that he was obliged to send it out constantly to be
washed, and it was in performing these little services that elisa made
herself useful to him.

this extreme poverty, of which she had had no suspicion, touched
madame de renal; she longed to make him presents, but did not dare;
this inward resistance was the first feeling of regret that julien
caused her. until then the name of julien and the sense of a pure and
wholly intellectual joy had been synonymous to her.  tormented by the
idea of julien's poverty, madame de renal spoke to her husband about
making him a present of linen:

'what idiocy!' he replied. 'w
 
 ___________________________
 
tirely happy, occupied incessantly with the thought of
julien, was far from reproaching herself in the slightest degree.




chapter 8
minor events


  then there were sighs, the deeper for suppression,
    and stolen glances, sweeter for the theft,
  and burning blushes, though for no transgression.
      _don juan_, i. 74

the angelic sweetness which madame de renal derived from her own
character as well as from her present happiness was interrupted only
when she happened to think of her maid elisa. this young woman
received a legacy, went to make her confession to the cure chelan, and
revealed to him her intention to marry julien. the cure was genuinely
delighted at his friend's good fortune; but his surprise was great
when julien informed him with a resolute air that miss elisa's offer
could not be accepted.

'pay good heed, my son, to what is taking place in your heart,' said
the cure, frowning; 'i congratulate you on your vocation, if it is to
it alone that must be ascribed your scorn
 
 ___________________________
 
 in shedding tears? that i should love the
man who proves to me that i am nothing more than a fool?'

three days later, julien had found the pretext with which he should
have armed himself from the first; this pretext was a calumny, but
what of that?  he admitted to the cure, after much hesitation, that a
reason which he could not explain to him, because to reveal it would
injure a third party, had dissuaded him from the first from the
projected marriage. this was tantamount to an indictment of elisa's
conduct. m. chelan detected in his manner a fire that was wholly
mundane, and very different from that which should have inspired a
young levite.

'my friend,' he appealed to him again, 'be an honest yeoman, educated
and respected, rather than a priest without a vocation.'

julien replied to these fresh remonstrances extremely well, so far as
words went; he hit upon the expressions which a fervent young
seminarist would have employed; but the tone in which he uttered them,
the ill-concealed f
 
 ___________________________
 
 a cunning and prudent hypocrisy. that is not bad at
his age. as for his tone and gestures, he lived among country folk; he
had been debarred from seeing the great models. in the sequel, no
sooner had he been permitted to mix with these gentlemen than he
became admirable as well in gesture as in speech.

madame de renal was surprised that her maid's newly acquired fortune
had not made the girl more happy; she saw her going incessantly to the
cure's, and returning with tears in her eyes; finally elisa spoke to
her mistress of her marriage.

madame de renal believed herself to have fallen ill; a sort of fever
prevented her enjoying any sleep; she was alive only when she had her
maid or julien before her eyes. she could think of nothing but them
and the happiness they would find in their married life. the poverty
of the small house in which people would be obliged to live, with an
income of fifty louis, portrayed itself to her in enchanting colours.
julien might very well become a lawyer at br
 
 ___________________________
 
ay, the sub-prefecture two
leagues from verrieres; in that event she would see something of
him.

madame de renal sincerely believed that she was going mad; she said so
to her husband, and finally did fall ill. that evening, as her maid
was waiting upon her, she noticed that the girl was crying. she
loathed elisa at that moment, and had spoken sharply to her; she
begged the girl's pardon. elisa's tears increased; she said that if
her mistress would allow it, she would tell her the whole tale of her
distress.

'speak,' replied madame de renal.

'well, the fact is, ma'am, he won't have me; wicked people must have
spoken evil of me to him, and he believes them.'

'who won't have you?' said madame de renal, scarcely able to breathe.

'and who could it be, ma'am, but m. julien?' the maid replied through
her sobs. 'his reverence has failed to overcome his resistance; for
his reverence consi
 
 ___________________________
 
dame de renal had ceased to listen; surfeit of happiness had almost
deprived her of the use of her reason. she made the girl repeat to her
several times the assurance that julien had refused in a positive
manner, which would not permit of his coming to a more reasonable
decision later on.

'i wish to make a final effort,' she said to her maid. 'i shall speak
to m. julien.'

next day after luncheon, madame de renal gave herself the exquisite
sensation of pleading her rival's cause, and of seeing elisa's hand
and fortune persistently refused for an hour on end.

little by little julien abandoned his attitude of studied reserve, and
ended by making spirited answers to the sound arguments advanced by
madame de renal. she could not hold out against the torrent of
happiness which now poured into her heart after all those days of
despair. she found herself really ill. when she had come to herself,
and was comfortably settled in her own room, she asked to be left
alone. she was in a state of profou
 
 ___________________________
 
 julien read to her the strange habits of
these insects.

they fastened them, without compunction, with pins upon a large sheet
of pasteboard, also prepared by julien.

at last madame de renal and julien had a subject for conversation; he
was no longer exposed to the frightful torture inflicted on him by
intervals of silence.

they conversed incessantly, and with extreme interest, although always
of the most innocent things. this life, active, occupied and cheerful,
suited everyone, except miss elisa, who found herself worked to death.
'even at carnival-time,' she said, 'when there is a ball at verrieres,
madame has never taken so much trouble over her dress; she changes her
clothes two or three times a day.'

as it is our intention to flatter no one, we shall not conceal the
fact that madame de renal, who had a superb skin, had dresses made for
her which exposed her arms and bosom freely. she was very well made,
and this way of dressing suited her to perfection.

'you have never _been so y
 
 ___________________________
 
oung_, ma'am,' her friends from verrieres used
to tell her when they came to dine at vergy. (it is a local form of
speech.)

a curious point, which our readers will scarcely believe, was that
madame de renal had no deliberate intention in taking such pains with
her appearance. she enjoyed doing so; and, without giving the matter
any particular thought, whenever she was not chasing butterflies with
the children and julien, she was engaged with elisa making dresses.
her one expedition to verrieres was due to a desire to purchase new
summer clothes which had just arrived there from mulhouse.

she brought back with her to vergy a young woman, one of her cousins.
since her marriage, madame de renal had gradually formed an intimate
friendship with madame derville, who in their younger days had been
her school-fellow at the sacre-coeur.

madame derville laughed heartily at what she called her cousin's
absurd ideas. 'if i were alone, they would n
 
 ___________________________
 
of m. de renal. at length he
answered him, sharply enough:

'i was unwell.'

the tone of this reply would have stung a man far less susceptible
than the mayor of verrieres; it occurred to him to reply to julien
with an immediate dismissal. he was restrained only by the maxim which
he had laid down for himself, never to be too hasty in business
matters.

'this young fool,' he soon reminded himself, 'has made himself a sort
of reputation in my house; valenod may take him on, or else he will
marry elisa, and, in either case, he can afford to laugh at me in his
heart.'

despite the wisdom of these reflections, m. de renal's displeasure
found an outlet nevertheless in a succession of coarse utterances
which succeeded in irritating julien. madame de renal was on the point
of subsiding in tears.  as soon as the meal was ended, she asked
julien to give her his arm for their walk; she leaned upon it in a
friendly way. to all that madame de renal said to him, julien could
only murmur in reply:

'this
 
 ___________________________
 
n he was afraid of losing her portrait, or of
compromising her by letting it be seen. for the first time, she had
surprised signs of fear on that calm and noble countenance. never had
he shown himself in such a state for her or for her children. this
additional grief carried her to the utmost intensity of anguish which
the human soul is able to endure.  unconsciously, madame de renal
uttered cries which roused her maid.  suddenly she saw appear by her
bedside the light of a lamp, and recognised elisa.

'is it you that he loves?' she cried in her frenzy.

the maid, amazed at the fearful distress in which she found her
mistress, paid no attention fortunately to this singular utterance.
madame de renal realised her own imprudence: 'i am feverish,' she told
her, 'and i think, a little light-headed; stay beside me.'

thoroughly awakened by the necessity of controlling herself, she felt
less wretched; reason resumed the sway of which her state of
drowsiness had deprived it. to escape from the fix
 
 ___________________________
 
l.

'you must not, on any account,' madame derville told her when she saw
julien return, 'feeling as you do, sit in the garden this evening, the
damp air would make you worse.'

madame derville was surprised to see that her friend, who was always
being scolded by m. de renal for the undue simplicity of her attire,
had put on open-work stockings and a pair of charming little shoes
that had arrived from paris. for the last three days madame de renal's
sole distraction had been to cut out and make elisa put together in
all haste a summer gown, of a charming little fabric greatly in
fashion. it was just possible to finish this gown a few minutes after
julien's arrival; madame de renal at once put it on. her friend had no
longer any doubt.

'she is in love, poor woman!' madame derville said to herself. she
understood all the strange symptoms of her illness.

she saw her speak to julien. pallor took the place of the most vivid
blushes. anxiety stood revealed in her eyes, fastened on those of the

 
 ___________________________
 
 not
my pardon at that price. these poor children have done nothing to
offend thee; 'tis i, i, the guilt is mine alone! i love a man who is
not my husband.'

julien next saw madame de renal reach a state that was outwardly
tranquil.  she sought to take the burden upon herself, she wished not
to poison the existence of him whom she loved.

in the midst of these alternations of love, remorse and pleasure, the
days passed for them with lightning rapidity. julien lost the habit of
reflection.

miss elisa went to conduct a little lawsuit which she had at
verrieres. she found m. valenod greatly annoyed with julien. she hated
the tutor and often spoke about him to m. valenod.

'you would ruin me, sir, if i told you the truth!' she said to him one
day.  'employers all hang together in important things. they never
forgive us poor servants for certain revelations ...'

after these conventional phrases, which the impatient curiosity of m.
valenod found a way of cutting short, he learned the most morti
 
 ___________________________
 
attention, and, unluckily, before the eyes
of all the world; this proudest of women, whose disdain had so often
made him blush, had taken as her lover a little journeyman dressed up
as a tutor. and that nothing might be wanting to the discomfiture of
the governor of the poorhouse, madame de renal adored this lover.

'and,' the maid added with a sigh, 'm. julien went to no pains to make
this conquest, he has never departed from his habitual coldness with
madame.'

it was only in the country that elisa had become certain of her facts,
but she thought that this intrigue dated from far earlier.

'that, no doubt, is why,' she continued bitterly, 'he refused at the
time to marry me. and i, like a fool, going to consult madame de
renal, begging her to speak to the tutor!'

that same evening m. de renal received from the town, with his
newspaper, a long anonymous letter which informed him in the fullest
detail of all that was going on under his roof. julien saw him turn
pale as he read this letter,
 
 ___________________________
 
une from ridicule.
why am i not a widower! i should go and spend six months in paris in
the best society.' after this momentary happiness caused by the idea
of widowhood, his imagination returned to the methods of ascertaining
the truth. should he at midnight, after the whole household had gone
to bed, sprinkle a few handfuls of bran outside the door of julien's
room? next morning, at daybreak, he would see the footprints on it.

'but that would be no good,' he broke out angrily, 'that wretched
elisa would notice it, and it would be all over the house at once that
i am jealous.'

in another story that circulated at the casino, a husband had made
certain of his plight by fastening a hair with a little wax so as to
seal up the doors of his wife's room and her lover's.

after so many hours of vacillation, this method of obtaining
enlightenment seemed to him decidedly the best, and he was thinking of
adopting it, when at a bend in the path he came upon that wife whom he
would have liked to see 
 
 ___________________________
 
in the mountain, a fit companion for
that little workman.'

'take care what you do,' put in m. de renal, calmly enough. 'the one
thing i must insist on is that you do not speak to him. you would show
temper and make him cross with me; you know how touchy the little
gentleman is.'

'that young man has no tact,' went on madame de renal; 'he may be
learned, you know about that, but at bottom he is nothing but a
peasant. for my own part, i have never had any opinion of him since he
refused to marry elisa, it was a fortune ready made; and all because
now and again she pays a secret visit to m. valenod.'

'ah!' said m. de renal, raising his eyebrows as far as they would go,
'what, did julien tell you that?'

'no, not exactly; he has always spoken to me of the vocation that is
calling him to the sacred ministry; but believe me, the first vocation
for the lower orders is to find their daily bread. he made it fairly
clear to me that he was not unaware of these secret visits.'

'and i, i, knew nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
g about them!' cried m. de renal, all his fury
returning, emphasising every word. 'there are things going on in my
house of which i know nothing ... what! there has been something
between elisa and valenod?'

'oh, that's an old story, my dear friend,' madame de renal said
laughing, 'and i daresay no harm was done. it was in the days when
your good friend valenod would not have been sorry to have it thought
in verrieres that there was a little love--of a purely platonic
sort--exchanged between him and me.'

'i had that idea at one time,' cried m. de renal striking his head in
his fury as he advanced from one discovery to another, 'and you never
said a word to me about it?'

'was i to m
 
 ___________________________
 
 taste, which he
learns by heart from some novel ...'

'he never reads any,' cried m. de renal; 'i am positive as to that. do
you suppose that i am a blind master who knows nothing of what goes on
under his roof?'

'very well, if he doesn't read those absurd compliments anywhere, he
invents them, which is even worse. he will have spoken of me in that
tone in verrieres; and, without going so far,' said madame de renal,
with the air of one making a discovery, 'he will have spoken like that
before elisa, which is just as though he had spoken to m. valenod.'

'ah!' cried m. de renal, making the table and the whole room shake
with one of the stoutest blows that human fist ever gave, 'the
anonymous letter in print and valenod's letters were all on the same
paper.'

'at last!' thought madame de renal; she appeared thunderstruck by this
discovery, and without having the courage to add a single word went
and sat down on the divan, at the farther end of the room.

the battle was now won; she had her 
 
 ___________________________
 
ness_. it contained the firmness
which seeks to cloak itself in courtesy; it determined m. de renal.
but, obeying the provincial custom, he continued to speak for a long
time, harked back to every argument in turn; his wife allowed him to
speak, there was still anger in his tone. at length, two hours of
futile discourse wore out the strength of a man who had been helpless
with rage all night. he determined upon the line of conduct which he
was going to adopt towards m. valenod, julien, and even elisa.

once or twice, during this great scene, madame de renal came within an
ace of feeling a certain sympathy for the very real distress of this
man who for ten years had been her friend. but our true passions are
selfish.  moreover she was expecting every moment an avowal of the
anonymous letter which he had received overnight, and this avowal
never came. to gain complete confidence, madame de renal required to
know what ideas might have been suggested to the man upon whom her
fate depended. for,
 
 ___________________________
 
de renal informed him rapidly of all that she had done since
the morning.

'the details tonight,' she added laughing.

'the perversity of woman!' thought julien. 'what pleasure, what
instinct leads them to betray us?

'i find you at once enlightened and blinded by your love,' he said to
her with a certain coldness; 'your behaviour today has been admirable;
but is there any prudence in our attempting to see each other tonight?
this house is paved with enemies; think of the passionate hatred that
elisa has for me.'

'that hatred greatly resembles the passionate indifference that you
must have for me.'

'indifferent or not, i am bound to save you from a peril into which i
have plunged you. if chance decrees that m. de renal speaks to elisa,
by a single word she may disclose everything to him. what is to
prevent him from hiding outside my room, well armed ...'

'what! lacking in courage even!' said madame de renal, with all the
pride of a woman of noble birth.

'i shall never sink so low as to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 time of happiness. he had
encountered disgust and gloomy thoughts only at the dinners to which
he had been invited; in that empty house, was he not free to read,
write, meditate, undisturbed? he had not been aroused at every moment
from his radiant dreams by the cruel necessity of studying the motions
of a base soul, and that in order to deceive it by hypocritical words
or actions.

'could happiness be thus within my reach? ... the cost of such a life
is nothing; i can, as i choose, marry miss elisa, or become fouque's
partner ... but the traveller who has just climbed a steep mountain,
sits down on the summit, and finds a perfect pleasure in resting.
would he be happy if he were forced to rest always?'

madame de renal's mind was a prey to carking thoughts. in spite of her
resolve to the contrary, she had revealed to julien the whole business
of the lease. 'so he will make me forget all my vows!' she thought.

she would have given her life without hesitation to save that of her
husband, h
 
 ___________________________
 
nter had soon come and gone. it was
time to leave the woods of vergy. the high society of verrieres began
to grow indignant that its anathemas were making so little impression
upon m. de renal. in less than a week, certain grave personages who
made up for their habitual solemnity by giving themselves the pleasure
of fulfilling missions of this sort, implanted in him the most cruel
suspicions, but without going beyond the most measured terms.

m. valenod, who was playing a close game, had placed elisa with a
noble and highly respected family, which included five women. elisa
fearing, she said, that she might not find a place during the winter,
had asked this family for only about two thirds of what she was
receiving at the mayor's.  of her own accord, the girl had the
excellent idea of going to confess to the retired cure chelan as well
as to the new cure, so as to be able to give them both a detailed
account of julien's amours.

on the morning after his return, at six o'clock, the abbe chel
 
 ___________________________
 
 separation, at any rate for the time being, was now
indispensable. 'away from me, julien will drift back into those
ambitious projects that are so natural when one has nothing. and i,
great god! i am so rich, and so powerless to secure my own happiness!
he will forget me. charming as he is, he will be loved, he will love.
ah, unhappy woman! of what can i complain? heaven is just, i have not
acquired merit by putting a stop to my crime; it blinds my judgment.
it rested with me alone to win over elisa with a bribe, nothing would
have been easier. i did not take the trouble to reflect for a moment,
the wild imaginings of love absorbed all my time. and now i perish.'

one thing struck julien; as he conveyed to madame de renal the
terrible news of his departure, he was met with no selfish objection.
evidently she was making an effort not to cry.

'we require firmness, my friend.'

she cut off a lock of her hair.

'i do not know what is to become of me,' she said to him, 'but if i
die, promise m
 
 ___________________________
 
blicly, and then fight him. it is going too far.'

'i might be left a widow, great god!' thought madame de renal. but
almost at the same instant she said to herself: 'if i do not prevent
this duel, as i certainly can, i shall be my husband's murderess.'

never before had she handled his vanity with so much skill. in less
than two hours she made him see, always by the use of arguments that
had occurred first to him, that he must show himself friendlier than
ever towards m. valenod, and even take elisa into the house again.
madame de renal required courage to make up her mind to set eyes on
this girl, the cause of all her troubles. but the idea had come to her
from julien.

finally, after having been set three or four times in the right
direction, m. de renal arrived of his own accord at the idea (highly
distressing, from the financial point of view) that the most
unpleasant thing that could happen for himself was that julien, amid
the seething excitement and gossip of the whole of verrieres,
 
 ___________________________
 
e sensations of pride when he was once more able to see in his
arms and almost at his feet this charming woman, the only woman that
he had ever loved, who, a few hours earlier, had been entirely wrapped
up in the fear of a terrible god and in devotion to duty. resolutions
fortified by a year of constancy had not been able to hold out against
his boldness.

presently they heard a sound in the house; a consideration to which
she had not given a thought now disturbed madame de renal.

'that wicked elisa will be coming into the room, what are we to do
with that enormous ladder?' she said to her lover; 'where are we to
hide it? i am going to take it up to the loft,' she suddenly
exclaimed, with a sort of playfulness.

'but you will have to go through the servant's room,' said julien with
astonishment.

'i shall leave the ladder in the corridor, call the man and send him
on an errand.'

'remember to have some excuse ready in case the man notices the ladder
when he passes it in the passage.'

'yes
 
 ___________________________
 
, my angel,' said madame de renal as she gave him a kiss. 'and
you, remember to hide yourself quickly under the bed if elisa comes
into the room while i am away.'

julien was amazed at this sudden gaiety. 'and so,' he thought, 'the
approach of physical danger, so far from disturbing her, restores her
gaiety because she forgets her remorse! indeed a superior woman! ah!
there is a heart in which it is glorious to reign!' julien was in
ecstasies.

madame de renal took the ladder; plainly it was too heavy for her.
julien went to her assistance; he was admiring that elegant figure,
which suggested anything rather than str
 
 ___________________________
 
ount of the incident made him shudder.

'you are afraid'; she said to him; 'and i, i would brave all the
dangers in the world without a tremor. i fear one thing only, that is
the moment when i shall be left alone after you have gone,' and she
ran from the room.

'ah!' thought julien, greatly excited, 'remorse is the only danger
that sublime soul dreads!'

night came at last. m. de renal went to the casino.

his wife had announced a severe headache, she retired to her room,
made haste to dismiss elisa, and speedily rose from her bed to open
the door to julien.

it so happened that he really was faint with hunger. madame de renal
went to the pantry to look for bread. julien heard a loud cry. she
returned and told him that on entering the dark pantry, making her way
to a cupboard in which the bread was kept, and stretching out her
hand, she had touched a woman's arm. it was elisa who had uttered the
cry which julien had heard.

'what was she doing there?'

'she was stealing a few sweetmeats, o
 
 ___________________________
 
at thus revealing an intimate secret that shone in the academician's
eyes shocked julien. 'what are we but a pair of servants engaged in
slandering our employers?' he thought. 'but nothing ought to surprise
me that is done by this academic gentleman.'

one day julien had caught him on his knees before the marquise de la
mole; he was begging her for a tobacco licence for a nephew in the
country. that night, he gathered from a little maid of mademoiselle de
la mole, who was making love to him, as elisa had done in the past,
that her mistress's mourning was by no means put on to attract
attention. this eccentricity was an intimate part of her nature. she
really loved this la mole, the favoured lover of the most brilliant
queen of her age, who had died for having sought to set his friends at
liberty. and what friends! the first prince of the blood and henri iv.

accustomed to the perfect naturalness that shone through the whole of
madame de renal's conduct, julien saw nothing but affectation in
 
 ___________________________
 
sorrow was julien's absence;
she herself called it remorse. her director, a young cleric, virtuous
and fervent, recently arrived from dijon, was under no illusion.

'to die thus, but not by my own hand, is not a sin,' thought madame de
renal. 'god will pardon me perhaps for rejoicing in my death.' she
dared not add: 'and to die by the hand of julien is the acme of
bliss.'

as soon as she was rid of the presence of the surgeon, and of all her
friends who had come crowding round her, she sent for elisa, her maid.

'the gaoler,' she said to her, blushing deeply, 'is a cruel man.
doubtless he intends to maltreat him, thinking that by so doing he
will be pleasing me ... the thought of such a thing is unendurable.
could you not go, as though on your own behalf, and give the gaoler
this packet which contains a few louis? you will tell him that
religion does not permit his maltreating him ... but on no account
must he mention this gift of money.'

it was to this circumstance that julien was indebte
 
 ___________________________
 
sir,' replied the gaoler, lowering his voice, 'but do not speak
so loud, it may damage you.'

julien laughed heartily.

'at the stage i have reached, my friend, you alone could damage me, if
you ceased to be gentle and human ... you shall be well paid,' julien
broke off, resuming his imperious air. this air was immediately
justified by the gift of a small coin.

m. noiroud told him once more, going into the fullest detail, all that
he had heard about madame de renal, but he did not mention miss
elisa's visit.

this man was as menial and submissive as possible. an idea came into
julien's head: 'this sort of ungainly giant may earn three or four
hundred francs, for his prison is never crowded; i can guarantee him
ten thousand francs, if he cares to escape to switzerland with me ...
the difficulty will be to persuade him of my sincerity.' the thought
of the long colloquy that he would have to hold with so vile a
creature filled julien with disgust, he turned his mind to other
things.

that eve
 
 ___________________________
 
hting a duel in the morning with a man
well known for his coolness and for his remarkable skill ... very
remarkable,' whispered mephistopheles, 'he never misses his stroke.

'very well, so be it, all's well that ends well.' (mathilde's
eloquence continued to flow.) 'begad, no,' he said to himself, 'i
shall not appeal.'

having made this decision, he relapsed into his dreams ... 'the
postman on his rounds will bring the newspaper at six o'clock, as
usual; at eight, after m. de renal has read it, elisa, entering the
room on tiptoe, will lay it down on her bed. later, she will awake:
suddenly, as she reads, she will grow troubled; her lovely hand will
tremble; she will come to the words: _at five minutes past ten he had
ceased to live_.

'she will shed hot tears, i know her; in vain did i seek to murder
her, all will be forgotten, and the person whose life i sought to take
will be the only one who will weep sincerely for my death.

'ah, this is a paradox!' he thought, and, for the next quarter