eeth. and yet this physiognomy did not suggest a criminal nature, so
much as that entire insensibility which inspires far greater terror in
the young. the sole feeling that julien's rapid glance could discern
in that long, smug face was a profound contempt for every subject that
might be mentioned to him, which did not refer to another and a better
world.

julien raised his eyes with an effort, and in a voice which the
palpitation of his heart made tremulous explained that he wished to
speak to m. pirard, the director of the seminary. without a word, the
man in black made a sign to him to follow. they climbed two flights of
a wide staircase with a wooden baluster, the warped steps of which
sloped at a downward angle from the wall, and seemed on the point of
collapse. a small door, surmounted by a large graveyard cross of white
wood painted black, yielded to pressure and the porter showed him into
a low and gloomy room, the whitewashed walls of which were adorned
with two large pictures dark wit
 
 ___________________________
 
a feeble voice.

'ah! that is fortunate.'

the man in black had half risen and was impatiently seeking for a
letter in the drawer of his table of firwood which opened with a
creak. he found it, slowly resumed his seat, and once more gazing at
julien, with an air which seemed to wrest from him the little life
that remained to him:

'you are recommended to me by m. chelan, who was the best cure in the
diocese, a good man if ever there was one, and my friend for the last
thirty years.'

'ah! it is m. pirard that i have the honour to address,' said julien
in a feeble voice.

'so it seems,' said the director of the seminary, looking sourly at
him.

the gleam in his little eyes brightened, followed by an involuntary
jerk of the muscles round his mouth. it was the physiognomy of a tiger
relishing in anticipation the pleasure of devouring its prey.

'chelan's letter is short,' he said, as though speaking to himself.
'_intelligenti pauca_; in these days, one cannot write too little.' he
read aloud:

'"i
 
 ___________________________
 
nd managed not to fall. he noticed that
a little window, near the door by which he had entered, commanded a
view of the country. he looked at the trees; the sight of them did him
good, as though he had caught sight of old friends.

'_loquerisne linguam latinam_? (do you speak latin?)' the abbe pirard
asked him as he returned.

'_ita, pater optime_ (yes, excellent father),' replied julien, who was
beginning to come to himself. certainly nobody in the world had
appeared to him less excellent than m. pirard, during the last
half-hour.

the conversation continued in latin. the expression in the abbe's eyes
grew gentler; julien recovered a certain coolness. 'how weak i am,' he
thought, 'to let myself be imposed upon by this show of virtue! this
man will be simply a rascal like m. maslon'; and julien congratulated
himself on having hidden almost all his money in his boots.

the abbe pirard examined julien in theology, and was surprised by the
extent of his knowledge. his astonishment increased when h
 
 ___________________________
 
 the ancient gallican church, he heard the
young man repeat the whole of m. de maistre's book.

'a strange man, chelan,' thought the abbe pirard; 'has he given him
this book to teach him to laugh at it?'

in vain did he question julien, trying to discover whether he
seriously believed the doctrine of m. de maistre. the young man could
answer him only by rote. from this moment, julien was really
admirable, he felt that he was master of himself. after a prolonged
examination it seemed to him that m. pirard's severity towards him
was no more than an affectation. indeed, but for the rule of austere
gravity which, for the last fifteen years, he had imposed on himself
in dealing with his pupils in theology, the director of the seminary
would have embraced julien in the name of logic, such clarity,
precision, and point did he find in the young man's answers.

'this is a bold and healthy mind,' he said to himself, 'but _corpus
debile_ (a frail body).

'do you often fall like that?' he asked julien in f
 
 ___________________________
 
ished
with a list.

'eh; great god, for what do they take me?' he said to himself. 'do
they suppose i can't take a hint?' and he chose the abbe pirard.

though he did not suspect it, this step was decisive. a little
seminarist, still quite a boy, and a native of verrieres, who, from
the first day, had declared himself his friend, informed him that if
he had chosen m. castanede, the vice-principal of the seminary, he
would perhaps have shown greater prudence.

'the abbe castanede is the enemy of m. pirard, who is suspected of
jansenism'; the little seminarist added, whispering this information
in his ear.

all the first steps taken by our hero who fancied himself so prudent
were, like his choice of a confessor, foolish in the extreme. led
astray by all the presumption of an imaginative man, he mistook his
intentions for facts, and thought himself a consummate hypocrite. his
folly went the length of his reproaching himself for his successes in
this art of the weak.

'alas! it is my sole weapon! i
 
 ___________________________
 
e an impression upon the sick and listless
minds of men and women of the world.

having half mastered these several truths, which however all the words
uttered in a seminary tend to deny, julien fell into a deep
melancholy. he worked hard, and rapidly succeeded in learning things
of great value to a priest, entirely false in his eyes, and in which
he took no interest. he imagined that there was nothing else for him
to do.

'am i then forgotten by all the world?' he wondered. he little knew
that m. pirard had received and had flung in the fire several letters
bearing the dijon postmark, letters in which, despite the most
conventional style and language, the most intense passion was
apparent. keen remorse seemed to be doing battle with this love. 'so
much the better,' thought the abbe pirard, 'at least it is not an
irreligious woman that this young man has loved.'

one day, the abbe pirard opened a letter which seemed to be half
obliterated by tears, it was an eternal farewell. 'at last,' the
wri
 
 ___________________________
 
, in my faculty for grasping all that nonsense. can
it be that in their hearts they esteem it at its true value; judge of
it as i do?  and i was fool enough to be proud of myself! those first
places in class which i always obtain have served only to give me
bitter enemies. chazel, who knows far more than i, always puts into
his compositions some piece of stupidity which sends him down to the
fiftieth place; if he obtains the first, it is when he is not
thinking. ah! one word, a single word from m. pirard, how useful it
would have been to me!'

>from the moment in which julien's eyes were opened, the long exercises
of ascetic piety, such as the rosary five times weekly, the hymns to
the sacred heart, etc., etc., which had seemed to him of such deadly
dullness, became the most interesting actions of his life. sternly
criticising his own conduct, and seeking above all not to exaggerate
his methods, julien did not aspire from the first, like the
seminarists who served as models to the rest, to perf
 
 ___________________________
 
of tale-bearing and spite of all sorts; spying and the accusation of
one's comrades are encouraged here. such is the will of heaven, to
show life as it is to young priests, and to inspire in them a disgust
with the world and its pomps.'

'and it is to me that you make these fine speeches'--the abbe pirard
was furious. 'you young rascal!'

'at verrieres,' julien went on calmly, 'my brothers used to beat me
when they had any reason to be jealous of me ...'

'to the point! get to the point!' cried m. pirard, almost beside
himself.

without being the least bit in the world intimidated, julien resumed
his narrative.

'on the day of my coming to besancon, about noon, i felt hungry, i
went into a cafe. my heart was filled with repugnance for so profane a
spot; but i thought that my luncheon would cost me less there than at
an inn. a lady, who seemed to be the mistress of the place, took pity
on my raw looks.  "besancon is full of wicked people," she told me, "i
am afraid for you, sir. if you find your
 
 ___________________________
 
hought julien, 'take part in these conversations.' when
they were not discussing sausages and rich livings, their talk ran on
the worldly side of ecclesiastical teaching; the differences between
bishops and prefects, mayors and cures. julien saw lurking in their
minds the idea of a second god, but of a god far more to be feared and
far more powerful than the first; this second god was the pope. it was
said, but with lowered voice, and when the speaker was quite certain
of not being overheard by m. pirard, that if the pope did not take
the trouble to appoint all the prefects and all the mayors in france,
it was because he had delegated the king of france for that duty, by
naming him the eldest son of the church.

it was about this time that julien thought he might derive some
benefit from his admiration for m. de maistre's book on the pope. he
did, as a matter of fact, astonish his fellow-students; but this was a
fresh misfortune. he annoyed them by expressing their opinions better
than they cou
 
 ___________________________
 
 say it: what judge is there who has
not a son, or at least a cousin to help on in the world?

to enlighten the less clear-sighted, a week after the first judgment
that he obtained, m. l'abbe de frilair took the bishop's carriage, and
went in person to convey the cross of the legion of honour to his
counsel. m. de la mole, somewhat dismayed by the bold front assumed by
the other side, and feeling that his own counsel were weakening, asked
the advice of the abbe chelan, who put him in touch with m. pirard.

at the date of our story they had been corresponding thus for some
years.  the abbe pirard dashed into the business with all the force of
his passionate nature. in constant communication with the marquis's
counsel, he studied his case, and finding him to be in the right,
openly declared himself a partisan of the marquis de la mole against
the all powerful vicar-general. the latter was furious at such
insolence, and coming from a little jansenist to boot!

'you see what these court nobles are 
 
 ___________________________
 
worth who claim to have such
power!' the abbe de frilair would say to his intimates; 'm. de la mole
has not sent so much as a wretched cross to his agent at besancon, and
is going to allow him to be deprived of his post without a murmur. and
yet, my friends write to me, this noble peer never allows a week to
pass without going to show off his blue riband in the drawing-room of
the keeper of the seals, for what that is worth.'

in spite of all m. pirard's activity, and albeit m. de la mole was
always on the best of terms with the minister of justice and still
more with his officials, all that he had been able to achieve, after
six years of constant effort, was to avoid actually losing his case.

in ceaseless correspondence with the abbe pirard, over an affair which
they both pursued with passion, the marquis came in time to appreciate
the abbe's type of mind. gradually, despite the immense gulf between
their social positions, their corresponde
 
 ___________________________
 
ce that would have had more
gravity but for the extreme subtlety that appeared in certain of its
features, and would actually have suggested dishonesty, if the owner
of that handsome face had ceased for a moment to control it. the nose,
which was extremely prominent, formed an unbroken and perfectly
straight line, and gave unfortunately to a profile that otherwise was
most distinguished, an irremediable resemblance to the mask of a fox.
in addition, this abbe who seemed so greatly interested in m. pirard's
resignation, was dressed with an elegance that greatly pleased julien,
who had never seen its like on any other priest.

it was only afterwards that julien learned what was the abbe de
frilair's special talent. he knew how to amuse his bishop, a pleasant
old man, made to live in paris, who regarded besancon as a place of
exile. this bishop was extremely short-sighted, and passionately fond
of fish. the abbe de frilair used to remove the bones from the fish
that was set before monseigneur.

ju
 
 ___________________________
 
tle disposed to discuss business, said to
him:

'before we put in the next man, let us try to discover why this one is
going. fetch me in that seminarist, the truth is to be found in the
mouths of babes.'

julien was summoned: 'i shall find myself trapped between two
inquisitors,' he thought. never had he felt more courageous.

at the moment of his entering the room, two tall valets, better
dressed than m. valenod himself, were disrobing monseigneur. the
prelate, before coming to the subject of m. pirard, thought fit to
question julien about his studies. he touched upon dogma, and was
amazed. presently he turned to the humanities, virgil, horace, cicero.
'those names,' thought julien, 'earned me my number 198. i have
nothing more to lose, let us try to shine.' he was successful; the
prelate, an excellent humanist himself, was enchanted.

at dinner at the prefecture, a girl, deservedly famous, had recited
the poem of _la madeleine_. [footnote: a poem by  delphine gay]  he
was in the mood for lit
 
 ___________________________
 
acitus, which contains the
bishop's inscription,' he said to him. 'that line of latin will be
your lightning conductor in this place, when i have gone.

'_erit tibi, fili mi, successor meus tanquam leo quaerens quern
devoret_. (my successor will be to you, my son, as a lion seeking whom
he may devour.)'

on the following morning, julien detected something strange in the
manner in which his companions addressed him. this made him all the
more reserved.  'here,' he thought, 'we have the effect of m. pirard's
resignation. it is known throughout the place, and i am supposed to be
his favourite. there must be an insult behind this attitude'; but he
could not discover it.  there was, on the contrary, an absence of
hatred in the eyes of all whom he encountered in the dormitories.
'what can this mean? it is doubtless a trap, we are playing a close
game.' at length the young seminarist from verrieres said to him with
a laugh: '_cornelii taciti opera omnia_ (complete works of tacitus).'

at this speech, 
 
 ___________________________
 
rself
be taken in by them; if you wished to succeed, you ought to let
yourself be taken in.'

'on the day when all this ceases to agree with me,' said julien,
'shall i be considered ungrateful if i return to my little cell,
number 103?'

'no doubt,' replied the abbe, 'all the sycophants of the house will
slander you, but then i shall appear. _adsum qui fed_. i shall say that
it was from me that the decision came.'

julien was dismayed by the bitter and almost malicious tone which he
remarked in m. pirard; this tone completely spoiled his last
utterance.

the fact was that the abbe felt a scruple of conscience about loving
julien, and it was with a sort of religious terror that he was thus
directly interfering with the destiny of another man.

'you will also see,' he continued, with the same ill grace, and as
though in the performance of a painful duty, 'you will see madame la
marquise de la mole. she is a tall, fair woman, pious, proud,
perfectly civil and even more insignificant. she is a daug
 
 ___________________________
 
e minutes, that evening, he
replied from the abundance of his heart to julien's eager questions,
then cut himself short, distressed to find himself speaking ill of
everyone, and imputing it to himself as a sin. being choleric and a
jansenist, and regarding christian charity as a duty, his life in
society was a perpetual conflict.

'how frightful that abbe pirard looks!' mademoiselle de la mole was
saying, as julien returned to the sofa.

julien felt a sting of irritation, and yet she was right. m. pirard
was beyond question the most honest man in the room, but his blotched
face, distorted by the pangs of conscience, made him hideous at the
moment.  'never judge by appearances after this,' thought julien; 'it
is at the moment when the abbe's scruples are reproaching him with
some peccadillo that he looks terrible; whereas on the face of that
napier, whom everyone knows to be a spy, one sees a pure and tranquil
happiness.' the abbe pirard had nevertheless made a great concession
to his party; he 
 
 ___________________________
 
e there to words without colour. woe to the man who
  innovates while he speaks!
    faublas

after many months of trial, this is the stage that julien had reached
on the day when the steward of the household paid him his third
quarter's salary. m. de la mole had set him to study the management of
his estates in brittany and normandy. julien made frequent journeys to
those parts. his principal duty was to take charge of the
correspondence relative to the famous lawsuit with the abbe de
frilair. m. pirard had given him the necessary instructions.

>from the brief notes which the marquis used to scribble on the margins
of the papers of all kinds that came to him, julien composed letters
almost all of which were signed.

at the school of theology, his teachers complained of his lack of
industry, but regarded him none the less as one of their most
distinguished pupils.  these several labours, taken up with all the
ardour of a chafed ambition, had soon robbed julien of the fresh
complexion he had br
 
 ___________________________
 
 in dealing with that fiery man ... he has no
judgment, he is capable of anything. fouque is too far off, besides he
would not understand the sentiments of a heart like the marquis's.

'conte altamira ... can i be sure of eternal silence? my request for
advice must not be a definite action, nor complicate my position.
alas!  there is no one left but the sombre abbe pirard ... his mind is
narrowed by jansenism ... a rascally jesuit would know the world
better, and would be more to my purpose ... m. pirard is capable of
beating me, at the mere mention of my crime.'

the genius of tartuffe came to julien's aid: 'very well, i shall go
and confess to him.' this was the resolution to which he finally came
in the garden, after pacing it for fully two hours. he no longer
thought that he might be surprised by a gunshot; sleep was
overpowering him.

next morning, before daybreak, julien was several leagues from paris,
knocking at the door of the stern jansenist. he found, greatly to his
astonishment, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
remony we
shall be on our way to languedoc, and shall never appear again in
paris save by your order. but what pierces me to the heart is that all
this will furnish a savoury anecdote at my expense, and at yours. may
not the epigrams of a foolish public oblige our excellent norbert to
seek a quarrel with julien? in that event, i know him, i should have
no control over him. we should find in his heart the plebeian in
revolt. i implore you on my knees, o my father, come and attend our
wedding, in m. pirard's church, next thursday. the point of the
malicious anecdote will be blunted, and the life of your only son, my
husband's life will be made safe,' etc., etc.

this letter plunged the marquis in a strange embarrassment. he must
now at length make up his mind. ah his little habits, all his
commonplace friends had lost their influence.

in these strange circumstances, the salient features of his character,
stamped upon it by the events of his younger days, resumed their full
sway.  the troubles of
 
 ___________________________
 
 him in
his childhood ..." i will undertake this part of the commission,' the
abbe went on; 'i have at last made m. de la mole decide to compromise
with that abbe de frilair, who is such a jesuit. his position is
unquestionably too strong for us. the implicit recognition of your
noble birth by that man who governs besancon will be one of the
implied conditions of the arrangement.'

julien was no longer able to control his enthusiasm, he embraced the
abbe, he saw himself recognised.

'fie!' said m. pirard, and thrust him away; 'what is the meaning of
this worldly vanity? as for sorel and his sons, i shall offer them, in
my name, an annual pension of five hundred francs, which will be paid
to each of them separately, so long as i am satisfied with them.'

julien was by this time cold and stiff. he thanked the abbe, but in
the vaguest terms and without binding himself to anything. 'can it
indeed be possible,' he asked himself, 'that i am the natural son of
some great nobleman, banished among our m
 
 ___________________________
 
, great god, good god,
indulgent god, restore to me her whom i love!'

the night was by now far advanced. after an hour or two of peaceful
slumber, fouque arrived.

julien felt himself to be strong and resolute like a man who sees
clearly into his own heart.




chapter 45
exit julien

'i will not play that poor abbe chas-bernard the unkind trick of
sending for him,' he said to fouque; 'he would not be able to eat his
dinner for three days afterwards. but try to find me a jansenist, a
friend of m. pirard and beyond the reach of intrigue.'

fouque had been awaiting this development with impatience. julien
acquitted himself in a decent fashion of everything that is due to
public opinion in the provinces. thanks to m. l'abbe de frilair, and
in spite of his unfortunate choice of a confessor, julien, in his
cell, was under the protection of the congregation; with a little more
of the spirit of action, he might have made his escape. but, as the
bad air of the cell produced its effect, his mental powe