ntle blow.'

'how different from me,' thought julien. 'only yesterday my father was
thrashing me. how fortunate these rich people are!'

madame de renal had by this time arrived at the stage of remarking the
most trivial changes in the state of the tutor's mind; she mistook
this envious impulse for shyness, and tried to give him fresh courage.

'what is your name, sir?' she asked him with an accent and a grace the
charm of which julien could feel without knowing whence it sprang.

'they call me julien sorel, ma'am; i am trembling as i enter a strange
house for the first time in my life; i have need of your protection,
and shall require you to forgive me many things at first. i have never
been to college, i was too poor; i have never talked to any other men,
except my cousin the surgeon-major, a member of the legion of honour,
and the reverend father chelan. he will give you a good account of me.
my brothers have always beaten me, do not listen to them if they speak
evil of me to you; pardon my fau
 
 ___________________________
 
 to himself.

a week after the visit of the king of ---- to verrieres, the chief
thing to emerge from the innumerable falsehoods, foolish
interpretations, absurd discussions, etc., etc., to which the king,
the bishop of agde, the marquis de la mole, the ten thousand bottles
of wine, the unseated moirod (who, in the hope of a cross, did not set
foot outside his own door for a whole month after his fall) were in
turn subjected, was the utter indelicacy of having jockeyed into the
guard of honour, julien sorel, the son of a carpenter. you ought to
have heard, on this topic, the wealthy calico printers, who, morning,
noon and night, used to talk themselves hoarse in preaching equality.
that proud woman, madame de renal, was the author of this abomination.
her reason? the flashing eyes and pink cheeks of that young abbe sorel
were reason enough and to spare.

shortly after their return to vergy, stanislas xavier, the youngest of
the children, took fever; at once madame de renal was seized by the
most f
 
 ___________________________
 
come to breakfast tomorrow before
eight o'clock; at that time, i am almost alone.'

'what is your name?' said julien, with the caressing smile of happy
timidity.

'amanda binet.'

'will you permit me to send you, in an hour's time, a little parcel no
bigger than this?'

the fair amanda reflected for a while.

'i am watched: what you ask may compromise me; however, i am now going
to write down my address upon a card, which you can attach to your
parcel.  send it to me without fear.'

'my name is julien sorel,' said the young man. 'i have neither family
nor friends in besancon.'

'ah! now i understand,' she exclaimed joyfully, 'you have come for the
law school?'

'alas, no!' replied julien; 'they are sending me to the seminary.'

the most complete discouragement extinguished the light in amanda's
features; she called a waiter: she had the necessary courage now. the
waiter poured out julien's coffee, without looking at him.

amanda was taking money at the counter; julien prided himself on
having vent
 
 ___________________________
 
orehead was outlined by a mass
of straight hair, as black as jet.

'are you coming nearer, or not?' the man said at length impatiently.

julien advanced with an uncertain step, and at length, ready to fall
to the ground and paler than he had ever been in his life, came to a
halt a few feet away from the little table of white wood covered with
scraps of paper.

'nearer,' said the man.

julien advanced farther, stretching out his hand as though in search
of something to lean upon.

'your name?'

'julien sorel.'

'you are very late,' said the other, once more fastening upon him a
terrible eye.

julien could not endure this gaze; putting out his hand as though to
support himself, he fell full length upon the floor.

the man rang a bell. julien had lost only his sense of vision and the
strength to move; he could hear footsteps approaching.

he was picked up and placed in the little armchair of white wood. he
heard the terrible man say to the porter:

'an epileptic, evidently; i might have known it.'

w
 
 ___________________________
 
ve the honour to address,' said julien
in a feeble voice.

'so it seems,' said the director of the seminary, looking sourly at
him.

the gleam in his little eyes brightened, followed by an involuntary
jerk of the muscles round his mouth. it was the physiognomy of a tiger
relishing in anticipation the pleasure of devouring its prey.

'chelan's letter is short,' he said, as though speaking to himself.
'_intelligenti pauca_; in these days, one cannot write too little.' he
read aloud:

'"i send you julien sorel, of this parish, whom i baptised nearly
twenty years ago; his father is a wealthy carpenter but allows him
nothing. julien will be a noteworthy labourer in the lord's vineyard.
memory, intelligence are not wanting, he has the power of reflection.
will his vocation last? is it sincere?"'

'sincere!' repeated the abbe pirard with an air of surprise, gazing at
julien; but this time the abbe's gaze was less devoid of all trace of
humanity. 'sincere!' he repeated, lowering his voice and returning to
 
 ___________________________
 
eventeenth paragraph of the bull _unam ecclesiam_ of
saint pius v. i am your ecclesiastical superior. in this house to
hear, my dearly beloved son, is to obey. how much money have you?'

('now we come to the point,' thought julien, 'this is the reason of
the "dearly beloved son".')

'thirty-five francs, father.'

'keep a careful note of how you spend your money; you will have to
account for it to me.'

this exhausting interview had lasted three hours. julien was told to
summon the porter.

'put julien sorel in cell number 103,' the abbe pirard told the man.

as a special favour, he was giving julien a room to himself.

'take up his trunk,' he added.

julien lowered his eyes and saw his trunk staring him in the face; he
had been looking at it for three hours and had never seen it.

on arriving at no. 103, which was a tiny room eight feet square on the
highest floor of the building, julien observed that it looked out
towards the ramparts, beyond which one saw the smiling plain which the
doubs divide
 
 ___________________________
 


this conversation comforted julien a little. as he walked away he
repeated to himself with a sigh:

'the only king whose memory the people cherish still!'

the examinations came round. julien answered the questions in a
brilliant manner; he saw that chazel himself was seeking to display
the whole extent of his knowledge.

on the first day, the examiners appointed by the famous vicar-general
de frilair greatly resented having always to place first, or at the
very most second on their list this julien sorel who had been pointed
out to them as the favourite of the abbe pirard. wagers were made in
the seminary that in the aggregate list of the examinations, julien
would occupy the first place, a distinction that carried with it the
honour of dining with the bishop. but at the end of one session, in
which the subject had been the fathers of the church, a skilful
examiner, after questioning julien upon saint jerome, and his passion
for cicero, began to speak of horace, virgil and other profane
authors
 
 ___________________________
 
really delighted to hear it,' said the bishop merrily. 'you
relieve me of a difficulty; for the last ten minutes, i have been
trying to think of a way of thanking you for the pleasant evening
which you have given me, and certainly in a most unexpected manner.
although the gift is scarcely canonical, i should like to give you a
set of tacitus.'

the prelate sent for eight volumes handsomely bound, and insisted upon
writing with his own hand, on the title-page of the first, a latin
inscription to julien sorel. the bishop prided himself on his fine
latinity; he ended by saying to him, in a serious tone, completely at
variance with his tone throughout the rest of the conversation:

'young man, if you are wise, you shall one day have the best living in
my diocese, and not a hundred leagues from my episcopal palace; but
you must be wise.'

julien, burdened with his volumes, left the palace, in great
bewilderment, as midnight was striking.

monseigneur had not said a word to him about the abbe pirard. ju
 
 ___________________________
 
e will do; but he has the sacred fire, he may go far. i
intended to give him to our bishop, should one ever be sent to us who
had something of your way of looking at men and affairs.'

'what is your young man's origin?' said the marquis.

'he is said to be the son of a carpenter in our mountains, but i am
inclined to believe that he is the natural son of some rich man. i
have seen him receive an anonymous or pseudonymous letter containing a
bill of exchange for five hundred francs.'

'ah! it is julien sorel,' said the marquis.

'how do you know his name?' asked the astonished abbe; and, as he was
blushing at his own question:

'that is what i am not going to tell you,' replied the marquis.

'very well!' the abbe went on, 'you might try making him your
secretary, he has energy, and judgment; in short, it is an experiment
worth trying.'

'why not?' said the marquis; 'but would he be the sort of man to let
his palm be greased by the prefect of police or by anyone else, to
play the spy on me? that is 
 
 ___________________________
 
my only objection.'

receiving favourable assurances from the abbe pirard, the marquis
produced a note for one thousand francs:

'send this to julien sorel for his journey; tell him to come to me.'

'one can see,' said the abbe pirard, 'that you live in paris! you are
unaware of the tyranny that weighs upon us poor provincials, and
especially upon priests who are not on good terms with the jesuits.
they will never allow julien sorel to leave, they will manage to cover
themselves with the cleverest excuses, they will reply that he is ill,
letters will have gone astray in the post,' etc., etc.

'one of these days i shall procure a letter from the minister to the
bishop,' said the marquis.

'i was forgetting one thing,' said the abbe: 'this young man, although
of quite humble birth, has a proud heart, he will be of no use to you
if his pride is offended; you will only make him stupid.'

'i like that,' said the marquis, 'i sha
 
 ___________________________
 
g,' he said to
himself. otherwise, she bore a painful resemblance to her mother, whom
he disliked more and more, and he ceased to look at her. comte
norbert, on the other hand, struck him as admirable in every respect.
julien was so captivated, that it never entered his head to be jealous
of him and to hate him, because he was richer and nobler than himself.

julien thought that the marquis appeared bored.

during the second course, he said to his son:

'norbert, i must ask you to look after m. julien sorel, whom i have
just taken upon my staff, and intend to make a man of, if that (_cela_)
can be done.

'he is my secretary,' the marquis added to his neighbour, 'and he
spells _cela_ with a double _l_.'

everyone looked at julien, who gave norbert a slightly exaggerated
bow; but on the whole, they were satisfied with his appearance.

the marquis must have spoken of the kind of education that julien had
received, for one of the guests tackled him upon horace: 'it was
precisely in discussing horace t
 
 ___________________________
 
;
people will not be able to say that it was his handsome moustaches or
his elegant seat on a horse that seduced me, but his profound
discussions of the future in store for france, his ideas as to the
resemblance the events that are going to burst upon us may bear to the
revolution of 1688 in england. i have been seduced,' she answered the
voice of remorse, 'i am a weak woman, but at least i have not been led
astray like a puppet by outward advantages.

'if there be a revolution, why should not julien sorel play the part
of roland, and i that of madame roland? i prefer that to the part of
madame de stael: immoral conduct will be an obstacle in our time.
certainly they shall not reproach me with a second lapse; i should die
of shame.'

mathilde's meditations were not all as grave, it must be admitted, as
the thoughts we have just transcribed.

she would look at julien, and found a charming grace in his most
trivial actions.

'no doubt,' she said to herself, 'i have succeeded in destroying every
ide
 
 ___________________________
 
r the estates; he was in hiding
in the abbe pirard's presbytery, and saw mathilde almost every day;
she, each morning, went to spend an hour with her father, but
sometimes they remained for weeks on end without mentioning the matter
that was occupying all their thoughts.

'i do not wish to know where that man is,' the marquis said to her one
day; 'send him this letter.' mathilde read:

'the estates in languedoc bring in 20,600 francs. i give 10,600 francs
to my daughter, and 10,000 francs to m. julien sorel. i make over the
estates themselves, that is to say. tell the lawyer to draft two
separate deeds of gift, and to bring me them tomorrow; after which, no
further relations between us. ah! sir, how was i to expect such a
thing as this?

'le marquis de la mole'

'i thank you very much,' said mathilde gaily. 'we are going to settle
in the chateau d'aiguillon, between agen and marmande. they say that
the country there is as beautiful as italy.'

this donation came as a great surprise to julien. he w
 
 ___________________________
 
athilde .. .' that day, the
marquis's arguments were more conclusive than usual. habit, however,
prevailed; he resolved to gain time and to write to his daughter; for
they communicated by letter between different parts of the house. m.
de la mole dared not discuss matters with mathilde and hold out
against her. he was afraid of bringing everything to an end by a
sudden concession.

'take care not to commit any fresh act of folly; here is a commission
as lieutenant of hussars for m. le chevalier julien sorel de la
vernaye. you see what i am doing for him. do not cross me, do not
question me. he shall start within twenty-four hours, and report
himself at strasbourg, where his regiment is quartered. here is a draft
upon my banker; i expect obedience.'

mathilde's love and joy knew no bounds; she sought to profit by her
victory and replied at once:

'm. de la vernaye would be at your feet, speechless with gratitude, if
he knew all that you are deigning to do for him. but, in the midst of
this generosi
 
 ___________________________
 
he insulted by
offering them gold too crudely; but they ended by accepting.

she speedily came to the conclusion that in doubtful matters of high
import, everything in besancon depended upon m. l'abbe de frilair.

under the obscure name of madame michelet, she at first found
insuperable obstacles in the way to the presence of the all-powerful
leader of the congregation. but the rumour of the beauty of a young
milliner, madly in love, who had come from paris to besancon to
comfort the young abbe julien sorel, began to spread through the town.

mathilde went alone and on foot through the streets of besancon; she
hoped that she might not be recognised. in any event, she thought that
it must help her cause to create a strong impression upon the
populace. in her folly she thought of making them revolt, to save
julien on his way to the scaffold. mademoiselle de la mole imagined
herself to be dressed simply and in a manner becoming a woman stricken
with grief; she was dressed in such a fashion as to attr
 
 ___________________________
 
f nothing worse than a piece of stupidity; the woman at whom
he fired is doing well.  in the second place, to corrupt the
subordinates, i can put down here and now fifty thousand francs, and
bind myself to pay double that sum. lastly, my gratitude and the
gratitude of my family will consider no request impossible from the
person who has saved m. de la vernaye.'

m. de frilair appeared to be surprised at this name. mathilde showed
him a number of letters from the ministry of war, addressed to m.
julien sorel de la vernaye.

'you see, sir, that my father undertook to provide for his future. i
married him secretly, my father wished him to be a senior officer
before making public this marriage, which is a little odd for a la
mole.'

mathilde remarked that the expression of benevolence and of a mild
gaiety speedily vanished as m. de frilair began to arrive at important
discoveries. a subtlety blended with profound insincerity was
portrayed on his features.

the abbe had his doubts, he perused the offic
 
 ___________________________
 
r in court upon the day of the trial, sir, because
my presence might prejudice m. sorel's case. i desire but one thing in
the world, and that passionately, namely his acquittal. be assured of
this, the terrible thought that on my account an innocent man has been
sent to his death would poison the remainder of my life, and would
doubtless shorten it. how could you sentence him to death, while i
still live? no, beyond question, society has not the right to take
life, especially from such a man as julien sorel. everyone at
verrieres has seen him in moments of distraction. this poor young man
has powerful enemies; but, even among his enemies (and how many they
are!) who is there that has any doubt of his admirable talents and his
profound learning? it is not an ordinary person that you are about to
judge, sir. for nearly eighteen months we have all known him to be
pious, wise, studious; but, two or three times in the year, he was
seized by fits of melancholy which bordered on insanity. the whole
town 
 
 ___________________________
 
d tired, heard them discussing
round him whether this delay augured well or ill. he noticed with
pleasure that everyone was on his side; the jury did not return, and
still not a woman left the court.

just as two o'clock had struck, a general stir was audible. the little
door of the jury-room opened. m. le baron de valenod advanced with a
grave, theatrical step, followed by the rest of the jury. he coughed,
then declared that on his soul and conscience the unanimous opinion of
the jury was that julien sorel was guilty of murder, and of murder
with premeditation: this verdict inferred a sentence of death; it was
pronounced a moment later. julien looked at his watch, and remembered
m. de lavalette; it was a quarter past two. today is friday,' he
thought.

'yes, but this is a lucky day for valenod, who is sentencing
me ... i am too closely guarded for mathilde to be able to effect my
escape, like madame de lavalette . .. and so, in three days, at this
same hour, i shall know what to think of the _gre
 
 ___________________________
 
rrel with me; for the hatred that follows on contempt is
generally furious.'

the death of m. de croisenois altered all julien's ideas with regard
to mathilde's future; he devoted several days to proving to her that
she ought to accept the hand of m. de luz. 'he is a shy man, not too
much of a jesuit,' he told her, 'and a man who no doubt intends to
climb. with a more sober and persistent ambition than poor croisenois,
and with no dukedom in his family, he will make no difficulty about
marrying julien sorel's widow.'

'and a widow who scorns grand passions,' replied mathilde coldly; 'for
she has lived long enough to see, after six months, her lover prefer
another woman, and a woman who was the origin of all their troubles.'

'you are unjust; madame de renal's visits will furnish the barrister
from paris, who has been engaged to conduct my appeal, with some
striking phrases; he will describe the murderer honoured by the
attentions of his victim. that may create an effect, and perhaps one
day you wi