'i shall send my son up to the chateau.'

it was thus that the mayor's subordinates spoke of his house when they
wished to please him.

returning to his mill, sorel looked in vain for his son. doubtful as
to what might be in store for him, julien had left home in the dead of
night.  he had been anxious to find a safe hiding-place for his books
and his cross of the legion of honour. he had removed the whole of his
treasures to the house of a young timber-merchant, a friend of his, by
the name of fouque, who lived on the side of the high mountain
overlooking verrieres.

when he reappeared: 'heaven knows, you damned idler,' his father said
to him, 'whether you will ever have enough honour to pay me for the
cost of your keep, which i have been advancing to you all these years!
pack up your rubbish, and off with you to the mayor's.'

julien, astonished not to receive a thrashing, made haste to set off.
but no sooner was he out of sight of his terrible father than he
slackened his pace. he decided
 
 ___________________________
 
book; at twenty, the thought of the world and of the
impression one is going to make on it, prevails over everything else.

presently, however, he put down the book. by dint of dreaming of
napoleon's victories, he had discerned a new element in his own. 'yes,
i have won a battle,' he told himself, 'but i must follow it up, i
must crush the arrogance of this proud gentleman while he is still
retreating. that is napoleon out and out. i must ask him for three
days' holiday, to go and see my friend fouque. if he refuses, i again
offer to break the agreement; but he will give way.'

madame de renal could not close an eye. she felt that she had never
lived until that moment. she could not tear her mind from the
happiness of feeling julien cover her hand with burning kisses.

suddenly the horrid word _adultery_ occurred to her. all the most
disgusting implications that the vilest debauchery can impart to the
idea of sensual love came crowding into her imagination. these ideas
sought to tarnish the 
 
 ___________________________
 
gaze, passing over the lower ridges which
confine the course of the doubs on the south, was able to sweep the
fertile plains of burgundy and beaujolais.  irresponsive as the heart
of this ambitious youth might be to this kind of beauty, he could not
refrain from stopping now and again to gaze at so vast and so imposing
a prospect.

at length he came to the summit of the high mountain, beneath which he
must pass in order to arrive, by this diagonal route, at the lonely
valley in which his friend fouque, the young timber merchant, lived.
julien was in no hurry to see him, or any other human being for that
matter. concealed like a bird of prey, amid the bare rocks which
crowned the high mountain, he could see a long way off anyone that
might be coming his way. he discovered a small cave in the almost
perpendicular face of one of the rocks. he set his course for it, and
presently was ensconced in this retreat. 'here,' he said, his eyes
sparkling with joy, 'men can do me no harm.' it occurred to 
 
 ___________________________
 
him to
indulge in the pleasure of writing down his thoughts, so dangerous to
him in any other place. a smooth block of stone served as his table.
his pen flew: he saw nothing of the scene round about him. at length
he noticed that the sun was setting behind the distant mountains of
beaujolais.

'why should i not spend the night here?' he asked himself; 'i have
bread, and _i am free_!' at the sound of that great word his heart
leaped, his hypocrisy meant that he was not free even with fouque. his
head supported on both his hands, julien stayed in this cave happier
than he had ever been in his life, engrossed in his dreams and in the
joy of freedom. without heeding it he saw fade and die, one after
another, the last rays of evening light. in the midst of that vast
darkness, his soul wandered in contemplation of what he imagined that
he would one day find in paris. this was first and foremost a woman
far more beautiful and of a far higher intelligence than any it had
been his lot to 
 
 ___________________________
 
been aroused at this
stage in his romance by the cold touch of irony; the mighty deeds
would have vanished with the hope of performing them, to give place to
the well-known maxim: 'when a man leaves his mistress, he runs the
risk of being betrayed two or three times daily.' the young peasant
saw no obstacle between himself and the most heroic actions, save want
of opportunity.

but black night had succeeded the day, and he had still two leagues to
cover before coming down to the hamlet in which fouque lived. before
leaving the little cave, julien struck a light and carefully destroyed
all that he had written.

he greatly astonished his friend by knocking at his door at one
o'clock in the morning. he found fouque engaged in making up his
accounts. he was a young man of tall stature, none too well made, with
large, hard features, a huge nose, and plenty of good nature concealed
beneath this repellent aspect.

'you've quarrelled with your m. de renal, then, that you come here of
a sudden like t
 
 ___________________________
 
his?'

julien related to him, with suitable omissions, the events of the
previous evening.

'stay with me,' fouque said to him; 'i see that you know m. de renal,
m. valenod, the sub-prefect maugiron, the cure chelan; you have
grasped all the subtle points of their natures; you're ripe now to put
yourself up for auction. you know arithmetic better than i do, you
shall keep my books; i am making a big profit from my business. the
impossibility of doing everything by myself and the fear of hitting
upon a rogue in the man i might take as my partner prevent me every
day from doing the most profitable deals. not 
 
 ___________________________
 
ichaud of saint-amand, whom i had
not seen for six years, and met quite by chance at the pontarlier
sale. why should not you have made those six thousand francs yourself,
or three thousand at least?  for if i had had you with me that day, i
should have gone on bidding for that lot of timber, and the other
would soon have left me with it. be my partner.'

this offer annoyed julien; it unsettled his erratic mind; throughout
supper, which the friends cooked for themselves, like homeric heroes,
for fouque lived by himself, he showed julien his books, and proved to
him what advantages his trade in timber offered. fouque had the
highest opinion of julien's intelligence and character.

when at length the latter found himself alone in his little room
walled with planks of firwood, 'it is true,' he said to himself, 'i
can make a few thousand francs here, then return with advantage to the
calling of soldier or priest, according to the fashion prevailing in
france at the time. the little hoard that i s
 
 ___________________________
 
hall have amassed will
remove all difficulties of detail. alone on this mountainside, i can
do something to dispel my present appalling ignorance of so many of
the things that occupy the minds of all these fashionable gentlemen.
but fouque is giving up the thought of marriage, he has told me again
and again that solitude is making him melancholy. it is obvious that
if he is taking a partner who has no money to put into his business,
it is in the hope of providing himself with a companion who will never
leave him.

'shall i prove false to my friend?' exclaimed julien angrily. this
creature, for whom hypocrisy and the absence of all fellow feeling
were the ordinary line of conduct, could not on this occasion bear the
thought of the
 
 ___________________________
 
ad a reason for refusing.
'what, i should be idly wasting seven or eight years! i should thus
arrive at eight and twenty; but, at that age, napoleon had already
done his greatest deeds!  after i have obscurely scraped together a
little money by going round all these timber sales, and winning the
favour of various minor rascals, who can say whether i shall still
preserve the sacred fire with which one makes oneself a name?'

the following morning, julien replied with great coolness to the
worthy fouque, who looked upon the matter of their partnership as
settled, that his vocation to the sacred ministry of the altar did not
allow him to accept. fouque could not believe his ears.

'but do you realise,' he kept on saying, 'that i make you my partner,
or, if you prefer, give you four thousand francs a year? and you want
to go back to your m. de renal, who despises you like the mud on his
shoes! when you have two hundred louis in hand, what is to prevent you
from entering the seminary? i will say 
 
 ___________________________
 
more, i undertake to procure
for you the best parish in the district. for,' fouque went on,
lowering his voice, 'i supply firewood to the ----, and the ----, and
m. ----. i give them the best quality of oak, for which they pay me
the price of white wood, but never was money better invested.'

nothing could prevail against julien's vocation. in the end fouque
decided that he must be slightly mad. on the third day, at dawn,
julien left his friend to pass the day among the rocks of the big
mountain. he found his little cave again, but he no longer enjoyed
peace of mind, his friend's offers had destroyed it. like hercules he
found himself called upon to choose not between vice and virtue, but
between mediocrity ending in an assured comfort and all the heroic
dreams of his youth. 'so i have no real firmness of character,' he
told himself; and this was t
 
 ___________________________
 
e picturesque ruins of the old church of
vergy, it occurred to him that for two whole days he had not once
thought of madame de renal. the other day, as i was leaving, that
woman reminded me of the vast gulf that separates us, she treated me
like a workman's son. no doubt she wished to show me that she repented
of having let me hold her hand the night before ... it is a lovely
hand, all the same! what charm, what nobility dwells in that woman's
glance!'

the possibility of making a fortune with fouque gave a certain
facility to the course of julien's reasoning; it was less often
interrupted by irritation, and the keen sense of his own poverty and
humble position in the eyes of the world. as though perched on a lofty
promontory, he was able to judge, and, so to speak, overlooked extreme
poverty on the one hand and that life of comfort which he still called
riches on the other. he was far from considering his position like a
philosopher, but he had sufficient perception to feel that he was
_di
 
 ___________________________
 
fferent_ after this little expedition among the mountains.

he was struck by the extreme uneasiness with which madame de renal
listened to the short account of his journey, for which she had asked
him.

fouque had had thoughts of marriage, unhappy love affairs; the
conversation between the friends had been filled with long confidences
of this nature.  after finding happiness too soon, fouque had
discovered that he was not the sole possessor of his mistress's heart.
these disclosures had astonished julien; he had learned much that was
new to him. his solitary life, compounded of imagination and
suspicion, had kept him aloof from everything that could have
enlightened him.

during his absence, life had been for madame de renal nothing more
than a succession of torments, each different but all alike
intolerable; she was really ill.

'you must not, on any account,' madame derville told
 
 ___________________________
 
said to her about it, had proposed a
turn in the garden; soon she had confessed that she was not well
enough to walk. she had taken the returned traveller's arm, and, far
from restoring her strength, the contact of that arm deprived her of
what little strength remained to her.

it was dark; no sooner were they seated than julien, relying on the
privilege he had already won, ventured to press his lips to the arm of
his pretty neighbour, and to take her hand. he was thinking of the
boldness which fouque had used with his mistresses, and not of madame
de renal; the phrase _well born_ still weighed upon his heart. his own
hand was pressed, but this afforded him no pleasure. far from his
being proud, or even grateful for the affection which madame de renal
betrayed this evening by unmistakable signs, beauty, elegance,
freshness found him almost unconscious of their appeal. purity of
heart, freedom from any feeling of hatred, serve doubtless to prolong
the duration of youth. it is the face that ag
 
 ___________________________
 
es first in the majority
of beautiful women.

julien was sullen all the evening; hitherto he had been angry only
with fortune and with society; now that fouque had offered him an
ignoble way of arriving at comfort, he was angry with himself.
absorbed in his own thoughts, although now and then he addressed a few
words to the ladies, julien ended by unconsciously letting go madame
de renal's hand. this action completely nonplussed the poor woman; she
saw in it an indication of her fate.

had she been certain of julien's affection, her virtue might perhaps
have found strength to resist him. trembling at the thought of losing
him for ever, her passion car
 
 ___________________________
 
t moment.
even the thought of virtue and of the fidelity she had vowed to m. de
renal, which had distressed her some days before, presented itself in
vain, she dismissed it like an importunate stranger. 'never will i
allow julien to take any liberty,' madame de renal told herself, 'we
shall live in future as we have been living for the last month. he
shall be a friend.'




chapter 14
the english scissors

  a girl of sixteen had a rosy complexion, and put on rouge.
    polidori

as for julien, fouque's offer had indeed destroyed all his happiness;
he could not decide upon any course.

'alas! perhaps i am wanting in character, i should have made napoleon
a bad soldier. anyhow,' he went on, 'my little intrigue with the lady
of the house is going to distract me for the moment.'

fortunately for him, even in this minor incident, his inward feelings
bore no relation to his cavalier language. he was afraid of madame de
renal because of her pretty gown. this gown was in his eyes the
advance guard 
 
 ___________________________
 
of paris. his pride was determined to leave nothing to
chance and to the inspiration of the moment. drawing upon fouque's
confessions and the little he had read about love in the bible, he
prepared a plan of campaign in great detail. since, though he did not
admit it to himself, he was extremely anxious, he committed this plan
to writing.

the following morning, in the drawing-room, madame de renal was alone
with him for a moment.

'have you no other name besides julien?' she asked him.

our hero did not know what answer to give to so flattering a question.
no provision had been made in his plan for such an even
 
 ___________________________
 
 idea; bored with himself and with madame
de renal, he saw with alarm the evening approach when he would be
seated in the garden, by her side and in the dark. he told m. de renal
that he was going to verrieres to see the cure; he set off after
dinner, and did not return until late at night.

at verrieres, julien found m. chelan engaged in packing up; he had at
last been deprived of his benefice; the vicar maslon was to succeed
him. julien helped the good cure, and it occurred to him to write to
fouque that the irresistible vocation which he felt for the sacred
ministry had prevented him at first from accepting his friend's
obliging offer, but that he had just witnessed such an example of
injustice, that perhaps it would be more advantageous to his welfare
were he not to take holy orders.

julien applauded his own deftness in making use of the deprivation of
the cure of verrieres to leave a door open for himself and so return
to commerce, should the sad voice of prudence prevail, in his mind,
 
 ___________________________
 
er wise counsel was becoming hateful
to a woman who had positively lost her head, she left vergy without
offering an explanation for which she was not asked. madame de renal
shed a few tears at her departure, and soon it seemed to her that
her happiness was doubled. by the withdrawal of her guest she found
herself left alone with her lover almost all day long.

julien gave himself all the more readily to the pleasant society of
his mistress inasmuch as, whenever he was left too long by himself,
fouque's fatal offer recurred to his mind to worry him. in the first
days of this new life, there were moments when he, who had never
loved, who had never been loved by anyone, found so exquisite a
pleasure in being sincere, that he was on the point of confessing to
madame de renal the ambition which until then had been the very
essence of his existence. he would have liked to be able to consult
her as to the strange temptation which he felt in fouque's offer, but
a trifling occurrence put a stop to a
 
 ___________________________
 
this distress was clearly
shown on her pure countenance; so simple when she was happy and away
from bores.

julien no longer dared give himself up freely to his dreams. more calm
and less amorous, he decided that it was imprudent in him to go to
madame de renal in her room. it would be better if she came to him; if
a servant saw her moving about the house, there would be a score of
possible reasons to account for her action.

but this arrangement also had its drawbacks. julien had received from
fouque certain books for which he, as a student of divinity, could
never have asked a bookseller. he ventured to open them only at night.
often he would have been just as well pleased not to be interrupted by
an assignation, the tension of waiting for which, even before the
little scene in the orchard, would have left him incapable of reading.

he was indebted to madame de renal for an entirely new understanding
of the books he read. he had ventured to ply her with questions as to
all sorts of little 
 
 ___________________________
 
 encroached on the public thoroughfare, as a
result of which they would be good for a hundred years. despite the
great piety and admitted probity of m. de moirod, it was certain that
he _could be managed_, for he had a large family. among the houses
that would have to be moved back, nine belonged to the very best
people in verrieres.

in julien's eyes, this intrigue was far more important than the
history of the battle of fontenoy, a name which he saw for the first
time in one of the books that fouque had sent him. many things had
astonished julien during the five years since he had begun to spend
his evenings with the cure. but discretion and a humble spirit being
the chief qualities required in a divinity student, it had always been
impossible for him to ask any questions.

one day, madame de renal had given an order to her husband's valet,
julien's enemy.

'but, ma'am, today is the last friday of the month,' the man answered
her with a curious expression.

'go,' said madame de renal.

'we
 
 ___________________________
 
mps his horse has taken,
with his fatuity and with the endless enumeration of all his
advantages.

'is there an anonymous letter? wicked one, that is what i wished to
discuss with you; but no, you were right. clasping you in my arms, for
the last time perhaps, i could never have discussed the matter calmly,
as i do when i am alone. from this moment our happiness will not be so
easily secured. will that be an annoyance to you? yes, on the days
when you have not received some amusing book from m. fouque. the
sacrifice is made; tomorrow, whether there be an anonymous letter or
not, i shall tell my husband that i have received an anonymous letter,
that he must instantly offer you a large sum to accept another post,
find some decent pretext, and send you back without delay to your
family.

'alas, dear friend, we are going to be parted for a fortnight, perhaps
a month! but there, i do you justice, you will suffer as much as i.
still, this is the only way to counteract the effect of this anonymous

 
 ___________________________
 
s. he had
encountered disgust and gloomy thoughts only at the dinners to which
he had been invited; in that empty house, was he not free to read,
write, meditate, undisturbed? he had not been aroused at every moment
from his radiant dreams by the cruel necessity of studying the motions
of a base soul, and that in order to deceive it by hypocritical words
or actions.

'could happiness be thus within my reach? ... the cost of such a life
is nothing; i can, as i choose, marry miss elisa, or become fouque's
partner ... but the traveller who has just climbed a steep mountain,
sits down on the summit, and finds a perfect pleasure in resting.
would he be happy if he were forced to rest always?'

madame de renal's mind was a prey to carking thoughts. in spite of her
resolve to the contrary, she had revealed to julien the whole business
of the lease. 'so he will make me forget all my vows!' she thought.

she would have given her life without hesitation to save that of her
husband, had she seen him in
 
 ___________________________
 
e mayor's.  of her own accord, the girl had the
excellent idea of going to confess to the retired cure chelan as well
as to the new cure, so as to be able to give them both a detailed
account of julien's amours.

on the morning after his return, at six o'clock, the abbe chelan sent
for julien:

'i ask you nothing,' he said to him; 'i beg you, and if need be order
you to tell me nothing, i insist that within three days you leave
either for the seminary at besancon or for the house of your friend
fouque, who is still willing to provide a splendid career for you. i
have foreseen and settled everything, but you must go, and not return
to verrieres for a year.'

julien made no answer; he was considering whether his honour ought to
take offence at the arrangements which m. chelan, who after all was
not his father, had made for him.

'tomorrow at this hour i shall have the honour of seeing you again,'
he said at length to the cure.

m. chelan, who reckoned upon overcoming the young man by main forc
 
 ___________________________
 
 her, 'to make the memory of our love
abominable?'

at length julien left verrieres. m. de renal was overjoyed; at the
decisive moment of accepting money from him, this sacrifice proved to
be too great for julien. he refused point-blank. m. de renal fell upon
his neck, with tears in his eyes. julien having asked him for a
testimonial to his character, he could not in his enthusiasm find
terms laudatory enough to extol the young man's conduct. our hero had
saved up five louis and intended to ask fouque for a similar amount.

he was greatly moved. but when he had gone a league from verrieres,
where he was leaving such a treasure of love behind him, he thought
only of the pleasure of seeing a capital, a great military centre like
besancon.

during this short parting of three days, madame de renal was duped by
one of love's most cruel illusions. her life was tolerable enough,
there was between her and the last extremes of misery this final
meeting that she was still to have with julien.

she cou
 
 ___________________________
 
nave

at length he made out, on a distant mountain, a line of dark walls; it
was the citadel of besancon. 'how different for me,' he said with a
sigh, 'if i were arriving in this noble fortress to be a sublieutenant
in one of the regiments entrusted with its defence!'

besancon is not merely one of the most charming towns in france, it
abounds in men and women of feeling and spirit. but julien was only a
young peasant and had no way of approaching the distinguished people.

he had borrowed from fouque a layman's coat, and it was in this attire
that he crossed the drawbridges. his mind full of the history of the
siege of 1674, he was determined to visit, before shutting himself up
in the seminary, the ramparts and the citadel. more than once, he was
on the point of being arrested by the sentries for making his way into
places from which the engineers of the garrison excluded the public,
in order to make a profit of twelve or fifteen francs every year by
the sale of the hay grown there.

the h
 
 ___________________________
 
be just towards men.'

this ending to the letter was almost entirely illegible. the writer
gave an address at dijon, and at the same time hoped that julien would
never reply, or that at least he would confine himself to language
which a woman restored to the ways of virtue could read without
blushing.

julien's melancholy, assisted by the indifferent food supplied to the
seminary by the contractor for dinners at 83 centimes a head, was
beginning to have an effect on his health, when one morning fouque
suddenly appeared in his room.

'at last i have found my way in. i have come five times to besancon,
honour bound, to see you. always a barred door. i posted someone at
the gate of the seminary; why the devil do you never come out?'

'it is a test which i have set myself.'

'i find you greatly altered. at last i see you again. two good five
franc pieces have just taught me that i was no better than a fool not
to have offered them on my first visit.'

the conversation between the friends was end
 
 ___________________________
 
less. julien changed
colour when fouque said to him:

'have you heard, by the way? the mother of your pupils has become most
devoutly religious.'

and he spoke with that detached air which makes so singular an
impression on the passionate soul whose dearest interests the speaker
unconsciously destroys.

'yes, my friend, the most exalted strain of piety. they say that she
makes pilgrimages. but, to the eternal shame of the abbe maslon, who
has been spying so long upon that poor m. chelan, madame de renal will
have nothing to do with h
 
 ___________________________
 
im. she goes to confession at dijon or
besancon.'

'she comes to besancon!' said julien, his brow flushing.

'quite often,' replied fouque with a questioning air.

'have you any _constitutionnels_ on you?'

'what's that you say?' replied fouque.

'i ask you if you have any _constitutionnels_?' julien repeated, in a
calmer tone. 'they are sold here for thirty sous a copy.'

'what! liberals even in the seminary!' cried fouque. 'unhappy france!'
he went on, copying the hypocritical tone and meek accents of the abbe
maslon.

this visit would have made a profound impression upon our hero, had
not, the very next day, a remark addressed to him by that little
seminarist from verrieres who seemed such a boy, led him to make an
important discovery.  ever since he had been in the seminary, julien's
conduct had been nothing but a succession of false steps. he laughed
bitterly at himself.

as a matter of fact, the important ac
 
 ___________________________
 
nary made a point of
never speaking to him except in the presence of witnesses. this was
only prudent, in the master's interest as well as the pupil's; but
more than anything else it was a test. the stern jansenist pirard's
invariable principle was: 'has a man any merit in your eyes? place an
obstacle in the way of everything that he desires, everything that he
undertakes. if his merit be genuine, he will certainly be able to
surmount or thrust aside your obstacles.'

it was the hunting season. fouque took it into his head to send to the
seminary a stag and a boar in the name of julien's family. the dead
animals were left lying in the passage, between kitchen and refectory.
there all the seminarists saw them on their way to dinner. they
aroused much interest. the boar, although stone dead, frightened the
younger boys; they fingered his tusks. nothing else was spoken of for
a week.

this present, which classified julien's family in the section of
society that one must respect, dealt a mortal 
 
 ___________________________
 
eigneur paid him, with regard to the
exalted destiny that awaited him in paris, a number of very neat
compliments, which required an explanation if he were to express his
thanks. julien could say nothing, chiefly because he knew nothing, and
monseigneur showed a high regard for him. one of the minor clergy of
the palace wrote to the mayor who made haste to appear in person
bringing a passport already signed, but with a blank space for the
name of the traveller.

before midnight, julien was with fouque, whose sober mind was more
astonished than delighted by the future which seemed to be in store
for his friend.

'the end of it will be,' said this liberal elector, 'a post under
government, which will oblige you to take some action that will be
pilloried in the newspapers. it will be through your disgrace that i
shall have news of you. remember that, even financially speaking, it
is better to earn one hundred louis in an honest trade in timber,
where you are your own master, than to receive fou
 
 ___________________________
 
tlemen, i understand this little stroke of
machiavellianism; the abbe maslon or m. castanede of the seminary
could not have been more clever. you rob me of my incitement, the
letter, and i become the second volume of colonel caron at colmar.

'one moment, gentlemen, i am going to send the fatal letter in a
carefully sealed packet to the custody of m. l'abbe pirard. he is an
honest man, a jansenist, and as such out of reach of the temptations
of the budget. yes, but he opens letters ... it is to fouque that i
must send this one.'

it must be admitted the glare in julien's eyes was ghastly, his
expression hideous; it was eloquent of unmitigated crime. he was an
unhappy man at war with the whole of society.

'_to arms_!' cried julien. and he sprang with one bound down the steps
that led from the house. he entered the letter-writer's booth at the
street corner; the man was alarmed. 'copy this,' said julien, giving
him mademoiselle de la mole's letter.

while the writer was thus engaged, he himse
 
 ___________________________
 
lf wrote to fouque; he
begged him to keep for him a precious article. 'but,' he said to
himself, laying down his pen, 'the secret room in the post office will
open my letter, and give you back the one you seek; no, gentlemen.' he
went and bought an enormous bible from a protestant bookseller,
skilfully concealed mathilde's letter in the boards, had it packed up
with his own letter, and his parcel went off by the mail, addressed to
one of fouque's workmen, whose name was unknown to anybody in paris.

this done, he returned joyful and brisk to the hotel de la mole. 'it
is our turn, now,' he exclaimed, as he locked himself into his room,
and flung off his coat:

'what, mademoiselle,' he wrote to mathilde, 'it is mademoiselle de la
mole who, by the hand of arsene, her father's servant, transmits a
letter couched in too seductive terms to a poor carpenter from the
jura, doubtless to play a trick upon his simplicity ...' and he
transcribed 
 
 ___________________________
 
moment i enter the room; they may
have set some diabolical machine there ready for me!

'it is like a duel,' he told himself with a laugh, 'there is a parry
for every thrust, my fencing master says, but the almighty, who likes
things to end, makes one of the fighters forget to parry. anyhow, here
is what will answer them'; he drew his pocket pistols; and, albeit
they were fully charged, renewed the primings.

there were still many hours to wait; in order to have something to do,
julien wrote to fouque: 'my friend, open the enclosed letter only in
case of accident, if you hear it said that something strange has
befallen me.  then, erase the proper names from the manuscript that i
am sending you, and make eight copies of it which you will send to the
newspapers of marseilles, bordeaux, lyons, brussels, etc.; ten days
later, have the manuscript printed, send the first copy to m. le
marquis de la mole, and a fortnight after that, scatter the other
copies by night about the streets of verrieres.'
 
 ___________________________
 


this brief exonerating memoir, arranged in the form of a tale, which
fouque was to open only in case of accident, julien made as little
compromising as possible to mademoiselle de la mole, but,
nevertheless, it described his position very accurately.

he had just sealed his packet when the dinner-bell rang; it made his
heart beat violently. his imagination, preoccupied with the narrative
which he had just composed, was a prey to all sorts of tragic
presentiment. he had seen himself seized by servants, garrotted,
carried down to a cellar with a gag in his mouth. there, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 have been killed in m. de renal's gardens without any harm to
my reputation. it would have been easy to make my death unaccountable.
here, what abominable tales will they not bandy about in the
drawing-rooms of the hotel de chaulnes, the hotel de caylus, the hotel
de retz, and in short everywhere? i shall be handed down to posterity
as a monster.

'for two or three years,' he added, laughing at himself. but the
thought of this overwhelmed him. 'and i, who is going to justify me?
supposing that fouque prints my posthumous pamphlet, it will be only
an infamy the more.  what! i am received in a house, and in payment
for the hospitality i receive there, the kindness that is showered
upon me, i print a pamphlet reporting all that goes on in the house! i
attack the honour of its women!  ah, a thousand times rather, let us
be trapped!'

it was a terrible evening.




chapter i 6
one o'clock in the morning


  the garden was extremely large, laid out with perfect
  taste just a few years previously
 
 ___________________________
 
. but the trees were over
  a century old. the place had something rustic about it.
    massinger  [trans. footnote: i have left this motto
    untranslated, as the attribution to massinger seems to
    be entirely fantastic.  c. k. s. m.]

he was on the point of countermanding his instructions to fouque when
the clock struck eleven. he came out of his bedroom and shut the door
behind him, turning the key noisily in the lock, as though he were
locking himself in. he prowled round the house to see what was afoot
everywhere, especially on the fourth floor, where the servants slept.
there was nothing unusual.  one of madame de la mole's maids was
giving a party, the servants were merrily imbibing punch. 'the men who
are laughing like that,' thought julien, 'cannot have been detailed
for the midnig
 
 ___________________________
 
ill me, well
and good, it is a satisfaction that i am offering him ... but, by
jove, i am in love with life ... i owe myself to my child.'

this idea, which for the first time appeared thus clearly before his
imagination, completely absorbed him after the first few minutes of
his stroll had been devoted to the sense of danger.

this entirely novel interest made a prudent creature of him. 'i need
advice to guide me in dealing with that fiery man ... he has no
judgment, he is capable of anything. fouque is too far off, besides he
would not understand the sentiments of a heart like the marquis's.

'conte altamira ... can i be sure of eternal silence? my request for
advice must not be a definite action, nor complicate my position.
alas!  there is no one left but the sombre abbe pirard ... his mind is
narrowed by jansenism ... a rascally jesuit would know the world
better, and would be more to my purpose ... m. pirard is capable of
beating me, at the mere mention of my crime.'

the genius of tart
 
 ___________________________
 
elow the level of courage that must lead me to the
guillotine.  this morning, i had that courage. what does it matter,
after all? provided that it returns to me at the right moment.' this
idea of a thermometer amused him and succeeded finally in distracting
him.

next morning, on waking, he was ashamed of his behaviour the day
before.  'my happiness, my tranquillity are at stake.' he almost made
up his mind to write to the attorney-general to ask that nobody should
be admitted to his cell. 'and fouque?' he thought. 'if he can manage
to come to besancon, how distressed he will be.'

it was perhaps two months since he had given fouque a thought. 'i was
an utter fool at strasbourg, my thoughts never went beyond my coat
collar.' memories of fouque kept recurring to his mind and left him in
a more tender mood. he paced the floor with agitation. 'now i am
certainly twenty degrees below the level of death ... if this weakness
increases, it will pay me better to kill myself. what a joy for the
abbe 
 
 ___________________________
 
maslons and the valenods if i die here like a rat!'

fouque arrived; the simple, honest fellow was shattered by grief. his
sole idea, if he had one at all, was to sell all that he possessed in
order to corrupt the gaoler and so save julien's life. he spoke to him
for hours of the escape of m. de lavalette.

'you distress me,' julien said to him; 'm. de lavalette was innocent,
i am guilty. without meaning to do so, you make me realise the
difference ...

'but is it true? what! you would sell all that you have?' said julien,
suddenly becoming observant an
 
 ___________________________
 
d suspicious once more.

fouque, delighted to see his friend at last responsive to his dominant
idea, explained to him in full detail, and to within a hundred francs
or so, what he expected to receive for each of his properties.

'what a sublime effort in a small landowner!' thought julien. 'how
many savings, how many little cheese-parings, which made me blush so
when i saw him make them, he is willing to sacrifice for me! none of
those fine young fellows whom i used to see at the hotel de la mole,
who read _rene_, would have
 
 ___________________________
 
 any of his absurdities; but apart from
those of them who are very young and have inherited fortunes, as well,
and know nothing of the value of money, which of those fine parisians
would be capable of such a sacrifice?'

all fouque's mistakes in grammer, all his vulgar mannerisms vanished,
he flung himself into his arms. never have the provinces, when
contrasted with paris, received a nobler homage. fouque, delighted by
the enthusiasm which he read in his friend's eyes, mistook it for
consent to an escape.

this glimpse of the _sublime_ restored to julien all the strength of
which m. chelan's visit had robbed him. he was still very young; but,
to my mind, he was a fine plant. instead of his advancing from
tenderness to cunning, like the majority of men, age would have given
him an easy access to emotion, he would have been cured of an insane
distrust ... but what good is there in these vain predi
 
 ___________________________
 
minations became more frequent, in spite of the efforts of
julien, whose answers were all aimed at cutting the whole business
short. 'i have taken life, or at least i have sought to take life, and
with premeditation,' he repeated day after day. but the magistrate was
a formalist first and foremost. julien's statements in no way cut
short the examinations; the magistrate's feelings were hurt. julien
did not know that they had proposed to remove him to a horrible
cellar, and that it was thanks to fouque's intervention that he was
allowed to remain in his charming room one hundred and eighty steps
from the ground.

m. l'abbe de frilair was one of the important persons who contracted
with fouque for the supply of their firewood. the honest merchant had
access even to the all-powerful vicar-general. to his inexpressible
delight, m. de frilair informed him that, touched by the good
qualities of julien and by the services which he had rendered in the
past to the seminary, he intended to intervene o
 
 ___________________________
 
n his behalf with the
judges. fouque saw a hope of saving his friend, and on leaving his
presence, bowing to the ground, begged the vicar-general to expend
upon masses, to pray for the acquittal of the prisoner, a sum of ten
louis.

fouque was strangely in error. m. de frilair was by no means a
valenod. he refused, and even tried to make the worthy peasant
understand that he would do better to keep his money in his pocket.
seeing that it was impossible to make his meaning clear without
indiscretion, he advised him to distribute the sum in alms, for the
poor prisoners, who, as a matter of fact, were in need of everything.

'this julien is a strange creature, his action is inexplicable,'
thought m. de frilair, 'and nothing ought to
 
 ___________________________
 
ome sensational means of reconciliation with m.
de la mole, who has a weakness for this little seminarist.'

the settlement of the lawsuit had been signed some weeks earlier, and
the abbe pirard had left besancon, not without having spoken of the
mystery of julien's birth, on the very day on which the wretched
fellow tried to kill madame de renal in the church of verrieres.

julien saw only one disagreeable incident in store for him before his
death, namely a visit from his father. he consulted fouque as to his
idea of writing to the attorney-general, asking to be excused any
further visitors. this horror at the sight of a father, at such a
moment, shocked the honest and respectable heart of the
timber-merchant profoundly.

he thought he understood why so many people felt a passionate hatred
of his friend. out of respect for another's grief, he concealed his
feelings.

'in any case,' he replied coldly, 'an order for solitary confinement
would not apply to your father.'




chapter 38
a man o
 
 ___________________________
 
king_ (new edition, 1830)  c. k. s. m.]

on leaving the bishop's palace, mathilde did not hesitate to send a
messenger to madame de fervaques; the fear of compromising herself did
not restrain her for a second. she implored her rival to obtain a
letter for m. de frilair, written throughout in the hand of the lord
bishop of ----. she even went the length of beseeching the other to
hasten, herself, to besancon. this was a heroic measure on the part of
a proud and jealous spirit.

on the advice of fouque, she had taken the precaution of saying
nothing about what she was doing to julien. her presence was
disturbing enough in itself. a more honourable man at the approach of
death than he had been during his life, he now felt compunction at the
thought not only of m. de la mole, but also of mathilde.

'what is this?' he asked himself, 'i experience in her company moments
of abstraction and even of boredom. she is ruining herself for me, and
it is thus that i reward her. can i indeed be wicked?' th
 
 ___________________________
 
would say_.

in the midst of all her anguish, of all her fears for the life of this
lover, whom she was determined not to outlive, she had a secret
longing to astonish the public by the intensity of her love and the
sublimity of her actions.

he resented the discovery that he was unable to feel at all touched by
all this heroism. what would his resentment have been, had he known of
all the follies with which mathilde overpowered the devoted, but
eminently reasonable and limited mind of the good fouque?

the latter could scarcely find fault with mathilde's devotion; for he,
too, would have sacrificed his whole fortune and exposed his life to
the greatest risks to save julien. he was stupefied by the quantity of
gold which mathilde scattered abroad. at first, the sums thus spent
impressed fouque, who had for money all the veneration of a
provincial.

later, he discovered that mademoiselle de la mole's plans often
varied, and, to his great relief, found a word with which to reproach
this charac
 
 ___________________________
 
sh passionate and
incisive.

'on your life, sir,' cried julien beside himself with rage, 'bear in
mind never again to utter that abominable falsehood.' the prudent
advocate was afraid for a moment of being murdered himself.

he prepared his defence, because the decisive moment was rapidly
approaching. besancon and the whole department could talk of nothing
but this cause celebre. julien was in ignorance of this, he had begged
that no one should ever speak to him of such matters.

that very day, fouque and mathilde having sought to inform him of
certain public rumours, which seemed to them to furnish grounds for
hope, julien had cut them short at the first word.

'leave me to enjoy my ideal life. your petty bickerings, your details
of real life, all more or less irritating to me, would bring me down
from heaven. one dies as best one can; as for me, i wish to think of
death only in my own way. what do i care for other people? my
relations with other people are soon to be cut short. for pity's 
 
 ___________________________
 
 foolish, one must admit, were he
to play a part ...

'it is strange, all the same, that i have learned the art of enjoying
life only now that i see its term draw so near.'

he spent these last days in pacing the narrow terrace on the roof of
his dungeon, smoking some excellent cigars for which mathilde had sent
a courier to holland, and with no suspicion that his appearance was
daily awaited by all the telescopes in the town. his thoughts were at
vergy. never did he speak of madame de renal to fouque, but on two or
three occasions this friend told him that she was recovering rapidly,
and these words echoed in his heart.

while julien's spirit was almost always completely lost in the world
of ideas, mathilde, occupied with realities, as becomes an
aristocratic heart, had contrived to increase the intimacy of the
direct correspondence between madame de fervaques and m. de frilair to
such a point that already the mighty word bishopric had been uttered.

the venerable prelate, in whose hands wa
 
 ___________________________
 
his was because his crime was astonishing and yet
  not atrocious. even if it had been, the young man was so
  handsome! his great destiny abruptly cut short heightened
  the pity felt for him. will he be condemned? the women
  would ask the men of their acquaintance and one could see
  them grow pale as they awaited the reply.
    sainte-beuve

at length the day dawned so dreaded by madame de renal and mathilde.

the strange appearance of the town increased their terror, and did not
leave even fouque's stout heart unmoved. the whole province had
swarmed into besancon to witness the trial of this romantic case.

for some days past there had not been a bed to be had in the inns. the
president of the assize court was assailed with requests for cards of
admission; all the ladies of the town wished to be present at the
trial; julien's portrait was hawked through the streets, etc., etc.

mathilde was keeping in reserve for this supreme moment a letter
written throughout in the hand of the lord bi
 
 ___________________________
 
nd hear a
mass for me,' he said to mathilde, 'and leave me a moment's peace.'
mathilde, who was extremely jealous already at madame de renal's
visits and had just heard of her departure, realised the cause of
julien's ill humour and burst into tears.

her grief was genuine, julien saw this and was all the more irritated.
he felt a compelling need of solitude, and how was he to secure it?

finally mathilde, having tried every argument to soften him, left him
to himself, but almost at that moment fouque appeared.

'i want to be alone,' he said to this faithful friend. and, as he saw
him hesitate: 'i am composing a memorial for my appeal to clemency ...
but anyhow ... do me a favour, never to speak to me of death. if i
want any special services on the day, let me be the first to mention
them.'

when julien had at length secured solitude, he found himself more
crushed and more of a coward than before. what little strength
remained to his enfeebled spirit had been used up in the effort to
conceal
 
 ___________________________
 
 his condition from mademoiselle de la mole and fouque.

towards evening, a comforting thought came to him:

'if this morning, at the moment when death seemed so ugly, i had been
warned to prepare for execution, _the eye of the public would have been
the incentive to glory_; my gait might perhaps have been a little
heavy, like that of a timid fop on entering a drawing-room. a few
perspicacious people, if there be any such among these provincials,
might have guessed my weakness ... but _no one would have seen it_.'

and he felt himself relieved of p
 
 ___________________________
 
 is absent; perhaps her husband
will not allow her to come to besancon again, and disgrace herself
further.

'that is what is isolating me, that and not the absence of a just,
good, all-powerful god, who is not wicked, not hungry for vengeance ...

'ah! if he existed ... alas! i should fall at his feet. i have
deserved death, i should say to him; but, great god, good god,
indulgent god, restore to me her whom i love!'

the night was by now far advanced. after an hour or two of peaceful
slumber, fouque arrived.

julien felt himself to be strong and resolute like a man who sees
clearly into his own heart.




chapter 45
exit julien

'i will not play that poor abbe chas-bernard the unkind trick of
sending for him,' he said to fouque; 'he would not be able to eat his
dinner for three days afterwards. but try to find me a jansenist, a
friend of m. pirard and beyond the reach of intrigue.'

fouque had been awaiting this development with impatience. julien
acquitted himself in a decent fashion of e
 
 ___________________________
 
reate an effect, and perhaps one
day you will see me the hero of some melodrama,' etc., etc.

a furious jealousy and one that was incapable of wreaking vengeance,
the prolongation of a hopeless misery (for, even supposing julien to
be saved, how was she to recapture his heart?), the shame and grief of
loving more than ever this faithless lover, had plunged mademoiselle
de la mole in a grim silence from which the zealous attentions of m.
de frilair were no more capable than the rude frankness of fouque, of
making her emerge.

as for julien, except during the moments usurped by the presence of
mathilde, he was living upon love and with hardly a thought of the
future.  a curious effect of this passion, in its extreme form and
free from all pretence, was that madame de renal almost shared his
indifference and mild gaiety.

'in the past,' julien said to her, 'when i might have been so happy
during our walks in the woods of vergy, a burning ambition led my soul
into imaginary tracts. instead of my
 
 ___________________________
 
air was a delicious sensation to him, as is treading
solid earth to a mariner who has long been at sea. 'there, all is
well,' he said to himself, 'i am not lacking in courage.'

never had that head been so poetic as at the moment when it was about
to fall. the most precious moments that he had known in the past in
the woods of vergy came crowding into his mind with an extreme
vividness.

everything passed simply, decorously, and without affectation on his
part.

two days earlier, he had said to fouque: 'for my emotions i cannot
answer; this damp and hideous cell gives me moments of fever in which
i am not myself; but fear, no; no one shall see me blench.'

he had made arrangements in advance that on the morning of the last
day, fouque should carry off mathilde and madame de renal.

'take them in the same carriage,' he had told him. 'arrange that the
post-horses shall gallop all the time. they will fall into one
another's arms, or else will show a deadly hatred for one another. in
either case
 
 ___________________________
 
, the poor women will have some slight distraction from
their terrible grief.'

julien had made madame de renal swear that she would live to look
after mathilde's child.

'who knows? perhaps we continue to have sensation after our death,' he
said one day to fouque. 'i should dearly like to repose, since repose
is the word, in that little cave in the high mountain that overlooks
verrieres.  many a time, as i have told you, retiring by night to that
cave, and casting my gaze afar over the richest provinces of france, i
have felt my heart ablaze with ambition: it was my passion then ...
anyhow, that cave is precious to me, and no one can deny that it is
situated in a spot that a philosopher's heart might envy ... very
well! these worthy members of the congr
 
 ___________________________
 
egation of besancon make money
out of everything; if you know how to set about it, they will sell you
my mortal remains ...'

fouque was successful in this grim transaction. he was spending the
night alone in his room, by the body of his friend, when to his great
surprise, he saw mathilde appear. a few hours earlier, he had left her
ten leagues from besancon. there was a wild look in her eyes.

'i wish to see him,' she said to him.

fouque had not the courage to speak or to rise. he pointed with his
finger to a great blue cloak on the floor; in it was wrapped all that
remained of julien.

she fell upon her knees. the memory of boniface de la mole and of
marguerite de navarre gave her, no doubt, a superhuman courage. her
trembling hands unfolded the cloak. fouque turned away his eyes.

he heard mathilde walking rapidly about the room. she lighted a number
of candles. when fouque had summoned up the strength to look at her,
she had
 
 ___________________________
 
the
jura, in the middle of the night, in that little cave magnificently
illuminated with countless candles, a score of priests celebrated the
office of the dead.  all the inhabitants of the little mountain
villages, through which the procession passed, had followed it, drawn
by the singularity of this strange ceremony.

mathilde appeared in their midst in a flowing garb of mourning, and,
at the end of the service, had several thousands of five franc pieces
scattered among them.

left alone with fouque, she insisted upon burying her lover's head
with her own hands. fouque almost went mad with grief.

by mathilde's orders, this savage grot was adorned with marbles
sculptured at great cost, in italy.

madame de renal was faithful to her promise. she did not seek in any
way to take her own life; but, three days after julien, died while
embracing her children.
