t the cure of verrieres, an old man of
eighty, but blessed by the keen air of his mountains with an iron
character and strength, had the right to visit at any hour of the day
the prison, the hospital, and even the poorhouse. it was at six
o'clock in the morning precisely that m. appert, who was armed with an
introduction to the cure from paris, had had the good sense to arrive
in an inquisitive little town.  he had gone at once to the presbytery.

as he read the letter addressed to him by m. le marquis de la mole, a
peer of france, and the wealthiest landowner in the province, the cure
chelan sat lost in thought.

'i am old and liked here,' he murmured to himself at length, 'they
would never dare!' turning at once to the gentleman from paris, with
eyes in which, despite his great age, there burned that sacred fire
which betokens the pleasure of performing a fine action which is
slightly dangerous:

'come with me, sir, and, in the presence of the gaoler and especially
of the superintendents of the poorho
 
 ___________________________
 
eeling
finished, the mayor had next to deal with a great religious ceremony;
the king of ---- refused to pass through verrieres without paying a
visit to the famous relic of saint clement which is preserved at
bray-le-haut, a short league from the town. the clergy must be present
in full force, and this was the most difficult thing to arrange; m.
maslon, the new cure, was determined, at any price, to keep m. chelan
out. in vain did m. de renal point out to him the imprudence of this
action. the marquis de la mole, whose ancestors for so long were
governors of the province, had been chosen to accompany the king of
----. he had known the abbe chelan for thirty years.  he would be
certain to inquire for him on arriving at verrieres, and, if he found
that he was in disgrace, was quite capable of going in search of him,
to the little house to which he had retired, accompanied by such of
the procession as were under his orders. what a rebuff that would be!

'i am dishonoured here and at besancon,' replied the
 
 ___________________________
 
ing their houses a hundred times more brilliantly
than the royalists. before leaving the town, the king paid a visit to
m. de moirod.




chapter 19
to think is to be full of sorrow

  the grotesque character of everyday occurrences conceals from
  one the real misery of passions.
    barnave

while he was replacing its ordinary furniture in the room that m. de
la mole had occupied, julien found a piece of stout paper, folded
twice across. he read at the foot of the first page:

to h. e., m. le marquis de la mole, peer of france, knight of the
royal orders, etc., etc.

it was a petition in the rude handwriting of a cook.

monsieur le marquis,

all my life i have held religious principles. i was in lyons, exposed
to the bombs, at the time of the siege, in '93, of execrable memory.
i am a communicant, i go every sunday to mass in my parish church. i
have never failed in my easter duty, not even in '93, of execrable
memory. my cook, for before the revolution i kept servants, my cook
observes friday. i enjo
 
 ___________________________
 
n of this petition was an endorsement signed de moirod,
which began with the words:

'i had the honour yesterday to mention the respectable person who
makes this request,' and so forth.

'and so even that imbecile cholin shows me the way that i must
follow,' julien said to himself.

a week after the visit of the king of ---- to verrieres, the chief
thing to emerge from the innumerable falsehoods, foolish
interpretations, absurd discussions, etc., etc., to which the king,
the bishop of agde, the marquis de la mole, the ten thousand bottles
of wine, the unseated moirod (who, in the hope of a cross, did not set
foot outside his own door for a whole month after his fall) were in
turn subjected, was the utter indelicacy of having jockeyed into the
guard of honour, julien sorel, the son of a carpenter. you ought to
have heard, on this topic, the wealthy calico printers, who, morning,
noon and night, used to talk themselves hoarse in preaching equality.
that proud woman, madame de renal, was the author of this
 
 ___________________________
 
elve years earlier, m. l'abbe de frilair had arrived at besancon with
the lightest of portmanteaux, which, the story went, contained his
entire fortune. he now found himself one of the wealthiest landowners
in the department. in the course of his growing prosperity he had
purchased one half of an estate of which the other half passed by
inheritance to m. de la mole. hence a great lawsuit between these
worthies.

despite his brilliant existence in paris, and the posts which he held
at court, the marquis de la mole felt that it was dangerous to fight
down at besancon against a vicar-general who was reputed to make and
unmake prefects. instead of asking for a gratuity of fifty thousand
francs, disguised under some head or other that would pass in the
budget, and allowing m. de frilair to win this pettifogging action for
fifty thousand francs, the marquis took offence. he believed that he
had a case: a fine reason!

for, if we may be so bold as to say it: what judge is there who has
not a son, or at least a
 
 ___________________________
 
omewhat dismayed by the bold front assumed by
the other side, and feeling that his own counsel were weakening, asked
the advice of the abbe chelan, who put him in touch with m. pirard.

at the date of our story they had been corresponding thus for some
years.  the abbe pirard dashed into the business with all the force of
his passionate nature. in constant communication with the marquis's
counsel, he studied his case, and finding him to be in the right,
openly declared himself a partisan of the marquis de la mole against
the all powerful vicar-general. the latter was furious at such
insolence, and coming from a little jansenist to boot!

'you see what these court nobles are worth who claim to have such
power!' the abbe de frilair would say to his intimates; 'm. de la mole
has not sent so much as a wretched cross to his agent at besancon, and
is going to allow him to be deprived of his post without a murmur. and
yet, my friends write to me, this noble peer never allows a week to
pass without going to sho
 
 ___________________________
 
f, my dear sir, of all these provincial bickerings, come
and breathe a calmer air in paris. i am sending you my carriage, which
has orders to await your decision for four days.  i shall wait for you
myself, in paris, until tuesday. it requires only the word yes, from
you, sir, to make me accept in your name one of the best livings in
the neighbourhood of paris. the wealthiest of your future parishioners
has never set eyes on you, but is devoted to you more warmly than you
can suppose; he is the marquis de la mole.'

without knowing it, the stern abbe pirard loved this seminary, peopled
with his enemies, to which, for fifteen years, he had devoted all his
thoughts.  m. de la mole's letter was to him like the sudden
appearance of a surgeon with the duty of performing a painful but
necessary operation. his dismissal was certain. he gave the steward an
appointment, in three days' time.

for the next forty-eight hours, he was in a fever of uncertainty.
finally, he wrote to m. de la mole and composed, for the
 
 ___________________________
 
a minister, and allowed themselves that evening to smile at the
imperious airs which m. l'abbe de frilair assumed in society.

next morning, the abbe pirard was almost followed through the streets,
and the tradesmen came out to their shop-doors when he went to beg an
audience of the marquis's judges. for the first time, he was received
by them with civility. the stern jansenist, indignant at everything
that he saw around him, spent a long time at work with the counsel
whom he had chosen for the marquis de la mole, and then left for
paris. he was so foolish as to say to two or three lifelong friends
who escorted him to the carriage and stood admiring its heraldic
blason, that after governing the seminary for fifteen years he was
leaving besancon with five hundred and twenty francs in savings.
these friends embraced him with tears in their eyes, and then said to
one another: the good abbe might have spared himself that lie, it is
really too absurd.'

the common herd, blinded by love of money, were not fit
 
 ___________________________
 
 strength to fight single-handed for six years against marie
alacoque, the sacred heart of jesus, the jesuits and his bishop.




chapter 30
ambition


  there is only one true nobility left; namely, the title of duke;
  marquis is absurd, at the word duke one turns one's head.
    the edinburgh review  [trans. footnote: i have translated this
    motto, which is quoted in french by stendhal, but have not been
    able to find the original passage in the _edinburgh review.
    c. k. s. m.]

the marquis de la mole received the abbe pirard without any of those
little mannerisms of a great gentleman, outwardly so polite, but so
impertinent to him who understands them. it would have been a waste of
time, and the marquis was so far immersed in public business as to
have no time to waste.

for six months he had been intriguing to make both king and nation
accept a certain ministry, which, as a mark of gratitude, would make
him a duke.

the marquis had appealed in vain, year after year, to his lawyer at
besanc
 
 ___________________________
 
f our cloth, except through the great nobles. with that
indefinable element (at least, i cannot define it), which there is in
your character, if you do not succeed you will be persecuted; there is
no middle way for you. do not abuse your position. people see that you
are not pleased when they speak to you; in a social environment like
this, you are doomed to misfortune, if you do not succeed in winning
respect.

'what would have become of you at besancon, but for this caprice on
the part of the marquis de la mole? one day, you will appreciate all
the singularity of what he is doing for you, and, if you are not a
monster, you will feel eternal gratitude to him and his family. how
many poor abbes, cleverer men than you, have lived for years in paris,
upon the fifteen sous for their mass and the ten sous for their
lectures in the sorbonne! ...  remember what i told you, last winter,
of the early years of that wretch, cardinal dubois. are you, by any
chance, so proud as to imagine that you have more talent 
 
 ___________________________
 
said to him, 'you will look after m. sorel.' a few
minutes later, julien found himself alone in a magnificent library: it
was an exquisite moment. so as not to be taken by surprise in his
emotion, he went and hid himself in a little dark corner; from which
he gazed with rapture at the glittering backs of the books. 'i can
read all of those,' he told himself. 'and how should i fail to be
happy here? m. de renal would have thought himself disgraced for ever
by doing the hundredth part of what the marquis de la mole has just
done for me.

'but first of all, we must copy the letters.' this task ended, julien
ventured towards the shelves; he almost went mad with joy on finding
an edition of voltaire. he ran and opened the door of the library so
as not to be caught. he then gave himself the pleasure of opening each
of the eighty volumes in turn. they were magnificently bound, a
triumph of the best craftsman in london. this was more than was needed
to carry julien's admiration beyond all bounds.

an hour later
 
 ___________________________
 
nding to know them; he admitted his
ignorance with good grace. this frankness found favour with the
chevalier's friend; he repeated the anecdotes to him in full detail,
and extremely well.

one thing astonished julien vastly. a station which was being erected
in the middle of the street for the corpus christi day procession,
held up the carriage for a moment. the gentlemen indulged in a number
of pleasantries; the cure, according to them, was the son of an
archbishop. never, in the house of the marquis de la mole, who hoped
to become a duke, would anyone have dared to say such a thing.

the duel was over in an instant: julien received a bullet in his
arm; they bound it up for him with handkerchiefs; these were
soaked in brandy, and the chevalier de beauvoisis asked julien most
politely to allow him to take him home, in the carriage that had
brought them. when julien gave his address as the hotel de la mole,
the young diplomat and his friend exchanged glances. julien's cab was
waiting, but he found these
 
 ___________________________
 
 she asked m. de croisenois.

she had the air of having come back to earth from so remote an
abstraction, and this question bore so little relation to all that the
poor marquis had been saying to her for the last five minutes, that
his friendly feelings were somewhat disconcerted. he was, however, a
man of ready wit, and highly esteemed in that capacity.

'mathilde is certainly odd,' he thought; 'it is a drawback, but she
gives her husband such a splendid social position! i cannot think how
the marquis de la mole manages it; he is on intimate terms with the
best people in every party, he is a man who cannot fall. besides, this
oddity in mathilde may pass for genius. given noble birth and an ample
fortune, genius is not to be laughed at, and then, what distinction!
she has such a command, too, when she pleases, of that combination of
wit, character and aptness, which makes conversation perfect. ..' as
it is hard to do two things well at the same time, the marquis
answered mathilde with a vacant air, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
y, interrupt
the examination that he was making of mathilde's letter, and intensify
his joy.  'i am preferred to the marquis de croisenois,' he cried, 'i,
who never say anything that is not serious! and he is so handsome! he
wears moustaches, a charming uniform; he always manages to say, just
at the right moment, something witty and clever.'

it was an exquisite moment for julien; he roamed about the garden, mad
with happiness.

later, he went upstairs to his office, and sent in his name to the
marquis de la mole, who fortunately had not gone out. he had no
difficulty in proving to him, by showing him various marked papers
that had arrived from normandy, that the requirements of his
employer's lawsuits there obliged him to postpone his departure for
languedoc.

'i am very glad you are not going,' the marquis said to him, when they
had finished their business, '_i like to see you_.' julien left the
room; this speech disturbed him.

'and i am going to seduce his daughter! to render impossible, perhaps,
th
 
 ___________________________
 
newed the primings.

there were still many hours to wait; in order to have something to do,
julien wrote to fouque: 'my friend, open the enclosed letter only in
case of accident, if you hear it said that something strange has
befallen me.  then, erase the proper names from the manuscript that i
am sending you, and make eight copies of it which you will send to the
newspapers of marseilles, bordeaux, lyons, brussels, etc.; ten days
later, have the manuscript printed, send the first copy to m. le
marquis de la mole, and a fortnight after that, scatter the other
copies by night about the streets of verrieres.'

this brief exonerating memoir, arranged in the form of a tale, which
fouque was to open only in case of accident, julien made as little
compromising as possible to mademoiselle de la mole, but,
nevertheless, it described his position very accurately.

he had just sealed his packet when the dinner-bell rang; it made his
heart beat violently. his imagination, preoccupied with the narrative
which he ha
 
 ___________________________
 
the library as a curiosity.

his grief, which he had believed to be intense at the moment of his
speaking to mademoiselle de la mole, had now been increased an
hundredfold by the tears of shame which he saw her shed. he would have
been the happiest of men had it been possible to kill her.

just as he had drawn the sword, with some difficulty, from its
antiquated scabbard, mathilde, delighted by so novel a sensation,
advanced proudly towards him; her tears had ceased to flow.

the thought of the marquis de la mole, his benefactor, arose vividly
in julien's mind. 'i should be killing his daughter!' he said to
himself; 'how horrible!' he made as though to fling away the sword.
'certainly,' he thought, 'she will now burst out laughing at the sight
of this melodramatic gesture': thanks to this consideration, he
entirely regained his self-possession. he examined the blade of the
old sword with curiosity, and as though he were looking for a spot of
rust, then replaced it in its scabbard, and with the utmost ca
 
 ___________________________
 
e, perhaps, but i shall gaze into those
lovely eyes which are so like the eyes that loved me best in the
world.

'she is foreign; that is a fresh character to be studied.

'i am mad, i am going under, i must follow the advice of a friend, and
pay no heed to myself.'




chapter 25
the office of virtue


  but if i take this pleasure with so much prudence
  and circumspection, it ceases to be a pleasure for me.
    lope de vega

immediately on his return to paris, and on leaving the study of the
marquis de la mole, who appeared greatly disconcerted by the messages
that were conveyed to him, our hero hastened to find conte altamira.
with the distinction of being under sentence of death, this handsome
foreigner combined abundant gravity and had the good fortune to be
devout; these two merits and, more than all, the exalted birth of the
count were entirely to the taste of madame de fervaques, who saw much
of him.

julien confessed to him gravely that he was deeply in love with her.

'she represents the pure
 
 ___________________________
 
guage
which is called _wit_ in certain drawing-rooms.

prince korasoff would indeed have been proud, had he been in paris:
the evening was passing exactly as he had foretold.

he would have approved of the mode of behaviour to which julien
adhered throughout the days that followed.

an intrigue among those constituting the power behind the throne was
about to dispose of several blue ribands; madame la marechale de
fervaques insisted that her great-uncle should be made a knight of the
order. the marquis de la mole was making a similar claim for his
father-in-law; they combined their efforts, and the marechale came
almost every day to the hotel de la mole. it was from her that julien
learned that the marquis was to become a minister: he offered the
_camarilla_ a highly ingenious plan for destroying the charter,
without any fuss, in three years' time.

julien might expect a bishopric, if m. de la mole entered the
ministry; but to his eyes all these important interests were as though
hidden by a veil. his i
 
 ___________________________
 
th of the accusations. the marechale, whose mind was
not framed to withstand these vulgar methods, reported her doubts to
mathilde, and was always comforted.

one day, after having inquired three times whether there were any
letters, madame de fervaques suddenly decided to write to julien. this
was a victory gained by boredom. at the second letter, the marechale
was almost brought to a standstill by the unpleasantness of writing
with her own hand so vulgar an address as: 'a m. sorel, chez m. le
marquis de la mole'.

'you must,' she said to julien that evening in the driest of tones,
'bring me some envelopes with your address written on them.'

'so now i am to combine the lover and the flunkey,' thought julien,
and bowed, amusing himself by screwing up his face like arsene, the
marquis's old footman.

that same evening he brought a supply of envelopes, and next day,
early in the morning, he received a third letter: he read five or six
lines at the beginning, and two or three towards the end. it covered
f
 
 ___________________________
 
all their thoughts.

'i do not wish to know where that man is,' the marquis said to her one
day; 'send him this letter.' mathilde read:

'the estates in languedoc bring in 20,600 francs. i give 10,600 francs
to my daughter, and 10,000 francs to m. julien sorel. i make over the
estates themselves, that is to say. tell the lawyer to draft two
separate deeds of gift, and to bring me them tomorrow; after which, no
further relations between us. ah! sir, how was i to expect such a
thing as this?

'le marquis de la mole'

'i thank you very much,' said mathilde gaily. 'we are going to settle
in the chateau d'aiguillon, between agen and marmande. they say that
the country there is as beautiful as italy.'

this donation came as a great surprise to julien. he was no longer the
severe, cold man that we have known. the destiny of his child absorbed
all his thoughts in anticipation. this unexpected fortune, quite
considerable for so poor a man, made him ambitious. he now saw,
settled on his wife or himself, an income
 
 ___________________________
 
on in her brain.

their almost continuous separation, the multiplicity of business, the
little time that they had to talk of love, now completed the good
effect of the wise policy adopted by julien in the past.

finally mathilde grew impatient at seeing so little of the man whom
she had now come to love sincerely.

in a moment of ill humour she wrote to her father, and began her
letter like othello:

'that i have preferred julien to the attractions which society offered
to the daughter of m. le marquis de la mole, my choice of him
sufficiently proves. these pleasures of reputation and petty vanity
are nothing to me.  it will soon be six weeks that i have lived apart
from my husband. that is enough to prove my respect for you. before
next thursday, i shall leave the paternal roof. your generosity has
made us rich. no one knows my secret save the estimable abbe pirard. i
shall go to him; he will marry us, and an hour after the ceremony we
shall be on our way to languedoc, and shall never appear again in
p
 
 ___________________________
 
 find on his handsome countenance the imprint of that
energetic, that almost wild virtue, so antipathetic to parisian
society. the half-smile that animated the features of the priest who
was in supreme control of everything at besancon, betokened the man
used to good society, the cultured prelate, the able administrator.
mathilde imagined herself in paris.

it needed only a few minutes for m. de frilair to lead mathilde on to
admit to him that she was the daughter of his powerful adversary, the
marquis de la mole.

'i am not, as a matter of fact, madame michelet,' she said, resuming
all the loftiness of her bearing, 'and this admission costs me little,
for i have come to consult you, sir, as to the possibility of
procuring the escape of m. de la vernaye. in the first place he is
guilty of nothing worse than a piece of stupidity; the woman at whom
he fired is doing well.  in the second place, to corrupt the
subordinates, i can put down here and now fifty thousand francs, and
bind myself to pay double tha
 
 ___________________________
 
ll say to me perhaps: "much
shall be pardoned thee, because thou hast loved much ..."

'have i loved much? ah! i did love madame de renal, but my conduct has
been atrocious. there, as elsewhere, i abandoned a simple and modest
merit for what was brilliant ...

'but then, what a prospect! colonel of hussars, should we go to war;
secretary of legation in time of peace; after that, ambassador ... for
i should soon have learned the business ... and had i been a mere
fool, need the son-in-law of the marquis de la mole fear any rival?
all my foolish actions would have been forgiven me, or rather counted
to me as merits. a man of distinction, enjoying the most splendid
existence in vienna or london ...

'not precisely that, sir, to be guillotined in three days' time.'

julien laughed heartily at this sally of his own wit. 'indeed, man has
two different beings inside him,' he reflected. 'what devil thought of
that malicious touch?

'very well, yes, my friend, guillotined in three days' time,' he
replied to the 