s; when it is directly overhead, the traveller's
rest is sheltered on this terrace by a row of magnificent planes.
their rapid growth, and handsome foliage of a bluish tint are due to
the artificial soil with which the mayor has filled in the space
behind his immense retaining wall, for, despite the opposition of the
town council, he has widened the avenue by more than six feet
(although he is an ultra and i myself a liberal, i give him credit for
it), that is why, in his opinion and in that of m. valenod, the
fortunate governor of the verrieres poorhouse, this terrace is worthy
to be compared with that of saint-germain-en-laye.

for my part, i have only one fault to find with the _cours de la
fidelite_; one reads this, its official title, in fifteen or twenty
places, on marble slabs which have won m. de renal yet another cross;
what i should be inclined to condemn in the cours de la fidelite is
the barbarous manner in which the authorities keep these sturdy plane
trees trimmed and pollarded.  i
 
 ___________________________
 
ayed by ever increasing emotion.

'what a difference!' the gaoler answered promptly; 'why you, m. le
cure, we know that you have an income of 800 livres, a fine place in
the sun ...'

such are the events which, commented upon, exaggerated in twenty
different ways, had been arousing for the last two days all the evil
passions of the little town of verrieres. at that moment they were
serving as text for the little discussion which m. de renal was having
with his wife. that morning, accompanied by m. valenod, the governor
of the poorhouse, he had gone to the cure's house, to inform him of
their extreme displeasure. m. chelan was under no one's protection; he
felt the full force of their words.

'well, gentlemen, i shall be the third parish priest, eighty years of
age, to be deprived of his living in this district. i have been
here for six and fifty years; i have christened almost all the
inhabitants of the town, which was no more than a village when i came.
every day i marry young couples whose gra
 
 ___________________________
 
ndparents i married long ago.
verrieres is my family; but i said to myself, when i saw the stranger:
"this man, who has come from paris, may indeed be a liberal, there are
far too many of them; but what harm can he do to our poor people and
our prisoners?"'

the reproaches of m. de renal, and above all those of m. valenod, the
governor of the poorhouse, becoming more and more bitter:

'very well, gentlemen, have me deprived,' the old cure had cried, in a
quavering voice. 'i shall live in the town all the same. you all know
that forty-eight years ago i inherited a piece of land which brings me
800 livres; i shall live on that income. i save nothing out of my
stipend, gentlemen, and that may be why i am less alarmed when people
speak of taking it from me.'

m. de renal lived on excellent terms with his wife; but n
 
 ___________________________
 
e was
a tall, well-made woman, who had been the beauty of the place, as the
saying is in this mountain district. she had a certain air of
simplicity and bore herself like a girl; in the eyes of a parisian,
that artless grace, full of innocence and vivacity, might even have
suggested ideas of a mildly passionate nature. had she had wind of
this kind of success, madame de renal would have been thoroughly
ashamed of it. no trace either of coquetry or of affectation had ever
appeared in her nature. m. valenod, the wealthy governor of the
poorhouse, was supposed to have paid his court to her, but without
success, a failure which had given a marked distinction to her virtue;
for this m. valenod, a tall young man, strongly built, with a vivid
complexion and bushy black whiskers, was one of those coarse, brazen,
noisy creatures who in the provinces are called fine men.

madame de renal, being extremely shy and liable to be swayed by her
moods, was offended chiefly by the restless movements and loud voic
 
 ___________________________
 
e
of m. valenod. the distaste that she felt for what at verrieres goes
by the name of gaiety had won her the reputation of being extremely
proud of her birth.  she never gave it a thought, but had been greatly
pleased to see the inhabitants of verrieres come less frequently to
her house. we shall not attempt to conceal the fact that she was
reckoned a fool in the eyes of their ladies, because, without any
regard for her husband's interests, she let slip the most promising
opportunities of procuring fine hats f
 
 ___________________________
 
e was saying. they
were watching julien.

the servants being still at the door, julien felt it incumbent upon
him to prolong the test.

'and now,' he said to the youngest boy, 'master stanislas xavier too
must set me a passage from the holy book.'

little stanislas, swelling with pride, read out to the best of his
ability the opening words of a paragraph, and julien repeated the
whole page. that nothing might be wanting to complete m. de renal's
triumph, while julien was reciting, there entered m. valenod, the
possessor of fine norman horses, and m. charcot de maugiron,
sub-prefect of the district. this scene earned for julien the title
'sir'; the servants themselves dared not withhold it from him.

that evening, the whole of verrieres flocked to m. de renal's to
behold the marvel. julien answered them all with an air of gloom which
kept them at a distance. his fame spread so rapidly through the town
that, shortly afterwards, m. de renal, afraid of losing him, suggested
his signing a contract fo
 
 ___________________________
 
 tried his
patience.  cold, just, impassive, and at the same time loved, because
his coming had in a measure banished dullness from the house, he was a
good tutor. for his part, he felt only hatred and horror for the high
society in which he was allowed to occupy the very foot of the
table, a position which may perhaps explain his hatred and horror.
there were certain formal dinners at which he could barely contain his
loathing of everything round about him.  on saint louis's day in
particular, m. valenod was laying down the law at m. de renal's;
julien almost gave himself away; he escaped into the garden, saying
that he must look after the children. 'what panegyrics of honesty!' he
exclaimed; 'anyone would say that was the one and only virtue; and yet
what consideration, what a cringing respect for a man who obviously
has doubled and tripled his fortune since he has been in charge of the
relief of the poor! i would wager that he makes something even out of
the fund set apart for the foundlings,
 
 ___________________________
 
 wood, known as the belvedere, which overlooks the cours de la
fidelite, had tried in vain to avoid his two brothers, whom he saw
approaching him by a solitary path. the jealousy of these rough
labourers had been so quickened by the sight of their brother's
handsome black coat, and air of extreme gentility, as well as by the
sincere contempt which he felt for them, that they had proceeded to
thrash him, leaving him there unconscious and bleeding freely. madame
de renal, who was out walking with m. valenod and the sub-prefect,
happened to turn into the little wood; she saw julien lying on the
ground and thought him dead. she was so overcome as to make m. valenod
jealous.

his alarm was premature. julien admired madame de renal's looks, but
hated her for her beauty; it was the first reef on which his fortune
had nearly foundered. he spoke to her as seldom as possible, in the
hope of making her forget the impulse which, at their first encounter,
had led him to kiss her hand.

elisa, madame de renal
 
 ___________________________
 
's maid, had not failed to fall in love with the
young tutor; she often spoke of him to her mistress. miss elisa's love
had brought upon julien the hatred of one of the footmen. one day he
heard this man say to elisa: 'you won't speak to me any more, since
that greasy tutor has been in the house.' julien did not deserve the
epithet; but, with the instinct of a good-looking youth, became doubly
attentive to his person. m. valenod's hatred was multiplied
accordingly. he said in public that so much concern with one's
appearance was not becoming in a young cleric. barring the cassock,
julien now wore clerical attire.

madame de renal observed that he was speaking more often than before
to miss elisa; she learned that these conversations were due to the
limitations of julien's extremely small wardrobe. he had so scanty a
supply of linen that he was obliged to send it out constantly to be
washed, and it was in performing the
 
 ___________________________
 
sband during
the first years of their married life. witticisms of this sort,
especially when they bore upon the illnesses of the children, turned
the dagger in madame de renal's heart. this was all the substitute she
found for the obsequious, honeyed flatteries of the jesuitical convent
in which she had passed her girlhood.  she was educated in the school
of suffering. too proud to speak of griefs of this sort, even to her
friend madame derville, she imagined that all men resembled her
husband, m. valenod, and the sub-prefect charcot de maugiron.  coarse
wit and the most brutal insensibility to everything that did not
promise money, promotion or a cross; a blind hatred of every argument
that went against them seemed to her to be things natural to the male
sex, like the wearing of boots and felt hats.

after many long years, madame de renal had not yet grown accustomed to
these money-grubbing creatures among whom she had to live.

hence the success of the little peasant julien. she found much
ple
 
 ___________________________
 
 standstill, his eyes ablaze with anger, and drawing himself up to
his full height. 'that is a point which you have not sufficiently
considered. i should be less than a footman if i put myself in the
position of hiding from m. de renal anything that had to do with my
money.'

madame de renal was overwhelmed.

'the mayor,' julien went on, 'has given me thirty-six francs five
times since i came to live in his house; i am prepared to show my
account-book to m. de renal or to anyone else, including m. valenod
who hates me.'

this outburst left madame de renal pale and trembling, and the walk
came to an end before either of them could find an excuse for renewing
the conversation. love for madame de renal became more and more
impossible in the proud heart of julien: as for her, she respected,
she admired him; she had been scolded by him. on the pretext of making
amends for the humiliation which she had unintentionally caused him,
she allowed herself to pay him the most delicate attentions. the
novelty
 
 ___________________________
 
egotiations; and
their success was of far more importance to him than the evidence of a
marked preference for himself which was only waiting for him to read
it in the heart of madame de renal.

the moral environment in which he had been placed all his life was
repeated in the household of the worshipful mayor of verrieres. there,
as in his father's sawmill, he profoundly despised the people with
whom he lived, and was hated by them. he saw every day, from the
remarks made by the sub-prefect, by m. valenod and by the other
friends of the family, with reference to the things that had just
happened under their eyes, how remote their ideas were from any
semblance of reality. did an action strike him as admirable, it was
precisely what called forth blame from the people round about him. his
unspoken retort was always: 'what monsters!' or 'what fools!' the
amusing thing was that, with all his pride, frequently he understood
nothing at all of what was being discussed.

in his whole life, he had never s
 
 ___________________________
 
m
the _congregation_ and hypocrisy has made the most brilliant advances
even among the liberal classes. dulness increases. no pleasure is
left, save in reading and agriculture.

madame de renal, the wealthy heiress of a religious aunt, married at
sixteen to a worthy gentleman, had never in her life felt or seen
anything that bore the faintest resemblance to love. her confessor,
the good cure chelan, was the only person almost who had ever spoken
to her of love, with reference to the advances of m. valenod, and he
had drawn so revolting a picture of it that the word conveyed nothing
to her but the idea of the most abject immorality. she regarded as an
exception, or rather as something quite apart from nature, love such
as she had found it in the very small number of novels that chance had
brought to her notice. thanks to this ignorance, madame de
renal, entirely happy, occupied incessantly with the thought of
julien, was far from reproaching herself in the slightest degree.




chapter 8
minor ev
 
 ___________________________
 
re
occupied in making the beds.

'that is not enough for me, sir,' julien went on, beside himself with
rage; 'think of the abominable things you said to me, and in the
presence of ladies, too!'

m. de renal was only too well aware of what julien was asking, and
conflicting passions did battle in his heart. it so happened that
julien, now really mad with rage, exclaimed: 'i know where to go, sir,
when i leave your house.'

on hearing these words, m. de renal had a vision of julien established
in m. valenod's household.

'very well, sir,' he said at length with a sigh, and the air of a man
calling in a surgeon to perform the most painful operation, 'i agree
to your request. from the day after tomorrow, which is the first of
the month, i shall give you fifty francs monthly.'

julien wanted to laugh and remained speechless: his anger had
completely vanished.

'i did not despise the animal enough,' he said to himself. 'this, no
doubt, is the most ample apology so base a nature is capable of
making.'

 
 ___________________________
 

the children, who had listened to this scene open-mouthed, ran to the
garden to tell their mother that m. julien was in a great rage, but
that he was to have fifty francs a month.

julien went after them from force of habit, without so much as a
glance at m. de renal, whom he left in a state of intense annoyance.

'that's a hundred and sixty-eight francs,' the mayor said to himself,
'that m. valenod has cost me. i must really say a few firm words to
him about his contract to supply the foundlings.'

a moment later, julien again stood before him.

'i have a matter of conscience to discuss with m. chelan. i have the
honour to inform you that i shall be absent for some hours.'

'ah, my dear julien,' said m. de renal, laughing in the most insincere
manner, 'the whole day, if you wish, the whole of tomorrow, my worthy
friend. take the gardener's horse to go to verrieres.'

'there,' m. de renal 
 
 ___________________________
 
lation.

it was the destiny of napoleon, was it one day to be his own?




chapter 11
night thoughts


  yet julia's very coldness still was kind,
    and tremulously gentle her small hand
  withdrew itself from his, but left behind
    a little pressure, thrilling, and so bland
  and slight, so very slight, that to the mind
    twas but a doubt.
      _don juan_, i. 71

he must, however, let himself be seen at verrieres. as he left the
presbytery the first person he met was, by a happy chance, m. valenod,
whom he hastened to inform of the increase in his salary.

on his return to vergy, julien did not go down to the garden until
night had set in. his heart was worn out by the multitude of powerful
emotions that had assailed it in the course of the day. 'what shall i
say to them?' he asked himself anxiously, thinking of the ladies. it
never occurred to him that his spirits were precisely at the level of
the trivial happenings that as a rule occupy the whole interest of
women. often julien was un
 
 ___________________________
 
e the fruit of
the terrible night she had passed. it was a question no longer of
resisting this charming lover, but of losing him for ever.

she was obliged to take her place at table. to add to her misery, m.
de renal and madame derville spoke of nothing but julien's departure.
the mayor of verrieres had remarked something, unusual in the firm
tone with which he had demanded a holiday.

'the young peasant has doubtless an offer from someone in his pocket.
but that someone, even if it should be m. valenod, must be a little
discouraged by the sum of 600 francs, which he must now be prepared to
spend annually.  yesterday, at verrieres, he will have asked for three
days in which to think things over; and this morning, so as not to be
obliged to give me an answer, the young gentleman goes off to the
mountains. to have to reckon with a wretched workman who puts on airs,
that's what we've come to!'

'since my husband, who does not know how deeply he has wounded julien,
thinks he is going to leave us, 
 
 ___________________________
 
s door at one
o'clock in the morning. he found fouque engaged in making up his
accounts. he was a young man of tall stature, none too well made, with
large, hard features, a huge nose, and plenty of good nature concealed
beneath this repellent aspect.

'you've quarrelled with your m. de renal, then, that you come here of
a sudden like this?'

julien related to him, with suitable omissions, the events of the
previous evening.

'stay with me,' fouque said to him; 'i see that you know m. de renal,
m. valenod, the sub-prefect maugiron, the cure chelan; you have
grasped all the subtle points of their natures; you're ripe now to put
yourself up for auction. you know arithmetic better than i do, you
shall keep my books; i am making a big profit from my business. the
impossibility of doing everything by myself and the fear of hitting
upon a rogue in the man i might take as my partner prevent me every
day from doing the most profitable deals. not a month ago i put six
thousand francs in the pocket of mic
 
 ___________________________
 
moments of their intimacy. there were moments when, despite his
hypocritical habits, he found an intense pleasure in confessing to
this great lady who admired him his ignorance of any number of little
usages. his mistress's rank seemed to raise him above himself. madame
de renal, for her part, found the most exquisite moral satisfaction in
thus instructing in a heap of little things this young man endowed
with genius whom everyone regarded as bound one day to go so far. even
the sub-prefect and m. valenod could not help admiring him: she
thought the better of them accordingly. as for madame derville, these
were by no means her sentiments. in despair at what she thought she
could discern, and seeing that her wise counsel was becoming hateful
to a woman who had positively lost her head, she left vergy without
offering an explanation for which she was not asked. madame de renal
shed a few tears at her departure, and soon it seemed to her that
her happiness was doubled. by the withdrawal of her gues
 
 ___________________________
 
lien away. he
said to himself: 'she is good and kind, her feeling for me is strong,
but she has been brought up in the enemy's camp. they are bound to be
specially afraid of that class of men of spirit who, after a good
education, have not enough money to enter upon a career. what would
become of these nobles, if it were granted us to fight them with equal
weapons? myself, for instance, as mayor of verrieres, well
intentioned, honest as m. de renal is at heart, how i should deal with
the vicar, m. valenod and all their rascalities! how justice should
triumph in verrieres. it is not their talents that would prove an
obstacle. they are endlessly feeling their way.'

julien's happiness was, that day, on the point of becoming permanent.
what our hero lacked was the courage to be sincere. he needed the
courage to give battle, but on the spot; madame de renal had been
surprised by his speech, because the men whom she was in the habit of
meeting were always saying that the return of robespierre was mad
 
 ___________________________
 
th,' the man answered
her with a curious expression.

'go,' said madame de renal.

'well,' said julien, 'he is going to that hay store, which used to be
a church, and was recently restored to the faith; but why? that is one
of the mysteries which i have never been able to penetrate.'

'it is a most beneficial, but a very strange institution,' replied
madame de renal. 'women are not admitted; all that i know of it is
that they all address one another as _tu_. for instance, this servant
will find m. valenod there, and that conceited fool will not be in the
least annoyed at hearing himself called _tu_ by saint-jean, and will
answer him in the same tone. if you really want to know what they do
there, i can ask m. de maugiron and m. valenod for details. we pay
twenty francs for each servant so that they do not cut our throats.'

the time flew. the memory of his mistress's charms distracted julien
from his black ambition. the necessity to refrain from speaking to her
of serious, reasonable matters, si
 
 ___________________________
 
en more so: one of her great wishes, which she had never
confessed to julien, for fear of shocking him, was to see him discard,
if only for a day, his gloomy black coat. with an ingenuity truly
admirable in so natural a woman, she secured, first from m. de moirod,
and then from the sub-prefect m. de maugiron, that julien should be
appointed to the guard of honour in preference to five or six young
men, sons of manufacturers in easy circumstances, at least two of whom
were of an exemplary piety. m. valenod, who was reckoning on lending
his carriage to the prettiest women of the town, in order to have his
fine norman horses admired, agreed to let julien, the person he hated
most, have one of them. but each of the members of the guard of honour
possessed or had borrowed one of those sky-blue coats with a pair of
colonel's epaulettes in silver, which had shone in public seven years
before. madame de renal wanted a new coat, and she had but four days
in which to send to besancon, and to procure from 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the onlookers recognised a relative
or friend. there was general laughter at the alarm of m. de moirod,
whose cautious hand lay ready at any moment to clutch hold of his
saddle. but one thing made them forget all the others: the left-hand
man in the ninth section was a handsome lad, very slender, who at
first was not identified.  presently a cry of indignation from some,
the astonished silence of others announced a general sensation. the
onlookers recognised in this young man, riding one of m. valenod's
norman horses, young sorel, the carpenter's son.  there was one
unanimous outcry against the mayor, especially among the liberals.
what, because this young labourer dressed up as a priest was tutor to
his brats, he had the audacity to appoint him to the guard of honour,
to the exclusion of m. this and m. that, wealthy manufacturers!  'those
gentlemen,' said a banker's wife, 'ought really to offer an affront to
the little upstart, born in the gutter.'

'he has a wicked temper and he is wearing
 
 ___________________________
 
 thee; 'tis i, i, the guilt is mine alone! i love a man who is
not my husband.'

julien next saw madame de renal reach a state that was outwardly
tranquil.  she sought to take the burden upon herself, she wished not
to poison the existence of him whom she loved.

in the midst of these alternations of love, remorse and pleasure, the
days passed for them with lightning rapidity. julien lost the habit of
reflection.

miss elisa went to conduct a little lawsuit which she had at
verrieres. she found m. valenod greatly annoyed with julien. she hated
the tutor and often spoke about him to m. valenod.

'you would ruin me, sir, if i told you the truth!' she said to him one
day.  'employers all hang together in important things. they never
forgive us poor servants for certain revelations ...'

after these conventional phrases, which the impatient curiosity of m.
valenod found a way of cutting short, he learned the most mortifying
things in the world for his own self-esteem.

this woman, the most distingui
 
 ___________________________
 
pths of your heart. your look
frightens me. i am afraid of you. great god! can it be, you have never
loved me? in that case, my husband can discover our love, and shut me
up in lifelong imprisonment, in the country, apart from my children.
perhaps god wills it so. i shall soon die; but you will be a monster.

'do you not love me? are you tired of my follies, of my remorse,
impious one? do you wish to ruin me? i give you an easy method. go,
show this letter to all verrieres, or rather show it to m. valenod
alone. tell him that i love you; but no, utter no such blasphemy; tell
him that i adore you, that life only began for me on the day when i
first saw you; that in the wildest moments of my girlhood, i had never
even dreamed of the happiness that i owe to you; that i have
sacrificed my life to you, that i am sacrificing my soul to you. you
know that i am sacrificing far more.

'but what does he know of sacrifices, that man? tell him, tell him, to
make him angry, that i defy all evil-speakers, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ther post,
find some decent pretext, and send you back without delay to your
family.

'alas, dear friend, we are going to be parted for a fortnight, perhaps
a month! but there, i do you justice, you will suffer as much as i.
still, this is the only way to counteract the effect of this anonymous
letter; it is not the first that my husband has received, and on my
account too. alas!  how i have laughed at them!

'the whole purpose of my scheme is to make my husband think that the
letter comes from m. valenod; i have no doubt that he is its author.
if you leave the house, do not fail to go and establish yourself at
verrieres. i shall contrive that my husband conceives the idea of
spending a fortnight there, to prove to the fools that there is no
coolness between him and myself.  once you are at verrieres, make
friends with everyone, even the liberals. i know that all the ladies
will run after you.

'do not go and quarrel with m. valenod, nor crop his ears, as you once
threatened; on the contrary, sh
 
 ___________________________
 

contemptuous with these vulgar personages, i implore you on my knees:
they are to be the arbiters of our destiny. doubt not for a moment
that my husband in dealing with you will conform to whatever _public
opinion_ may prescribe.

'it is you that are going to provide me with this anonymous
letter; arm yourself with patience and a pair of scissors. cut out of
a book the words you will see below; paste them together, with
water-glue, on the sheet of blue paper that i send you; it came to me
from m. valenod. be prepared for a search of your room; burn the pages
of the book you mutilate. if you do not find the words ready made,
have the patience to compose them letter by letter. to spare you
trouble, i have cut the anonymous letter short. alas! if you no longer
love me, as i fear, how long mine must seem to you!

anonymous letter

"madame,

all your little goings on are known; but the persons to whose interest
it is to check them have been warned. from a lingering affection for
yourself, i beg you 
 
 ___________________________
 
 him.
overpowered by the necessity of venting his anger on something, he
tore up the sheet on which this second anonymous letter was gummed,
and strode rapidly away, feeling that he could not endure his wife's
company. a minute later, he returned to her, already more calm.

'we must take action at once and dismiss julien,' she immediately
began; 'after all he is only the son of a working man. you can
compensate him with a few crowns, besides, he is clever and can easily
find another place, with m. valenod, for instance, or the sub-prefect
maugiron; they both have families. and so you will not be doing him
any harm ...'

'you speak like the fool that you are,' cried m. de renal in a voice
of thunder. 'how can one expect common sense of a woman? you never pay
attention to what is reasonable; how should you have any knowledge?
your carelessness, your laziness leave you just enough activity to
chase butterflies, feeble creatures which we are so unfortunate as to
have in our households ...'

madame d
 
 ___________________________
 
. de renal, calmly enough. 'the one
thing i must insist on is that you do not speak to him. you would show
temper and make him cross with me; you know how touchy the little
gentleman is.'

'that young man has no tact,' went on madame de renal; 'he may be
learned, you know about that, but at bottom he is nothing but a
peasant. for my own part, i have never had any opinion of him since he
refused to marry elisa, it was a fortune ready made; and all because
now and again she pays a secret visit to m. valenod.'

'ah!' said m. de renal, raising his eyebrows as far as they would go,
'what, did julien tell you that?'

'no, not exactly; he has always spoken to me of the vocation that is
calling him to the sacred ministry; but believe me, the first vocation
for the lower orders is to find their daily bread. he made it fairly
clear to me that he was not unaware of these secret visits.'

'and i, i, knew nothing about them!' cried m. de renal, all his fury
returning, emphasising every word. 'there are thing
 
 ___________________________
 
e rocks, might have reached
her in her tower. her ravening gaze devoured that immense slope of
dusky verdure, unbroken as the surface of a meadow, that was formed by
the treetops. 'how is it he has not the sense,' she asked herself with
deep emotion, 'to think of some signal to tell me that his happiness
is no less than mine?' she came down from the dovecote only when she
began to be afraid that her husband might come up in search of her.

she found him foaming with rage. he was running through m. valenod's
anodyne sentences, that were little used to being read with such
emotion.

seizing a moment in which a lull in her husband's exclamations gave
her a chance to make herself heard:

'i cannot get away from my original idea,' said madame de renal,
'julien ought to go for a holiday. whatever talent he may have for
latin, he is nothing more, after all, than a peasant who is often
coarse and wanting in tact; every day, thinking he is being polite, he
plies me with extravagant compliments in the wor
 
 ___________________________
 
 ...'

'he never reads any,' cried m. de renal; 'i am positive as to that. do
you suppose that i am a blind master who knows nothing of what goes on
under his roof?'

'very well, if he doesn't read those absurd compliments anywhere, he
invents them, which is even worse. he will have spoken of me in that
tone in verrieres; and, without going so far,' said madame de renal,
with the air of one making a discovery, 'he will have spoken like that
before elisa, which is just as though he had spoken to m. valenod.'

'ah!' cried m. de renal, making the table and the whole room shake
with one of the stoutest blows that human fist ever gave, 'the
anonymous letter in print and valenod's letters were all on the same
paper.'

'at last!' thought madame de renal; she appeared thunderstruck by this
discovery, and without having the courage to add a single word went
and sat down on the divan, at the farther end of the room.

the battle was now won; she had her work cut out to prevent m. de
renal from going and ta
 
 ___________________________
 
lking to the supposed author of the anonymous
letter.

'how is it you do not feel that to make a scene, without sufficient
proof, with m. valenod would be the most deplorable error? if you are
envied, sir, who is to blame? your own talents: your wise
administration, the buildings you have erected with such good taste,
the dowry i brought you, and above all the considerable fortune we may
expect to inherit from my worthy aunt, a fortune the extent of which
is vastly exaggerated, have made you the principal person in
verrieres.'

'you forget my birth,' said m. de renal, with a faint smile.

'you are one of the most distinguished gentlemen 
 
 ___________________________
 
in the province,'
madame de renal hastily added; 'if the king were free and could do
justice to birth, you would doubtless be figuring in the house of
peers,' and so forth. 'and in this magnificent position do you seek to
provide jealousy with food for comment?

'to speak to m. valenod of his anonymous letter is to proclaim
throughout verrieres, or rather in besancon, throughout the province,
that this petty cit, admitted perhaps imprudently to the friendship of
a renal, has found out a way to insult him. did these letters which
you have just discovered prove that i had responded to m. valenod's
overtures, then it would be for you to kill me, i should have deserved
it a hundred times, but not to show anger with him. think that all
your neighbours only await a pretext to be av
 
 ___________________________
 
threat was uttered _with gladness_. it contained the firmness
which seeks to cloak itself in courtesy; it determined m. de renal.
but, obeying the provincial custom, he continued to speak for a long
time, harked back to every argument in turn; his wife allowed him to
speak, there was still anger in his tone. at length, two hours of
futile discourse wore out the strength of a man who had been helpless
with rage all night. he determined upon the line of conduct which he
was going to adopt towards m. valenod, julien, and even elisa.

once or twice, during this great scene, madame de renal came within an
ace of feeling a certain sympathy for the very real distress of this
man who for ten years had been her friend. but our true passions are
selfish.  moreover she was expecting every moment an avowal of the
anonymous letter which he had received overnight, and this avowal
never came. to gain complete confidence, madame de renal required to
know what ideas might have been suggested to the man upon whom
 
 ___________________________
 
'why, that rascal never even
told me the name of the person who is making the offer! it will be m.
valenod, who sees in my banishment to verrieres the effect of his
anonymous letter.'

his missive dispatched, julien, as happy as a hunter who at six in the
morning on a fine autumn day emerges upon a plain teeming with game,
went out to seek the advice of m. chelan. but before he arrived at the
good cure's house, heaven, which was anxious to shower its blessings
on him, threw him into the arms of m. valenod, from whom he did not
conceal the fact that his heart was torn; a penniless youth like
himself was bound to devote himself entirely to the vocation which
heaven had placed in his heart, but a vocation was not everything in
this vile world. to be a worthy labourer in the lord's vineyard, and
not to be altogether unworthy of all one's learned fellow-labourers,
one required education; one required to spend in the seminary at
besancon two very expensive years; it became indispensable, therefore,
to
 
 ___________________________
 
 month by month. on the other hand, did not heaven, by
placing him with the renal boys, and above all by inspiring in him a
particular attachment to them, seem to indicate to him that it would
be a mistake to abandon this form of education for another? ...

julien arrived at such a pitch of perfection in this kind of
eloquence, which has taken the place of the swiftness of action of the
empire, that he ended by growing tired of the sound of his own voice.

returning to the house he found one of m. valenod's servants in full
livery, who had been looking for him all over the town, with a note
inviting him to dinner that very day.

never had julien set foot in the man's house; only a few days earlier,
his chief thought was how he might give him a thorough good thrashing
without subsequent action by the police. although dinner was not to be
until one o'clock, julien thought it more respectful to present
himself at half past twelve in the study of the governor of the
poorhouse. he found him displayin
 
 ___________________________
 
importance amid a mass of
papers. his huge black whiskers, his enormous quantity of hair, his
night-cap poised askew on the top of his head, his immense pipe, his
embroidered slippers, the heavy gold chains slung across his chest in
every direction, and all the equipment of a provincial financier, who
imagines himself to be a ladies' man, made not the slightest
impression upon julien; he only thought all the more of the thrashing
that he owed him.

he craved the honour of being presented to madame valenod; she was
making her toilet and could not see him. to make up for this, he had
the privilege of witnessing that of the governor of the poorhouse.
they then proceeded to join madame valenod, who presented her children
to him with tears in her eyes. this woman, one of the most important
people in verrieres, had a huge masculine face, which she had
plastered with rouge for this great ceremony.  she displayed all the
pathos of maternal feelings.

julien thought of madame de renal. his distrustful na
 
 ___________________________
 
oom wall there were wretched prisoners,
whose rations of meat had perhaps been squeezed to purchase all this
tasteless splendour with which his hosts sought to dazzle him.

'they are hungry perhaps at this moment,' he said to himself; his
throat contracted, he found it impossible to eat and almost to speak.
it was much worse a quarter of an hour later; they could hear in the
distance a few snatches of a popular and, it must be admitted, not too
refined song which one of the inmates was singing. m. valenod glanced
at one of his men in full livery, who left the room, and presently the
sound of singing ceased.  at that moment, a footman offered julien
some rhine wine in a green glass, and madame valenod took care to
inform him that this wine cost nine francs the bottle, direct from the
grower. julien, the green glass in his hand, said to m. valenod:

'i don't hear that horrid song any more.'

'gad! i should think not, indeed,' replied the governor triumphantly.
'i've made the rascal shut up.'

this
 
 ___________________________
 

tired.

he rose gravely as six o'clock struck and mentioned a chapter of the
new theology of liguori, which he had to learn by heart in order to
repeat it next day to m. chelan. 'for my business,' he added
pleasantly, 'is to make other people repeat lessons, and to repeat
them myself.'

his audience laughed heartily and applauded; this is the kind of wit
that goes down at verrieres. julien was by this time on his feet,
everyone else rose, regardless of decorum; such is the power of
genius. madame valenod kept him for a quarter of an hour longer; he
really must hear the children repeat their catechism; they made the
most absurd mistakes which he alone noticed. he made no attempt to
correct them. 'what ignorance of the first principles of religion,' he
thought. at length he said good-bye and thought that he might escape;
but the children must next attempt one of la fontaine's fables.

'that author is most immoral,' julien said to madame valenod; 'in one
of his fables on messire jean chouart, he h
 
 ___________________________
 
who for long
had been so shocked by the disdainful smile and the haughty
superiority which he found lurking behind all the compliments that
were paid him at m. de renal's. he could not help feeling the extreme
difference. 'even if we forget,' he said to himself as he walked away,
'that the money has been stolen from the poor prisoners, and that they
are forbidden to sing as well, would it ever occur to m. de renal to
tell his guests the price of each bottle of wine that he offers them?
and this m. valenod, in going over the list of his property, which he
does incessantly, cannot refer to his house, his land and all the rest
of it, if his wife is present, without saying your house, your land.'

this lady, apparently so conscious of the joy of ownership, had just
made an abominable scene, during dinner, with a servant who had broken
a wineglass and spoiled one of her sets; and the servant had answered
her with the most gross insolence.

'what a household!' thought julien; 'if they were to give me 
 
 ___________________________
 
prudent display was the true cause of his success. soon, the only
question discussed in verrieres was who would be successful in the
struggle to secure the learned young man's services, m. de renal or
the governor of the poorhouse. these two gentlemen formed with m.
maslon a triumvirate which for some years past had tyrannised the
town. people were jealous of the mayor, the liberals had grounds for
complaint against him; but after all he was noble and created to fill
a superior station, whereas m. valenod's father had not left him an
income of six hundred livres. he had been obliged to pass from the
stage of being pitied for the shabby apple-green coat in which
everybody remembered him in his younger days to that of being envied
for his norman horses, his gold chains, the clothes he ordered from
paris, in short, all his present prosperity.

in the welter of this world so new to julien he thought he had
discovered an honest man; this was a geometrician, was named gros and
was reckoned a jacobin. 
 
 ___________________________
 
he at
verrieres. there was always the dread of bankruptcy, wealth and
poverty were always fighting for the upper hand. the people with whom
he dined, in speaking of the joint on their table, made confidences
humiliating to themselves, and nauseating to their hearers.

'you aristocrats, you have every reason to be proud,' he said to
madame de renal. and he told her of all the dinners he had endured.

'why, so you are in the fashion!' and she laughed heartily at the
thought of the rouge which madame valenod felt herself obliged to put
on whenever she expected julien. 'i believe she has designs on your
heart,' she added.

luncheon was a joy. the presence of the children, albeit apparently a
nuisance, increased as a matter of fact the general enjoyment. these
poor children did not know how to express their delight at seeing
julien again.  the servants had not failed to inform them that he was
being offered two hundred francs more to educate the little valenods.

in the middle of luncheon, stanislas 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
popular comments.  those that had been repeated to the mayor had dealt
exclusively with the question whether julien would remain with him at
six hundred francs or would accept the eight hundred francs offered by
the governor of the poorhouse.

the said governor, when he met m. de renal in society, gave him the
cold shoulder. his behaviour was not without a certain subtlety; there
is not much thoughtless action in the provinces: sensations are so
infrequent there that people suppress them.

m. valenod was what is called, a hundred leagues from paris, a
_faraud_; this is a species marked by coarseness and natural
effrontery. his triumphant existence, since 1815, had confirmed him in
his habits. he reigned, so to speak, at verrieres, under the orders of
m. de renal; but being far more active, blushing at nothing,
interfering in everything, everlastingly going about, writing,
speaking, forgetting humiliations, having no personal pretensions, he
had succeeded in equalling the credit of his mayor
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the eyes of
ecclesiastical authority. m. valenod had as good as told the grocers
of the place: 'give me the two biggest fools among you'; the lawyers:
'point me out the two most ignorant'; the officers of health: 'let me
have your two biggest rascals.' when he had collected the most
shameless representatives of each profession, he had said to them:
'let us reign together.'

the manners of these men annoyed m. de renal. valenod's coarse nature
was offended by nothing, not even when the young abbe maslon gave him
the lie direct in public.

but,
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the midst of this prosperity, m. valenod was obliged to
fortify himself by little insolences in points of detail against the
harsh truths which he was well aware that everyone was entitled to
address to him. his activity had multiplied since the alarms which m.
appert's visit had left in its wake. he had made three journeys to
besancon; he wrote several letters for each mail; he sent others by
unknown messengers who came to his house at nightfall. he had been
wrong perhaps in securing the deprivation of the old cure chelan; for
this v
 
 ___________________________
 
dictive action had made him be regarded, by several pious
ladies of good birth, as a profoundly wicked man. moreover this
service rendered had placed him in the absolute power of the
vicar-general de frilair, from whom he received strange orders. he had
reached this stage in his career when he yielded to the pleasure of
writing an anonymous letter. to add to his embarrassment, his wife
informed him that she wished to have julien in the house; the idea
appealed to her vanity.

in this situation, m. valenod foresaw a final rupture with his former
confederate m. de renal. the mayor would address him in harsh
language, which mattered little enough to him; but he might write to
besancon, or even to paris. a cousin of some minister or other might
suddenly descend upon verrieres and take over the governorship of the
poorhouse. m. valenod thought of making friends with the liberals; it
was for this reason that several of them were invited to the dinner at
which julien recited. he would find powerful sup
 
 ___________________________
 
port there against the
mayor. but an election might come, and it went without saying that the
poorhouse and a vote for the wrong party were incompatible. the
history of these tactics, admirably divined by madame de renal, had
been imparted to julien while he gave her his arm to escort her from
one shop to another, and little by little had carried them to the
cours de la fidelite, where they spent some hours, almost as peaceful
as the hours at vergy.

at this period, m. valenod was seeking to avoid a final rupture with
his former chief, by himself adopting a bold air towards him. on the
day of which we treat, this system proved successful, but increased
the mayor's ill humour.

never can vanity, at grips with all the nastiest and shabbiest
elements of a petty love of money, have plunged a man in a more
wretched state than that in which m. de renal found himself, at the
moment of his entering the tavern. never, on the contrary, had his
children been gayer or more joyfu
 
 ___________________________
 
 tone which he sought to make imposing.

by way of reply, his wife drew him aside and explained to him the
necessity of getting rid of julien. the hours of happiness she had
just enjoyed had given her back the ease and resolution necessary for
carrying out the plan of conduct which she had been meditating for the
last fortnight. what really and completely dismayed the poor mayor of
verrieres was that he knew that people joked publicly in the town at
the expense of his attachment to _hard cash_: m. valenod was as
generous as a robber, whereas he had shown himself in a prudent rather
than a brilliant light in the last five or six subscription lists for
the confraternity of saint joseph, the congregation of our lady, the
congregation of the blessed sacrament, and so forth.

among the country gentlemen of verrieres and the neighbourhood,
skilfully classified in the lists compiled by the collecting brethren,
according to the amount of their offerings, the name of m. de renal
had more than once been s
 
 ___________________________
 
 ill-lighted room; but everyone eyed his neighbours in a singular
fashion. every eye was fixed on a table, where julien saw, on a pewter
plate, three lighted candle-ends. the crier was shouting: 'three
hundred francs, gentlemen!'

'three hundred francs! it is too bad!' one man murmured to another.
julien was standing between them. 'it is worth more than eight
hundred; i am going to cover the bid.'

'it's cutting off your nose to spite your face. what are you going to
gain by bringing m. maslon, m. valenod, the bishop, his terrible
vicar-general de frilair and the whole of their gang down upon you?'

'three hundred and twenty,' the other shouted.

'stupid idiot!' retorted his neighbour. 'and here's one of the mayor's
spies,' he added pointing at julien.

julien turned sharply to rebuke him for this speech; but the two
franc-comtois paid no attention to him. their coolness restored his
own. at this moment the last candle-end went out, and the drawling
voice of the crier assigned the house for a le
 
 ___________________________
 

bored than usual.

the autumn, the first weeks of winter had soon come and gone. it was
time to leave the woods of vergy. the high society of verrieres began
to grow indignant that its anathemas were making so little impression
upon m. de renal. in less than a week, certain grave personages who
made up for their habitual solemnity by giving themselves the pleasure
of fulfilling missions of this sort, implanted in him the most cruel
suspicions, but without going beyond the most measured terms.

m. valenod, who was playing a close game, had placed elisa with a
noble and highly respected family, which included five women. elisa
fearing, she said, that she might not find a place during the winter,
had asked this family for only about two thirds of what she was
receiving at the mayor's.  of her own accord, the girl had the
excellent idea of going to confess to the retired cure chelan as well
as to the new cure, so as to be able to give them both a detailed
account of julien's amours.

on the morning
 
 ___________________________
 
usband had just been speaking to her
with a certain frankness. the natural weakness of his character,
seeking encouragement in the prospect of the inheritance from
besancon, had made him decide to regard her as entirely innocent. he
had just confessed to her the strange condition in which he found
public opinion at verrieres. the public were wrong, had been led
astray by envious ill-wishers, but what was to be done?

madame de renal had the momentary illusion that julien might be able
to accept m. valenod's offer, and remain at verrieres. but she was no
longer the simple, timid woman of the previous year; her fatal
passion, her spells of remorse had enlightened her. soon she had to
bear the misery of proving to herself, while she listened to her
husband, that a separation, at any rate for the time being, was now
indispensable. 'away from me, julien will drift back into those
ambitious projects that are so natural when one has nothing. and i,
great god! i am so rich, and so powerless to secure my
 
 ___________________________
 
s. i shall disgrace him
publicly, and then fight him. it is going too far.'

'i might be left a widow, great god!' thought madame de renal. but
almost at the same instant she said to herself: 'if i do not prevent
this duel, as i certainly can, i shall be my husband's murderess.'

never before had she handled his vanity with so much skill. in less
than two hours she made him see, always by the use of arguments that
had occurred first to him, that he must show himself friendlier than
ever towards m. valenod, and even take elisa into the house again.
madame de renal required courage to make up her mind to set eyes on
this girl, the cause of all her troubles. but the idea had come to her
from julien.

finally, after having been set three or four times in the right
direction, m. de renal arrived of his own accord at the idea (highly
distressing, from the financial point of view) that the most
unpleasant thing that could happen for himself was that julien, amid
the seething excitement and gossip of th
 
 ___________________________
 
e whole of verrieres, should
remain there as tutor to m. valenod's children. it was obviously in
julien's interest to accept the offer made him by the governor of the
poorhouse. it was essential however to m. de renal's fair fame that
julien should leave verrieres to enter the seminary at besancon or at
dijon. but how was he to be made to agree, and after that how was he
to maintain himself there?

m. de renal, seeing the imminence of a pecuniary sacrifice, was in
greater despair than his wife. for her part, after this conversation,
she was in the position o
 
 ___________________________
 
stramonium_; he ceases to act, save, so to speak,
automatically, and no longer takes an interest in anything. thus louis
xiv on his deathbed was led to say: 'when i was king.' an admirable
speech!

on the morrow, at break of day, m. de renal received an anonymous
letter.  it was couched in the most insulting style. the coarsest
words applicable to his position stared from every line. it was the
work of some envious subordinate. this letter brought him back to the
thought of fighting a duel with m. valenod. soon his courage had risen
to the idea of an immediate execution of his design. he left the house
unaccompanied, and went to the gunsmith's to procure a brace of
pistols, which he told the man to load.

'after all,' he said to himself, 'should the drastic rule of the
emperor napoleon be restored, i myself could not be charged with the
misappropriation of a halfpenny. at the most i have shut my eyes; but
i have plenty of letters in my desk authorising me to do so.'

madame de renal was frighten
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by her husband's cold anger, it brought
back to her mind the fatal thought of widowhood, which she found it so
hard to banish. she shut herself up with him. for hours on end she
pleaded with him in vain, the latest anonymous letter had determined
him. at length she succeeded in transforming the courage required to
strike m. valenod into that required to offer julien six hundred
francs for his maintenance for one year in a seminary. m. de renal,
heaping a thousand curses on the day on which he had conceived the
fatal idea of taking a tutor into his household, forgot the anonymous
letter.

he found a grain of comfort in an idea which he did not communicate to
his wife: by skilful handling, and by taking advantage of the young
man's romantic ideas, he hoped to bind him, for a smaller sum, to
refuse m. valenod's offers.

mada
 
 ___________________________
 
car-general wished to insinuate a few words as to the choice of
a successor. the prelate, little disposed to discuss business, said to
him:

'before we put in the next man, let us try to discover why this one is
going. fetch me in that seminarist, the truth is to be found in the
mouths of babes.'

julien was summoned: 'i shall find myself trapped between two
inquisitors,' he thought. never had he felt more courageous.

at the moment of his entering the room, two tall valets, better
dressed than m. valenod himself, were disrobing monseigneur. the
prelate, before coming to the subject of m. pirard, thought fit to
question julien about his studies. he touched upon dogma, and was
amazed. presently he turned to the humanities, virgil, horace, cicero.
'those names,' thought julien, 'earned me my number 198. i have
nothing more to lose, let us try to shine.' he was successful; the
prelate, an excellent humanist himself, was enchanted.

at dinner at the prefecture, a girl, deservedly famous, had recited
 
 ___________________________
 
rs, and has no other real object than to take
away all influence from well-born people,' he said to mathilde, on the
eve of the drawing by lot of the thirty-six jurors for the assize, 'i
could have answered for the verdict. did i not secure the acquittal of
the cure n---- ?'

it was with pleasure that, on the following day, among the names drawn
from the urn, m. de frilair found those of five members of the
congregation of besancon, and, among those who were strangers to the
town, the names of mm. valenod, de moirod and de cholin. 'i can
answer at once for these eight jurors,' he told mathilde. 'the first
five are _machines_. valenod is my agent, moirod owes all he has to me,
cholin is an imbecile, who is afraid of everything.'

the newspaper published throughout the department the names of the
jurors, and madame de renal, to the inexpressible terror of her
husband, decided to come to besancon. all that m. de renal could
obtain from her was that she would not leave her bed, so that she
might not
 
 ___________________________
 
er six friends
devoted to my welfare, and i have given them to understand that it
rested with them to raise me to the episcopate.  baron de valenod,
whom i have made mayor of verrieres, has entire control over two of
his subordinates, mm. de moirod and de cholin. to tell the truth,
chance has given us, for dealing with this affair, two jurors who are
extremely disaffected; but, although ultra-liberals, they loyally obey
my orders on great occasions, and i have sent word asking them to vote
with m. valenod. i learn that a sixth juror of the industrial class,
an immensely rich and garrulous liberal, is secretly hoping for a
contract from the ministry of war, and no doubt he would not wish to
vex me. i have let him know that m. valenod has my last word.'

'and who is this m. valenod?' said mathilde, anxiously.

'if you knew him, you would have no doubt of our success. he is a bold
speaker, impudent, coarse, a man made to be the leader of fools. 1814
raised him from penury, and i am going to make hi
 
 ___________________________
 
inst you, has helped your case,' said the counsel. and indeed, he
had not been speaking for five minutes before almost all the ladies
had their handkerchiefs in their hands. the counsel, encouraged by
this, addressed the jury in extremely strong language. julien
shuddered, he felt that he was on the point of bursting into tears.
'great god! what will my enemies say?'

he was about to yield to the emotion that was overpowering him, when,
fortunately for himself, he caught an insolent glance from m. valenod.

'that wretch's eyes are ablaze,' he said to himself; 'what a triumph
for that vile nature! had my crime led to this alone, i should be
bound to abhor it. heaven knows what he will say of me to madame de
renal!'

this thought obliterated all the rest. shortly afterwards, julien was
recalled to himself by sounds of approval from the public. his counsel
had just concluded his speech. julien remembered that it was the
correct thing to shake hands with him. the time had passed quickly.

refreshmen