tain passes through verrieres before emptying its waters into
the doubs, and supplies power to a great number of sawmills; this is
an extremely simple industry, and procures a certain degree of comfort
for the majority of the inhabitants, who are of the peasant rather
than of the burgess class. it is not, however, the sawmills that have
made this little town rich. it is to the manufacture of printed
calicoes, known as mulhouse stuffs, that it owes the general
prosperity which, since the fall of napoleon, has led to the refacing
of almost all the houses in verrieres.

no sooner has one entered the town than one is startled by the din of
a noisy machine of terrifying aspect. a score of weighty hammers,
falling with a clang which makes the pavement tremble, are raised
aloft by a wheel which the water of the torrent sets in motion. each
of these hammers turns out, daily, i cannot say how many thousands of
nails. a bevy of fresh, pretty girls subject to the blows of these
enormous hammers, the litt
 
 ___________________________
 
f these were directed against such of the inhabitants as read the
_constitutionnel_. the right party was triumphant. the sums involved
amounted, it was true, to no more than four or five francs; but one of
these small fines was levied upon a nailsmith, julien's godfather. in
his anger, this man exclaimed: 'what a change! and to think that, for
twenty years and more, the justice was reckoned such an honest man!'
the surgeon-major, julien's friend, was dead.

all at once julien ceased to speak of napoleon; he announced his
intention of becoming a priest, and was constantly to be seen, in his
father's sawmill, engaged in learning by heart a latin bible which the
cure had lent him. the good old man, amazed at his progress, devoted
whole evenings to instructing him in divinity. julien gave utterance
in his company to none but pious sentiments. who could have supposed
that that girlish face, so pale and gentle, hid the unshakeable
determination to expose himself to the risk of a thousand deaths
rath
 
 ___________________________
 
ea which occurred to him drove
him almost out of his senses for some weeks, and finally took
possession of him with the absolute power of the first idea which a
passionate nature believes itself to have discovered.

'when bonaparte made a name for himself, france was in fear of being
invaded; military distinction was necessary and fashionable. today we
see priests at forty drawing stipends of a hundred thousand francs,
that is to say three times as much as the famous divisional commanders
under napoleon.  they must have people to support them. look at the
justice here, so wise a man, always so honest until now, sacrificing
his honour, at his age, from fear of offending a young vicar of
thirty. i must become a priest.'

on one occasion, in the midst of his new-found piety, after julien had
been studying divinity for two years, he was betrayed by a sudden
blaze of the fire that devoured his spirit. this was at m. chelan's;
at a dinner party of priests, to whom the good cure had introduced him
as
 
 ___________________________
 
 an educational prodigy, he found himself uttering frenzied praise
of napoleon. he bound his right arm across his chest, pretending that
he had put the arm out of joint when shifting a fir trunk, and kept it
for two months in this awkward position. after this drastic penance,
he forgave himself. such is the young man of eighteen, but weak in
appearance, whom you would have said to be, at the most, seventeen,
who, carrying a small parcel under his arm, was entering the
magnificent church of verrieres.

he found it dark and deserted. in view of some festival, all the
window
 
 ___________________________
 
enal, afraid of losing him, suggested
his signing a contract for two years.

'no, sir,' julien replied coldly, 'if you chose to dismiss me i should
be obliged to go. a contract which binds me without putting you under
any obligation is unfair, i must decline.'

julien managed so skilfully that, less than a month after his coming
to the house, m. de renal himself respected him. the cure having
quarrelled with mm. de renal and valenod, there was no one who could
betray julien's former passion for napoleon, of whom he was careful to
speak with horror.




chapter 7
elective affinities


  they can only touch the heart by bruising it.
    a modern

the children adored him, he did not care for them; his thoughts were
elsewhere. nothing that these urchins could do ever tried his
patience.  cold, just, impassive, and at the same time loved, because
his coming had in a measure banished dullness from the house, he was a
good tutor. for his part, he felt only hatred and horror for the high
society in wh
 
 ___________________________
 
 their eyes, how remote their ideas were from any
semblance of reality. did an action strike him as admirable, it was
precisely what called forth blame from the people round about him. his
unspoken retort was always: 'what monsters!' or 'what fools!' the
amusing thing was that, with all his pride, frequently he understood
nothing at all of what was being discussed.

in his whole life, he had never spoken with sincerity except to the
old surgeon-major; the few ideas that he had bore reference to
napoleon's campaigns in italy, or to surgery. his youthful courage
took delight in detailed accounts of the most painful operations; he
said to himself: 'i should not have flinched.'

the first time that madame de renal attempted a conversation with him
on a subject other than that of the children's education, he began to
talk of surgical operations; she turned pale, and begged him to stop.

julien knew nothing apart from these matters. and so, as he spent his
time with madame de renal, the strangest si
 
 ___________________________
 
is eyes, they were so fine and revealed so burning a
soul that, like good actors, they imparted at times a charming meaning
to what was meaningless. madame de renal remarked that, when alone
with her, he never expressed himself well except when he was
distracted by some unforeseen occurrence, he never thought of turning
a compliment. as the friends of the family did not spoil her by
offering her new and brilliant ideas, she took a delight in the
flashes of julien's intellect.

since the fall of napoleon, all semblance of gallantry in speech has
been sternly banished from the code of provincial behaviour. people
are afraid of losing their posts. the unscrupulous seek support from
the _congregation_ and hypocrisy has made the most brilliant advances
even among the liberal classes. dulness increases. no pleasure is
left, save in reading and agriculture.

madame de renal, the wealthy heiress of a religious aunt, married at
sixteen to a worthy gentleman, had never in her life felt or seen
anything 
 
 ___________________________
 
 in town, as frequently happened, he ventured to read; soon,
instead of reading at night, and then taking care, moreover, to shade
his lamp with an inverted flower-pot, he could take his full measure
of sleep; during the day, in the interval between the children's
lessons, he climbed up among these rocks with the book that was his
sole rule of conduct, and the sole object of his transports. he found
in it at once happiness, ecstasy and consolation in moments of
depression.

certain things which napoleon says of women, various discussions of
the merits of the novels in vogue during his reign, furnished him
now, for the first time, with several ideas which would long since
have been familiar to any other young man of his age.

the hot weather came. they formed the habit of spending the evening
under a huge lime a few yards from the house. there the darkness was
intense. one evening, julien was talking with emphasis, he was
revelling in the pleasure of talking well and to young married women;
as 
 
 ___________________________
 
f the woman he
loves.'

seated on a chair in the sitting-room of this apartment, madame de
renal fell a prey to all the horrors of jealousy. her extreme
ignorance was of service to her again at this moment; astonishment
tempered her grief.  julien appeared, snatched the box, without
thanking her, without saying a word, and ran into his bedroom, where
he struck a light and immediately destroyed it. he was pale,
speechless; he exaggerated to himself the risk he had been running.

'the portrait of napoleon,' he said to himself with a toss of the
head, 'found hidden in the room of a man who professes such hatred for
the usurper! found by m. de renal, so _ultra_ and so angry! and, to
complete the imprudence, on the white card at the back of the
portrait, lines in my writing! and lines that can leave no doubt as to
the warmth of my admiration! and each of those transports of love is
dated! there was one only two days ago!

'all my reputation brought down, destroyed in a moment!' julien said
to himse
 
 ___________________________
 
 kindled to flame
by an august sun. the grasshoppers were chirping in the patch of
meadow beneath the rock; when they ceased everything around him was
silence.  twenty leagues of country lay at his feet. from time to time
a hawk, risen from the bare cliffs above his head, caught his eye as
it wheeled silently in its vast circles. julien's eye followed
mechanically the bird of prey. its calm, powerful motion impressed
him, he envied such strength, he envied such isolation.

it was the destiny of napoleon, was it one day to be his own?




chapter 11
night thoughts


  yet julia's very coldness still was kind,
    and tremulously gentle her small hand
  withdrew itself from his, but left behind
    a little pressure, thrilling, and so bland
  and slight, so very slight, that to the mind
    twas but a doubt.
      _don juan_, i. 71

he must, however, let himself be seen at verrieres. as he left the
presbytery the first person he met was, by a happy chance, m. valenod,
whom he hastened to inform 
 
 ___________________________
 
a divided attention to the rustle of the leaves of the
lime, stirred by the gentle night breeze, and to the dogs at the mill
by the doubs, barking in the distance.

but this emotion was a pleasure and not a passion. on returning to his
room he thought of one happiness only, that of going on with his
favourite book; at twenty, the thought of the world and of the
impression one is going to make on it, prevails over everything else.

presently, however, he put down the book. by dint of dreaming of
napoleon's victories, he had discerned a new element in his own. 'yes,
i have won a battle,' he told himself, 'but i must follow it up, i
must crush the arrogance of this proud gentleman while he is still
retreating. that is napoleon out and out. i must ask him for three
days' holiday, to go and see my friend fouque. if he refuses, i again
offer to break the agreement; but he will give way.'

madame de renal could not close an eye. she felt that she had never
lived until that moment. she could not tear 
 
 ___________________________
 
th a companion who will never
leave him.

'shall i prove false to my friend?' exclaimed julien angrily. this
creature, for whom hypocrisy and the absence of all fellow feeling
were the ordinary line of conduct, could not on this occasion bear the
thought of the slightest want of delicacy towards a man who loved him.

but all at once julien became happy, he had a reason for refusing.
'what, i should be idly wasting seven or eight years! i should thus
arrive at eight and twenty; but, at that age, napoleon had already
done his greatest deeds!  after i have obscurely scraped together a
little money by going round all these timber sales, and winning the
favour of various minor rascals, who can say whether i shall still
preserve the sacred fire with which one makes oneself a name?'

the following morning, julien replied with great coolness to the
worthy fouque, who looked upon the matter of their partnership as
settled, that his vocation to the sacred ministry of the altar did not
allow him to accep
 
 ___________________________
 
, she dismissed it like an importunate stranger. 'never will i
allow julien to take any liberty,' madame de renal told herself, 'we
shall live in future as we have been living for the last month. he
shall be a friend.'




chapter 14
the english scissors

  a girl of sixteen had a rosy complexion, and put on rouge.
    polidori

as for julien, fouque's offer had indeed destroyed all his happiness;
he could not decide upon any course.

'alas! perhaps i am wanting in character, i should have made napoleon
a bad soldier. anyhow,' he went on, 'my little intrigue with the lady
of the house is going to distract me for the moment.'

fortunately for him, even in this minor incident, his inward feelings
bore no relation to his cavalier language. he was afraid of madame de
renal because of her pretty gown. this gown was in his eyes the
advance guard of paris. his pride was determined to leave nothing to
chance and to the inspiration of the moment. drawing upon fouque's
confessions and the little he had 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and by and by a cloud takes all away!
    _the two gentlemen of verona_

one evening as the sun set, sitting by his mistress, at the end of the
orchard, safe from disturbance, he was deep in thought. 'will such
delicious moments,' he was wondering, 'last for ever?' his thoughts
were absorbed in the difficulty of adopting a profession, he was
deploring this great and distressing problem which puts an end to
boyhood and spoils the opening years of manhood when one has no money.

'ah!' he cried, 'napoleon was indeed the man sent by god to help the
youth of france! who is to take his place? what will the poor wretches
do without him, even those who are richer than i, who have just the
few crowns needed to procure them a good education, and not enough
money to purchase a man at twenty and launch themselves in a career!
whatever happens,' he added with deep sigh, 'that fatal memory will
for ever prevent us from being happy!'

he saw madame de renal frown suddenly; she assumed a cold, disdainful
air
 
 ___________________________
 
rse than most
of the young men of this mountain town. he saw in the eyes of the
women that they were talking about him.

his epaulettes were more brilliant because they were new. at every
moment his horse threatened to rear; he was in the seventh heaven of
joy.

his happiness knew no bounds when, as they passed near the old
rampart, the sound of the small cannon made his horse swerve out of
the ranks. by the greatest accident, he did not fall off; from that
moment he felt himself a hero. he was napoleon's orderly officer and
was charging a battery.

there was one person happier than he. first of all she had watched him
pass from one of the windows of the town hall; then, getting into her
carriage, and rapidly making a wide detour, she was in time to tremble
when his horse carried him out of the ranks. finally, her carriage
passing out at a gallop through another of the gates of the town, she
made her way back to the road along which the king was to pass, and
was able to follow the guard of hon
 
 ___________________________
 
ing manners.'

they entered the church by a side door; suddenly an appalling crash
made its ancient vaults resound; julien thought that the walls were
collapsing.  it was again the small cannon; drawn by eight horses at a
gallop, it had just arrived; and immediately on its arrival, brought
into action by the gunners of leipsic, it was firing five rounds a
minute, as though the prussians had been in front of it.

but this stirring sound no longer had any effect upon julien, he
dreamed no more of napoleon and martial glory. 'so young,' he was
thinking, 'to be bishop of agde! but where is agde? and how much is
it worth? two or three hundred thousand francs, perhaps.'

his lordship's servants appeared, carrying a magnificent dais; m.
chelan took one of the poles, but actually it was julien that bore it.
the bishop took his place beneath it. he had really succeeded in
giving himself the air of an old man; our hero's admiration knew no
bounds. 'what cannot one do if one is clever!' he thought.

the 
 
 ___________________________
 

of the refrain, sung in chorus: 'there,' julien's conscience warned
him, 'you have the sordid fortune which you will achieve, and you will
enjoy it only in these conditions and in such company as this! you
will have a place worth perhaps twenty thousand francs, but it must be
that while you gorge to repletion you stop the poor prisoner from
singing; you will give dinner parties with the money you have filched
from his miserable pittance, and during your dinner he will be more
wretched still! o napoleon! how pleasant it was in your time to climb
to fortune through the dangers of a battle; but meanly to intensify
the sufferings of the wretched!'

i admit that the weakness which julien displays in this monologue
gives me a poor opinion of him. he would be a worthy colleague for
those conspirators in yellow gloves, who profess to reform all the
conditions of life in a great country, and would be horrified at
having to undergo the slightest inconvenience themselves.

julien was sharply recalled to
 
 ___________________________
 
in the most insulting style. the coarsest
words applicable to his position stared from every line. it was the
work of some envious subordinate. this letter brought him back to the
thought of fighting a duel with m. valenod. soon his courage had risen
to the idea of an immediate execution of his design. he left the house
unaccompanied, and went to the gunsmith's to procure a brace of
pistols, which he told the man to load.

'after all,' he said to himself, 'should the drastic rule of the
emperor napoleon be restored, i myself could not be charged with the
misappropriation of a halfpenny. at the most i have shut my eyes; but
i have plenty of letters in my desk authorising me to do so.'

madame de renal was frightened by her husband's cold anger, it brought
back to her mind the fatal thought of widowhood, which she found it so
hard to banish. she shut herself up with him. for hours on end she
pleaded with him in vain, the latest anonymous letter had determined
him. at length she succeeded in tran
 
 ___________________________
 
d
entirely of coarse creatures who were by no means certain that they
understood the latin words which they repeated all day long. almost
all of them were the sons of peasants, and preferred to earn their
bread by reciting a few latin words rather than by tilling the soil.
it was after making this discovery, in the first few days, that julien
promised himself a rapid success. 'in every service, there is need of
intelligent people, for after all there is work to be done,' he told
himself. 'under napoleon, i should have been a serjeant; among these
future cures, i shall be a vicar-general.

'all these poor devils,' he added, 'labourers from the cradle, have
lived, until they came here, upon skim milk and black bread. in their
cottages, they tasted meat only five or six times in a year. like the
roman soldiers who found active service a holiday, these boorish
peasants are enchanted by the luxuries of the seminary.'

julien never read anything in their lack-lustre eyes beyond the
satisfaction of a
 
 ___________________________
 
rry feast. never had the abbe chas
seen his church looking so well.

'my dear disciple,' he said to julien, 'my mother used to hire out
chairs in this venerable fane, so that i was brought up in this great
edifice.  robespierre's terror ruined us; but, at eight years old, as
i then was, i was already serving masses in private houses, and
their owners gave me my dinner on mass days. no one could fold a
chasuble better than i, the gold braid was never broken. since the
restoration of the faith by napoleon, it has been my happy lot to
take charge of everything in this venerable mother church. on five
days in the year, my eyes behold it decked out with these beautiful
ornaments. but never has it been so resplendent, never have the damask
strips been so well hung as they are today, have they clung so to the
pillars.'

'at last, he is going to tell me his secret,' thought julien, 'here he
is talking to me of himself; he is beginning to expand.' but nothing
imprudent was said by this man, evidently i
 
 ___________________________
 
with his chamberlains and his pomp and his
receptions at the tuileries, he simply furnished a new edition of all
the stuff and nonsense of the monarchy. it was a corrected edition, it
might have served for a century or two. the nobles and priests
preferred to return to the old edition, but they have not the iron
hand that they need to bring it before the public.'

'listen to the old printer talking!'

'who is it that is turning me off my land?' went on the printer with
heat.  'the priests, whom napoleon brought back with his concordat,
instead of treating them as the state treats doctors, lawyers,
astronomers, of regarding them merely as citizens, without inquiring
into the trade by which they earn their living. would there be these
insolent gentlemen today if your bonaparte had not created barons and
counts? no, the fashion had passed. next to the priests, it is the
minor country nobles that have annoyed me most, and forced me to turn
liberal.'

the discussion was endless, this theme will occ
 
 ___________________________
 
 julien
that this kind of wit required ample room to develop itself.

the baron could not produce epigrams; he required at least four
sentences of six lines each to be brilliant.

'this man is holding forth, he is not talking,' said someone behind
julien's back. he turned round and flushed with pleasure when he heard
the name of comte chalvet. this was the cleverest man of the day.
julien had often come upon his name in the _memorial de sainte-helene_
and in the fragments of history dictated by napoleon. comte chalvet
was curt in his speech; his remarks were flashes of lightning,
accurate, keen, profound. if he spoke of any public matter,
immediately one saw the discussion reach a fresh stage. he brought
facts to bear on it, it was a pleasure to listen to him. in politics,
however, he was a brazen cynic.

'i am independent, myself,' he was saying to a gentleman wearing three
decorations, whom he was apparently quizzing. 'why should i be
expected to hold the same opinion today that i held six w
 
 ___________________________
 
ontinued, he looked at her as a servant looks at his master, when
receiving orders. although his eyes looked full into those of
mathilde, still fastened upon him with a strange gaze, he withdrew
with marked alacrity.

'that he, who really is so handsome,' mathilde said to herself at
length, awakening from her dreams, 'should pay such a tribute to
ugliness! never a thought of himself! he is not like caylus or
croisenois. this sorel has something of the air my father adopts when
he is playing the napoleon, at a ball.' she had entirely forgotten
danton. 'no doubt about it, i am bored this evening.' she seized her
brother by the arm, and, greatly to his disgust, forced him to take
her for a tour of the rooms. the idea occurred to her of following the
condemned man's conversation with julien.

the crowd was immense. she succeeded, however, in overtaking them at
the moment when, just in front of her, altamira had stopped by a tray
of ices to help himself. he was talking to julien, half turning
towar
 
 ___________________________
 
embers.

'a conspiracy wipes out all the titles conferred by social caprice. in
those conditions, a man springs at once to the rank which his manner
of facing death assigns to him. the mind itself loses some of its
authority ...

'what would danton be today, in this age of valenods and renais? not
even a deputy crown prosecutor .. .

'what am i saying? he would have sold himself to the _congregation_;
he would be a minister, for after all the great danton did steal.
mirabeau, too, sold himself. napoleon stole millions in italy,
otherwise he would have been brought to a standstill by poverty, like
pichegru. only la fayette never stole. must one steal, must one sell
oneself?' julien wondered. the question arrested the flow of his
imagination. he spent the rest of the night reading the history of the
revolution.

next day, as he copied his letters in the library, he could still
think of nothing but conte altamira's conversation.

'it is quite true,' he said to himself, after a long spell of
absor
 
 ___________________________
 
or. you must agree that there was less egoism
and pettiness. i love that period.'

'and boniface de la mole was its hero,' he said to her.

'at any rate he was loved as it is perhaps pleasant to be loved. what
woman alive today would not be horrified to touch the head of her
decapitated lover?'

madame de la mole called her daughter indoors. hypocrisy, to be
effective, must be concealed; and julien, as we see, had taken
mademoiselle de la mole partly into his confidence as to his
admiration for napoleon.

'that is the immense advantage which they have over us,' he said to
himself, when left alone in the garden. 'the history of their
ancestors raises them above vulgar sentiments, and they have not
always to be thinking of their daily bread! what a wretched state of
things!' he added bitterly. 'i am not worthy to discuss these serious
matters. my life is nothing more than a sequence of hypocrisies,
because i have not an income of a thousand francs with which to buy my
bread.'

'what are you drea
 
 ___________________________
 
he kind of occupation that is in fashion.
they must have been less colourless in the days of the empire. then
all these young men in society had seen or performed actions in which
there was real greatness. the due de n----, my uncle, fought at
wagram.'

'what intelligence is required to wield a sabre? and when that has
happened to them, they talk about it so often!' said mademoiselle de
sainte-heredite, mathilde's cousin.

'oh, well, those stories amuse me. to have been in a real battle, one
of napoleon's battles, in which ten thousand soldiers were killed, is
a proof of courage. exposing oneself to danger elevates the soul, and
saves it from the boredom in which all my poor adorers seem to be
plunged; and it is contagious, that boredom. which of them ever dreams
of doing anything out of the common? they seek to win my hand, a fine
enterprise! i am rich, and my father will help on his son-in-law. oh,
if only he could find one who was at all amusing!'

mathilde's vivid, picturesque point of vie
 
 ___________________________
 
ave grown moustaches like
yourselves, gentlemen; in six months he will be an officer of hussars
like yourselves, gentlemen. and then the greatness of his character
will no longer be a joke. i can see you reduced, my lord duke-to-be,
to that old and worthless plea: the superiority of the nobility of the
court to the provincial nobility. but what defence have you left if i
choose to take an extreme case, if i am so unkind as to make julien's
father a spanish duke, a prisoner of war at besancon in napoleon's
time, who, from a scruple of conscience, acknowledges him on his
deathbed?'

all these assumptions of a birth out of wedlock were regarded by mm.
de caylus and de croisenois as in distinctly bad taste. this was all
that they saw in mathilde's argument.

obedient as norbert was, his sister's meaning was so unmistakable that
he assumed an air of gravity, little in keeping, it must be confessed,
with his genial, smiling features. he ventured to say a few words:

'are you unwell, dear?' mathilde 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a mishap for which we find this
remedy,' he went on, pronouncing each word slowly, and in accents of
restrained ferocity, 'we begin it by quoting the strongest expressions
from the letter of the sublime mathilde.

'yes, but then four of m. de croisenois's flunkeys will spring upon
me, and tear the original from me.

'no, for i am well armed, and am accustomed, as they know, to firing
on flunkeys.

'very well! say, one of them has some courage; he springs upon me. he
has been promised a hundred napoleons. i kill or injure him, all the
better, that is what they want. i am flung into prison with all the
forms of law; i appear in the police court, and they send me, with all
justice and equity on the judges' part, to keep mm. fontan and magalon
company at poissy. there, i lie upon straw with four hundred poor
wretches, pell-mell ... and i am to feel some pity for these people,'
he cried, springing impetuously to his feet. 'what pity do they show
for the third estate when they have us in their powe
 
 ___________________________
 
ventured to say that she was in love. she had written
_first_ (what a terrible word!) to a man in the lowest rank of society.

this circumstance assured her, in the event of discovery, eternal
disgrace.  which of the women who came to see her mother would dare to
take her part?  what polite expression could be put into their mouths
to lessen the shock of the fearful contempt of the drawing-rooms?

and even to speak to a man was fearful, but to write! 'there are
things which one does not write,' napoleon exclaimed when he heard of
the surrender of baylen. and it was julien who had told her of this
saying! as though teaching her a lesson in advance.

but all this was still nothing, mathilde's anguish had other causes.
oblivious of the horrible effect upon society, of the ineradicable
blot, the universal contempt, for she was outraging her caste,
mathilde was writing to a person of a very different nature from the
croisenois, the de luz, the caylus.

the depth, the _strangeness_ of julien's chara
 
 ___________________________
 
ning and scarcely
respectful effect which would doubtless annoy them. if i lower my eyes
too far i shall appear to be making a record of their talk.'

his embarrassment was extreme, he was hearing some strange things
said.




chapter 22
the discussion

  the republic--for every person today willing to sacrifice
  all to the common good, there are thousands and millions
  who know only their own pleasures and their vanity. one
  is esteemed in paris for one's carriage, not for one's virtue.
    napoleon, _memorial_

the footman burst in, announcing: 'monsieur le duc de ----.'

'hold your tongue, you fool,' said the duke as he entered the room. he
said this so well, and with such majesty that julien could not help
thinking that knowing how to lose his temper with a footman was the
whole extent of this great personage's knowledge. julien raised his
eyes and at once lowered them again. he had so clearly divined the
importance of this new arrival that he trembled lest his glance should
be thought 
 
 ___________________________
 
is obliged to pay the
interest on the forty thousand million francs which were employed
against the jacobins. she has no longer a pitt ...'

'she has the duke of wellington,' said a military personage who
assumed an air of great importance.

'silence, please, gentlemen,' cried the chairman; 'if we continue to
disagree, there will have been no use in our sending for m. sorel.'

'we know that monsieur is full of ideas,' said the duke with an air of
vexation and a glance at the interrupter, one of napoleon's generals.
julien saw that this was an allusion to something personal and highly
offensive. everyone smiled; the turncoat general seemed beside
himself with rage.

'there is no longer a pitt,' the speaker went on, with the discouraged
air of a man who despairs of making his hearers listen to reason.
'were there a fresh pitt in england, one does not hoodwink a nation
twice by the same means ...'

'that is why a conquering general, a bonaparte is impossible now in
france,' cried the military int
 
 ___________________________
 
by a delicate smile.

'nothing easier, it seems to me, than to sum up our position,' said
the young bishop of agde with the concentrated and restrained fire of
the most exalted fanaticism. hitherto he had remained silent; his eye,
which julien had watched, at first mild and calm, had grown fiery
after the first hour's discussion. now his heart overflowed like lava
from vesuvius.

'from 1806 to 1814, england made only one mistake,' he said, 'which
was her not dealing directly and personally with napoleon. as soon as
that man had created dukes and chamberlains, as soon as he had
restored the throne, the mission that god had entrusted to him was at
an end; he was ripe only for destruction. the holy scriptures teach us
in more than one passage the way to make an end of tyrants.' (here
followed several latin quotations.)

'today, gentlemen, it is not a man that we must destroy; it is paris.
the whole of france copies paris. what is the use of arming your five
hundred men in each department? a hazar
 
 ___________________________
 
l-treated by the
stocking-merchant's daughter, since you are seeking to influence only
the heart of madame de dubois?'

every day they went out riding: the prince was madly taken with
julien. not knowing what token to give him of his sudden affection, he
ended by offering him the hand of one of his cousins, a wealthy
heiress in moscow; 'and once you are married,' he explained, 'my
influence and the cross you are wearing will make you a colonel in two
years.'

'but this cross was not given me by napoleon, quite the reverse.'

'what does that matter,' said the prince, 'didn't he invent it? it is
still the first decoration by far in europe.'

julien was on the point of accepting; but duty recalled him to the
eminent personage; on parting from korasoff, he promised to write. he
received the reply to the secret note that he had brought, and
hastened to paris; but he had barely been by himself for two days on
end, before the thought of leaving france and mathilde seemed to him a
punishment worse tha
 
 ___________________________
 
s, _manon lescaut_,' the marechale
went on, 'occupies, they say, one of the first places. the frailties
and well-merited sufferings of a thoroughly criminal heart are, they
say, described in it with a truth that is almost profound; which did
not prevent your bonaparte from declaring on saint helena that it was
a novel written for servants.'

this speech restored all its activity to julien's spirit. 'people have
been trying to damage me with the marechale; they have told her of my
enthusiasm for napoleon. this intelligence has stung her sufficiently
for her to yield to the temptation to let me feel her resentment.'
this discovery kept him amused for the rest of the evening and made
him amusing. as he was bidding the marechale good night in the
vestibule of the opera: 'bear in mind, sir,' she said to him, 'that
people must not love napoleon when they love me; they may, at the
most, accept him as a necessity imposed by providence. anyhow, the man
had not a soul pliant enough to feel great works o
 
 ___________________________
 
imself on his
knees and covered with kisses the love letters given him by prince
korasoff?

'oh, you great man! what do i not owe to you?' he cried in his frenzy.

gradually a little coolness returned to him. he compared himself to a
general who had just won the first half of a great battle. 'the
advantage is certain, immense,' he said to himself; 'but what is going
to happen tomorrow? an instant may ruin everything.'

he opened with a passionate impulse the _memoirs dictated at saint
helena by napoleon_, and for two solid hours forced himself to read
them; his eyes alone read the words, no matter, he forced himself to
the task. during this strange occupation, his head and heart, rising
to the level of everything that is most great, were at work without
his knowledge. 'this is a very different heart from madame de renal's,'
he said to himself, but he went no farther.

'make her afraid,' he cried of a sudden, flinging the book from him.
'the enemy will obey me only so long as i make him fear me
 
 ___________________________
 
hat is the meaning of
this worldly vanity? as for sorel and his sons, i shall offer them, in
my name, an annual pension of five hundred francs, which will be paid
to each of them separately, so long as i am satisfied with them.'

julien was by this time cold and stiff. he thanked the abbe, but in
the vaguest terms and without binding himself to anything. 'can it
indeed be possible,' he asked himself, 'that i am the natural son of
some great nobleman, banished among our mountains by the terrible
napoleon?' every moment this idea seemed to him less improbable . . .
'my hatred for my father would be a proof ... i should no longer be a
monster!'

a few days after this monologue, the fifteenth regiment of hussars,
one of the smartest in the army, was drawn up in order of battle on
the parade ground of strasbourg. m. le chevalier de la vernaye was
mounted upon the finest horse in alsace, which had cost him six
thousand francs. he had joined as lieutenant, without having ever been
a second lieutenant
 
 ___________________________
 
ful greed. 'it would only be right
for monsieur to give something to the surgeon who, according to law
and justice, ought not to speak. but, to oblige monsieur, i went to
his house, and he told me everything ...'

'in short, the injury is not mortal,' said julien, losing patience,
'you answer for that with your life?'

the gaoler, a giant six feet in stature, took fright and retreated
towards the door. julien saw that he was going the wrong way to reach
the truth, he sat down again and tossed a napoleon to m. noiroud.

as the man's story began to convince julien that madame de renal's
injury was not mortal, he felt himself overcome by tears. 'leave me!'
he said suddenly.

the gaoler obeyed. as soon as the door was shut: 'great god! she is
not dead!' exclaimed julien; and he fell on his knees, weeping hot
tears.

in this supreme moment he was a believer. what matter the hypocrisies
of the priests? can they destroy anything of the truth and sublimity
of the idea of god?

only then did julien beg
 
 ___________________________
 
elf! that is the great question,' he said to himself. those
judges so steeped in formalities, so thirsty for the blood of the
wretched prisoner, who would have the best of citizens hanged in order
to hang a cross from their own buttonholes ... i should remove myself
from their power, from their insults in bad french, which the local
newspaper will proceed to call eloquence.

'i may live for five or six weeks still, more or less ... kill
myself!  faith, no,' he said to himself after a few days, 'napoleon
lived...

'besides, life is pleasant to me; this is a quiet spot to stay in; i
have no worries,' he added, laughing, and set to work to make a list
of the books which he wished to have sent to him from paris.




chapter 37
a dungeon


  the tomb of a friend.
    sterne

he heard a great din in the corridor; it was not the hour for visiting
his cell; the osprey flew away screaming, the door opened, and the
venerable cure chelan, trembling all over and leaning upon his cane,
flung himself into j
 
 ___________________________
 
anly pride
which repels with a forcible oath certain degrading ideas by which the
miserable are assailed.

'i have loved the truth ... where is it to be found? ... everywhere
hypocrisy, or at least charlatanism, even among the most virtuous,
even among the greatest'; and his lips curled in disgust ... 'no, man
cannot place any trust in man.

'madame de ----, when she was making a collection for her poor
orphans, told me that some prince had just given her ten louis; a lie.
but what am i saying? napoleon at saint-helena! ... pure charlatanism,
a proclamation in favour of the king of rome.

'great god! if such a man as he, at a time, too, when misfortune ought
to recall him sternly to a sense of duty, stoops to charlatanism, what
is one to expect of the rest of the species?

'where is truth? in religion ... yes,' he added with a bitter smile
of the most intense scorn, 'in the mouths of the maslons, the
frilairs, the castanedes ... perhaps in true christianity, whose
priests would be no more paid