you have an income of 800 livres, a fine place in
the sun ...'

such are the events which, commented upon, exaggerated in twenty
different ways, had been arousing for the last two days all the evil
passions of the little town of verrieres. at that moment they were
serving as text for the little discussion which m. de renal was having
with his wife. that morning, accompanied by m. valenod, the governor
of the poorhouse, he had gone to the cure's house, to inform him of
their extreme displeasure. m. chelan was under no one's protection; he
felt the full force of their words.

'well, gentlemen, i shall be the third parish priest, eighty years of
age, to be deprived of his living in this district. i have been
here for six and fifty years; i have christened almost all the
inhabitants of the town, which was no more than a village when i came.
every day i marry young couples whose grandparents i married long ago.
verrieres is my family; but i said to myself, when i saw the stranger:
"this man, who has
 
 ___________________________
 

that is to say three times as much as the famous divisional commanders
under napoleon.  they must have people to support them. look at the
justice here, so wise a man, always so honest until now, sacrificing
his honour, at his age, from fear of offending a young vicar of
thirty. i must become a priest.'

on one occasion, in the midst of his new-found piety, after julien had
been studying divinity for two years, he was betrayed by a sudden
blaze of the fire that devoured his spirit. this was at m. chelan's;
at a dinner party of priests, to whom the good cure had introduced him
as an educational prodigy, he found himself uttering frenzied praise
of napoleon. he bound his right arm across his chest, pretending that
he had put the arm out of joint when shifting a fir trunk, and kept it
for two months in this awkward position. after this drastic penance,
he forgave himself. such is the young man of eighteen, but weak in
appearance, whom you would have said to be, at the most, seventeen,
who, carryi
 
 ___________________________
 
s? that i should love the
man who proves to me that i am nothing more than a fool?'

three days later, julien had found the pretext with which he should
have armed himself from the first; this pretext was a calumny, but
what of that?  he admitted to the cure, after much hesitation, that a
reason which he could not explain to him, because to reveal it would
injure a third party, had dissuaded him from the first from the
projected marriage. this was tantamount to an indictment of elisa's
conduct. m. chelan detected in his manner a fire that was wholly
mundane, and very different from that which should have inspired a
young levite.

'my friend,' he appealed to him again, 'be an honest yeoman, educated
and respected, rather than a priest without a vocation.'

julien replied to these fresh remonstrances extremely well, so far as
words went; he hit upon the expressions which a fervent young
seminarist would have employed; but the tone in which he uttered them,
the ill-concealed fire that smouldered i
 
 ___________________________
 
n his eyes alarmed m. chelan.

we need not augur ill for julien's future; he hit upon the correct
form of words of a cunning and prudent hypocrisy. that is not bad at
his age. as for his tone and gestures, he lived among country folk; he
had been debarred from seeing the great models. in the sequel, no
sooner had he been permitted to mix with these gentlemen than he
became admirable as well in gesture as in speech.

madame de renal was surprised that her maid's newly acquired fortune
had not made the girl more happy; she s
 
 ___________________________
 
at m. julien was in a great rage, but
that he was to have fifty francs a month.

julien went after them from force of habit, without so much as a
glance at m. de renal, whom he left in a state of intense annoyance.

'that's a hundred and sixty-eight francs,' the mayor said to himself,
'that m. valenod has cost me. i must really say a few firm words to
him about his contract to supply the foundlings.'

a moment later, julien again stood before him.

'i have a matter of conscience to discuss with m. chelan. i have the
honour to inform you that i shall be absent for some hours.'

'ah, my dear julien,' said m. de renal, laughing in the most insincere
manner, 'the whole day, if you wish, the whole of tomorrow, my worthy
friend. take the gardener's horse to go to verrieres.'

'there,' m. de renal said to himself, 'he's going with an answer to
valenod; he's given me no promise, but we must let the young hothead
cool down.'

julien made a speedy escape and climbed up among the big woods through
which o
 
 ___________________________
 
ne can go from vergy to verrieres. he was in no hurry to reach
m. chelan's. so far from desiring to involve himself in a fresh
display of hypocrisy, he needed time to see clearly into his own
heart, and to give audience to the swarm of conflicting feelings that
disturbed it.

'i have won a battle,' he said to himself as soon as he found himself
in the shelter of the woods and out of sight of anyone, 'i have really
won a battle!'

the last word painted his whole position for him in glowing colours,
and restored some degree of tranquillity to his heart.

'here i am wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ot seek them.

julien, insisting upon playing the part of a don juan, he who had
never had a mistress in his life, was deadly dull for the rest of the
day. he had only one sensible idea; bored with himself and with madame
de renal, he saw with alarm the evening approach when he would be
seated in the garden, by her side and in the dark. he told m. de renal
that he was going to verrieres to see the cure; he set off after
dinner, and did not return until late at night.

at verrieres, julien found m. chelan engaged in packing up; he had at
last been deprived of his benefice; the vicar maslon was to succeed
him. julien helped the good cure, and it occurred to him to write to
fouque that the irresistible vocation which he felt for the sacred
ministry had prevented him at first from accepting his friend's
obliging offer, but that he had just witnessed such an example of
injustice, that perhaps it would be more advantageous to his welfare
were he not to take holy orders.

julien applauded his own deft
 
 ___________________________
 
im by
surprise, him and the town.

the work of organising the guard of honour and popular feeling
finished, the mayor had next to deal with a great religious ceremony;
the king of ---- refused to pass through verrieres without paying a
visit to the famous relic of saint clement which is preserved at
bray-le-haut, a short league from the town. the clergy must be present
in full force, and this was the most difficult thing to arrange; m.
maslon, the new cure, was determined, at any price, to keep m. chelan
out. in vain did m. de renal point out to him the imprudence of this
action. the marquis de la mole, whose ancestors for so long were
governors of the province, had been chosen to accompany the king of
----. he had known the abbe chelan for thirty years.  he would be
certain to inquire for him on arriving at verrieres, and, if he found
that he was in disgrace, was quite capable of going in search of him,
to the little house to which he had retired, accompanied by such of
the procession as were 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng so much as to embarrass people. he is
capable, simply for his own amusement, of covering us with ridicule in
the eyes of the liberals.'

it was not until the night between saturday and sunday, after three
days of discussion, that the abbe maslon's pride gave way before the
mayor's fear, which had turned to courage. the next thing was to write
a honeyed note to the abbe chelan, inviting him to be present at the
veneration of the relic at bray-le-haut, his great age and infirmities
permitting. m. chelan asked for and obtained a letter of invitation
for julien, who was to accompany him in the capacity of sub-deacon.

early on sunday morning, thousands of peasants, arriving from the
neighbouring mountains, flooded the streets of verrieres. it was a day
of brilliant sunshine. at length, about three o'clock, a tremor ran
through the crowd; they had caught sight of a beacon blazing on a rock
two leagues from verrieres. this signal announced that the king had
just entered the territory of the depart
 
 ___________________________
 
tands on
the summit of an imposing hill. 'enthusiasm is multiplying these
peasants,' thought julien. 'one cannot move at verrieres, and here
there are more than ten thousand of them round this old abbey.' half
ruined by the vandalism of the revolution, it had been magnificently
restored since the restoration, and there was already some talk of
miracles. julien joined the abbe chelan, who scolded him severely, and
gave him a cassock and surplice. he vested himself hurriedly in these
and followed m. chelan, who was going in search of the youthful bishop
of agde. this was a nephew of m. de la mole, recently appointed to the
see, who had been selected to exhibit the relic to the king. but the
bishop was not to be found.

the clergy were growing impatient. they awaited their leader in the
sombre, gothic cloister of the ancient abbey. four and twenty parish
priests had been collected to represent the original chapter of
bray-le-haut which prior to 1789 had consisted of four and twenty
canons. having 
 
 ___________________________
 
 bishop, the priests decided that it would be a
good thing if their dean were to go and inform his lordship that the
king was on his way, and that it was time they were in the choir. m.
chelan's great age had made him dean; despite the anger he showed with
julien, he made a sign to him to follow him. julien carried his
surplice admirably. by some secret process of the ecclesiastical
toilet-table, he had made his fine curly hair lie quite flat; but, by
an oversight which intensified the anger of m. chelan, beneath the
long folds of his cassock one could see the spurs of the guard of
honour.

when they reached the bishop's apartment, the tall lackeys smothered
in gold lace barely condescended to inform the old cure that his
lordship could not be seen. they laughed at him when he tried to
explain that in his capacity as dean of the noble chapter of
bray-le-haut, it was his privilege to be admitted at all times to the
presence of the officiating bishop.

julien's proud spirit was offended by the in
 
 ___________________________
 
n caught sight of him in the glass, turned round, and
suddenly discarding his look of irritation said to him in the
pleasantest tone:

'well, sir, is it ready yet?'

julien remained speechless. as this young man turned towards him,
julien saw the pectoral cross on his breast: it was the bishop of
agde. 'so young,' thought julien; 'at the most, only six or eight
years older than myself!'

and he felt ashamed of his spurs.

'monseigneur,' he replied timidly. 'i am sent by the dean of the
chapter, m. chelan.'

'ah! i have an excellent account of him,' said the bishop in a
courteous tone which left julien more fascinated than ever. 'but i beg
your pardon, sir, i took you for the person who is to bring me back my
mitre. it was carelessly packed in paris; the silver tissue has been
dreadfully frayed at the top. it will create a shocking effect,' the
young bishop went on with a sorrowful air, 'and they are keeping me
waiting too.'

'monseigneur, i shall go and find the mitre, with your lordship's
perm
 
 ___________________________
 
 to me to be quite right.'

'the king of ---- is accustomed to venerable clergy who are doubtless
very solemn. i should not like, especially in view of my age, to
appear too frivolous.'

and the bishop once more began to walk about the room scattering
benedictions.

'it is quite clear,' said julien, at last venturing to understand, 'he
is practising the benediction.'

a few moments later:

'i am ready,' said the bishop. 'go, sir, and inform the dean and the
gentlemen of the chapter.'

presently m. chelan, followed by the two oldest of the cures, entered
by an immense door, magnificently carved, which julien had not
noticed. but this time he remained in his place in the extreme rear,
and could see the bishop only over the shoulders of the ecclesiastics
who crowded towards this door.

the bishop crossed the room slowly; when he came to the threshold the
cures formed in processional order. after a momentary confusion the
procession began to move, intoning a psalm. the bishop came last,
between m. 
 
 ___________________________
 
for
his nephew, had chosen to pay him the compliment of bearing the whole
of the expense himself. the ceremony at bray-le-haut alone cost three
thousand eight hundred francs.

after the bishop's address and the king's reply, his majesty took his
place beneath the dais; he then knelt down most devoutly upon a
cushion close to the altar. the choir was enclosed with stalls, and
these stalls were raised two steps above the pavement. it was on the
second of these steps that julien sat at the feet of m. chelan, not
unlike a train-bearer at the feet of his cardinal, in the sistine
chapel, in rome. there were a te deum, clouds of incense, endless
volleys of musketry and artillery; the peasants were frantic with joy
and piety. such a day undoes the work of a hundred numbers of the
jacobin papers.

julien was within six paces of the king, who was praying with genuine
fervour. he noticed for the first time a small man of intelligent
appearance, whose coat was almost bare of embroidery. but he wore a
sky-b
 
 ___________________________
 
ng in verrieres was to
reproach himself for his unfairness to madame de renal. 'i should have
despised her as a foolish woman if from weakness she had failed to
bring off the scene with m. de renal! she carried it through like a
diplomat, and my sympathies are with the loser, who is my enemy. there
is a streak of middle-class pettiness in my nature; my vanity is hurt,
because m. de renal is a man!  that vast and illustrous corporation to
which i have the honour to belong; i am a perfect fool.'

m. chelan had refused the offers of hospitality which the most
respected liberals of the place had vied with one another in making
him, when his deprivation drove him from the presbytery. the pair of
rooms which he had taken were littered with his books. julien, wishing
to show verrieres what it meant to be a priest, went and fetched from
his father's store a dozen planks of firwood, which he carried on his
back the whole length of the main street. he borrowed some tools from
an old friend and had soon c
 
 ___________________________
 
onstructed a sort of bookcase in which he
arranged m. chelan's library.

'i supposed you to have been corrupted by the vanity of the world,'
said the old man, shedding tears of joy; 'this quite redeems the
childishness of that dazzling guard of honour uniform which made you
so many enemies.'

m. de renal had told julien to put up in his house. no one had any
suspicion of what had happened. on the third day after his arrival,
there came up to his room no less a personage than the sub-prefect, m.
de maugiron. it was only after two solid hours of insipid
ti
 
 ___________________________
 
 he wrote a letter of nine pages
to m. de renal, in which he informed him of everything that had been
said to him, and humbly asked his advice. 'why, that rascal never even
told me the name of the person who is making the offer! it will be m.
valenod, who sees in my banishment to verrieres the effect of his
anonymous letter.'

his missive dispatched, julien, as happy as a hunter who at six in the
morning on a fine autumn day emerges upon a plain teeming with game,
went out to seek the advice of m. chelan. but before he arrived at the
good cure's house, heaven, which was anxious to shower its blessings
on him, threw him into the arms of m. valenod, from whom he did not
conceal the fact that his heart was torn; a penniless youth like
himself was bound to devote himself entirely to the vocation which
heaven had placed in his heart, but a vocation was not everything in
this vile world. to be a worthy labourer in the lord's vineyard, and
not to be altogether unworthy of all one's learned fellow-labo
 
 ___________________________
 
nd from having seen him on horseback on the day of the
king of ----'s visit, were his most vociferous admirers. 'when will
these fools tire of listening to this biblical language, of which they
understand nothing?' he thought. on the contrary, this language amused
them by its unfamiliarity; they laughed at it. but julien had grown
tired.

he rose gravely as six o'clock struck and mentioned a chapter of the
new theology of liguori, which he had to learn by heart in order to
repeat it next day to m. chelan. 'for my business,' he added
pleasantly, 'is to make other people repeat lessons, and to repeat
them myself.'

his audience laughed heartily and applauded; this is the kind of wit
that goes down at verrieres. julien was by this time on his feet,
everyone else rose, regardless of decorum; such is the power of
genius. madame valenod kept him for a quarter of an hour longer; he
really must hear the children repeat their catechism; they made the
most absurd mistakes which he alone noticed. he made 
 
 ___________________________
 
an sent
for julien:

'i ask you nothing,' he said to him; 'i beg you, and if need be order
you to tell me nothing, i insist that within three days you leave
either for the seminary at besancon or for the house of your friend
fouque, who is still willing to provide a splendid career for you. i
have foreseen and settled everything, but you must go, and not return
to verrieres for a year.'

julien made no answer; he was considering whether his honour ought to
take offence at the arrangements which m. chelan, who after all was
not his father, had made for him.

'tomorrow at this hour i shall have the honour of seeing you again,'
he said at length to the cure.

m. chelan, who reckoned upon overcoming the young man by main force,
spoke volubly. his attitude, his features composed in the utmost
humility, julien did not open his mouth.

at length he made his escape, and hastened to inform madame de renal,
whom he found in despair. her husband had just been speaking to her
with a certain frankness. the 
 
 ___________________________
 
opped writing, and with a sidelong
glance at julien asked:

'are you in a fit state to answer my questions?'

'yes, sir,' said julien in a feeble voice.

'ah! that is fortunate.'

the man in black had half risen and was impatiently seeking for a
letter in the drawer of his table of firwood which opened with a
creak. he found it, slowly resumed his seat, and once more gazing at
julien, with an air which seemed to wrest from him the little life
that remained to him:

'you are recommended to me by m. chelan, who was the best cure in the
diocese, a good man if ever there was one, and my friend for the last
thirty years.'

'ah! it is m. pirard that i have the honour to address,' said julien
in a feeble voice.

'so it seems,' said the director of the seminary, looking sourly at
him.

the gleam in his little eyes brightened, followed by an involuntary
jerk of the muscles round his mouth. it was the physiognomy of a tiger
relishing in anticipation the pleasure of devouring its prey.

'chelan's letter i
 
 ___________________________
 
he friends was endless. julien changed
colour when fouque said to him:

'have you heard, by the way? the mother of your pupils has become most
devoutly religious.'

and he spoke with that detached air which makes so singular an
impression on the passionate soul whose dearest interests the speaker
unconsciously destroys.

'yes, my friend, the most exalted strain of piety. they say that she
makes pilgrimages. but, to the eternal shame of the abbe maslon, who
has been spying so long upon that poor m. chelan, madame de renal will
have nothing to do with him. she goes to confession at dijon or
besancon.'

'she comes to besancon!' said julien, his brow flushing.

'quite often,' replied fouque with a questioning air.

'have you any _constitutionnels_ on you?'

'what's that you say?' replied fouque.

'i ask you if you have any _constitutionnels_?' julien repeated, in a
calmer tone. 'they are sold here for thirty sous a copy.'

'what! liberals even in the seminary!' cried fouque. 'unhappy france!'
he we
 
 ___________________________
 
card,' he said to
him, looking at him in such a way as to make him wish that the earth
would open and swallow him.

julien read:

'amanda binet, at the giraffe cafe, before eight o'clock. say you are
from genlis, and a cousin of my mother.'

julien perceived the immensity of the danger; the abbe castanede's
police had stolen the address from him.

'the day on which i came here,' he replied, gazing at the abbe
pirard's forehead, for he could not face his terrible eye, 'i was
trembling with fear: m. chelan had told me that this was a place full
of tale-bearing and spite of all sorts; spying and the accusation of
one's comrades are encouraged here. such is the will of heaven, to
show life as it is to young priests, and to inspire in them a disgust
with the world and its pomps.'

'and it is to me that you make these fine speeches'--the abbe pirard
was furious. 'you young rascal!'

'at verrieres,' julien went on calmly, 'my brothers used to beat me
when they had any reason to be jealous of me ...'


 
 ___________________________
 
ope did not take
the trouble to appoint all the prefects and all the mayors in france,
it was because he had delegated the king of france for that duty, by
naming him the eldest son of the church.

it was about this time that julien thought he might derive some
benefit from his admiration for m. de maistre's book on the pope. he
did, as a matter of fact, astonish his fellow-students; but this was a
fresh misfortune. he annoyed them by expressing their opinions better
than they could themselves. m. chelan had been a rash counsellor for
julien as he had been for himself. after training him to the habit of
reasoning accurately and not letting himself be taken in by vain
words, he had omitted to tell him that in a person of little repute
this habit is a crime; for sound reasoning always gives offence.

julien's fine speech was therefore only another crime against him. his
companions, being compelled to think about him, succeeded in finding
two words to express all the horror with which he filled th
 
 ___________________________
 
he arms; it was a
woman. all his ideas of courage melted. 'if it is she, what will she
say to me?' what was his state when he realised from a faint cry that
it was madame de renal.

he gathered her in his arms; she trembled, and had barely the strength
to repulse him.

'wretch! what are you doing?'

scarcely could her tremulous voice articulate the words. julien saw
that she was genuinely angry.

'i have come to see you after fourteen months of a cruel parting.'

'go, leave me this instant. ah! m. chelan, why did you forbid me to
write to him? i should have prevented this horror.' she thrust him
from her with a force that was indeed extraordinary. 'i repent of my
crime; heaven has deigned to enlighten me,' she repeated in a stifled
voice. 'go! fly!'

'after fourteen months of misery, i shall certainly not leave you
until i have spoken to you. i wish to know all that you have been
doing. ah! i have loved you well enough to deserve this confidence ...
i wish to know all.'

in spite of herself mad
 
 ___________________________
 
rs increased. 'so absence
unfailingly destroys all human feelings!

'be so kind as to tell me what has happened to you,' julien said at
length, embarrassed by his silence and in a voice almost stifled by
tears.

'there can be no doubt,' replied madame de renal in a harsh voice, the
tone of which offered a cutting reproach to julien, 'my misdeeds were
known in the town, at the time of your departure. you were so
imprudent in your behaviour. some time later, when i was in despair,
the respectable m. chelan came to see me. it was in vain that, for a
long time, he sought to obtain a confession. one day, the idea
occurred to him to take me into that church at dijon in which i made
my first communion. there, he ventured to broach the subject...'
madame de renal's speech was interrupted by her tears. 'what a
shameful moment! i confessed all. that worthy man was kind enough not
to heap on me the weight of his indignation: he shared my distress. at
that time i was writing you day after day letters which
 
 ___________________________
 
 i dared not
send you; i concealed them carefully, and when i was too wretched used
to shut myself up in my room and read over my own letters.

'at length, m. chelan persuaded me to hand them over to him ... some
of them, written with a little more prudence than the rest, had been
sent to you; never once did you answer me.'

'never, i swear to you, did i receive any letter from you at the
seminary.'

'great god! who can have intercepted them?'

'imagine my grief; until the day when i saw you in the cathedral, i
did not know whether you were still alive.'

'god in his mercy made me understand how greatly i was sinning against
him, against my children, agains
 
 ___________________________
 
t my husband,' replied madame de
renal. 'he has never loved me as i believed then that you loved me
...'

julien flung himself into her arms, without any definite intention but
with entire lack of self-control. but madame de renal thrust him from
her, and continued quite firmly:

'my respectable friend m. chelan made me realise that, in marrying m.
de renal, i had pledged all my affections to him, even those of which
i was still ignorant, which i had never felt before a certain fatal
intimacy ...  since the great sacrifice of those letters, which were
so precious to me, my life has flowed on, if not happily, at any rate
quietly enough. do not disturb it any more; be a friend to me ... the
best of friends.' julien covered her hands with kisses; she could feel
that he was still crying. 'do not cry, you d
 
 ___________________________
 
in her
room, and not to leave until the following night.

'and why not?' was her answer. 'this fatal relapse destroys all my
self-esteem, and dooms me to lifelong misery,' and she pressed him to
her heart. 'my husband is no longer the same, he has suspicions; he
believes that i have been fooling him throughout this affair, and is
in the worst of tempers with me. if he hears the least sound i am
lost, he will drive me from the house like the wretch that i am.'

'ah! there i can hear the voice of m. chelan,' said julien; you would
not have spoken to me like that before my cruel departure for the
seminary; you loved me then!'

julien was rewarded for the coolness with which he had uttered this
speech; he saw his mistress at once forget the danger in which the
proximity of her husband involved her, to think of the far greater
danger of seeing julien doubtful of her love for him. the daylight was
rapidly increasing and now flooded the room; julien recovered all the
exquisite sensations of pride when
 
 ___________________________
 
terable coolness won him a reputation from the first day. in a
short time, his perfect and entirely measured courtesy, his skill with
the pistol and sabre, which he made known without undue affectation,
removed all temptation to joke audibly at his expense. after five or
six days of hesitation, the general opinion of the regiment declared
itself in his favour. 'this young man has everything,' said the older
officers who were inclined to banter, 'except youth.'

>from strasbourg, julien wrote to m. chelan, the former cure of
verrieres, who was now reaching the extreme limits of old age:

'you will have learned with a joy, of which i have no doubt, of the
events that have led my family to make me rich. here are five hundred
francs which i beg you to distribute without display, and with no
mention of my name, among the needy, who are poor now as i was once,
and whom you are doubtless assisting as in the past you assisted me.'

julien was intoxicated with ambition and not with vanity; he still
appl
 
 ___________________________
 
ted fortunes, as well,
and know nothing of the value of money, which of those fine parisians
would be capable of such a sacrifice?'

all fouque's mistakes in grammer, all his vulgar mannerisms vanished,
he flung himself into his arms. never have the provinces, when
contrasted with paris, received a nobler homage. fouque, delighted by
the enthusiasm which he read in his friend's eyes, mistook it for
consent to an escape.

this glimpse of the _sublime_ restored to julien all the strength of
which m. chelan's visit had robbed him. he was still very young; but,
to my mind, he was a fine plant. instead of his advancing from
tenderness to cunning, like the majority of men, age would have given
him an easy access to emotion, he would have been cured of an insane
distrust ... but what good is there in these vain predictions?

the examinations became more frequent, in spite of the efforts of
julien, whose answers were all aimed at cutting the whole business
short. 'i have taken life, or at least i have 