he dignity of a village
mayor that sort of charm which may still be found in a man of
forty-eight or fifty. but soon the visitor from paris is annoyed by a
certain air of self-satisfaction and self-sufficiency mingled with a
suggestion of limitations and want of originality. one feels, finally,
that this man's talent is confined to securing the exact payment of
whatever is owed to him and to postponing payment till the last
possible moment when he is the debtor.

such is the mayor of verrieres, m. de renal. crossing the street with
a solemn step, he enters the town hall and passes from the visitor's
sight.  but, a hundred yards higher up, if the visitor continues his
stroll, he will notice a house of quite imposing appearance, and,
through the gaps in an iron railing belonging to the house, some
splendid gardens. beyond, there is a line of horizon formed by the
hills of burgundy, which seem to have been created on purpose to
delight the eye. this view makes the visitor forget the pestilential
atm
 
 ___________________________
 
osphere of small financial interests which was beginning to stifle
him.

he is told that this house belongs to m. de renal. it is to the
profits that he has made from his great nail factory that the mayor of
verrieres is indebted for this fine freestone house which he has just
finished building.  his family, they say, is spanish, old, and was or
claims to have been established in the country long before louis xiv
conquered it.

since 1815 he has blushed at his connection with industry: 1815 made
him mayor of verrieres. the retaining walls that support the various
sections of this splendid garden, which, in a succes
 
 ___________________________
 
sion of terraces,
runs down to the doubs, are also a reward of m. de renal's ability as
a dealer in iron.

you must not for a moment expect to find in france those picturesque
gardens which enclose the manufacturing towns of germany; leipsic,
frankfurt, nuremberg, and the rest. in the franche-comte, the more
walls a man builds, the more he makes his property bristle with stones
piled one above another, the greater title he acquires to the respect
of his neighbours. m. de renal's gardens, honeycombed with walls, are
still further admired because he bought, for their weight in gold,
certain minute scraps of ground which they cover. for instance that
sawmill whose curious position on the bank of the doubs struck you as
you entered verrieres, and on which you noticed the name _sorel_,
inscribed in huge letters on a board which overtops the roof,
occupied, six years ago, the ground on which at this moment they are
building the wall of the fourth terrace of m. de renal's g
 
 ___________________________
 
ardens.

for all his pride, the mayor was obliged to make many overtures to old
sorel, a dour and obstinate peasant; he was obliged to pay him in fine
golden louis before he would consent to remove his mill elsewhere. as
for the _public_ lade which supplied power to the saw, m. de renal,
thanks to the influence he wielded in paris, obtained leave to divert
it. this favour was conferred upon him after the 182- elections.

he gave sorel four acres in exchange for one, five hundred yards lower
down by the bank of the doubs. and, albeit this site was a great deal
more advantageous for his trade in planks of firwood, pere sorel, as
they have begun to call him now that he is rich, contrived to screw
out of the impatience and _landowning mania_ which animated his
neighbour a sum of 6
 
 ___________________________
 
 the most irritating
form of _despotism_; it is owing to that vile word that residence in
small towns is intolerable to anyone who has lived in that great
republic which we call paris. the tyranny of public opinion (and what
an opinion!) is as fatuous in the small towns of france as it is in
the united states of america.




chapter 2
a mayor


  prestige! sir, is it nothing? to be revered by fools, gaped at by
  children, envied by the rich and scorned by the wise.
    barnave

fortunately for m. de renal's reputation as an administrator, a huge
retaining wall was required for the public avenue which skirts the
hillside a hundred feet above the bed of the doubs. to this admirable
position it is indebted for one of the most picturesque views in
france. but, every spring, torrents of rainwater made channels across
the avenue, carved deep gullies in it and left it impassable. this
nuisance, which affected everybody alike, placed m. de renal under the
fortunate obligation to immortalise his administ
 
 ___________________________
 
ration by a wall
twenty feet in height and seventy or eighty yards long.

the parapet of this wall, to secure which m. de renal was obliged to
make three journeys to paris, for the minister of the interior before
last had sworn a deadly enmity to the verrieres avenue; the parapet of
this wall now rises four feet above the ground. and, as though to defy
all ministers past and present, it is being finished off at this
moment with slabs of dressed stone.

how often, my thoughts straying back to the ball-rooms of paris, which
i had forsaken overnight, my elbows leaning upon those great blocks of
stone of a fine grey with a 
 
 ___________________________
 
n of the
town council, he has widened the avenue by more than six feet
(although he is an ultra and i myself a liberal, i give him credit for
it), that is why, in his opinion and in that of m. valenod, the
fortunate governor of the verrieres poorhouse, this terrace is worthy
to be compared with that of saint-germain-en-laye.

for my part, i have only one fault to find with the _cours de la
fidelite_; one reads this, its official title, in fifteen or twenty
places, on marble slabs which have won m. de renal yet another cross;
what i should be inclined to condemn in the cours de la fidelite is
the barbarous manner in which the authorities keep these sturdy plane
trees trimmed and pollarded.  instead of suggesting, with their low,
rounded, flattened heads, the commonest of kitchen garden vegetables,
they would like nothing better than to assume those magnificent forms
which one sees them wear in england. but the mayor's will is despotic,
and twice a year every tree belonging to the commune is pitile
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
reverend vicar maslon formed the habit of appropriating the clippings.

this young cleric was sent from besancon, some years ago, to keep an
eye upon the abbe chelan and certain parish priests of the district.
an old surgeon-major of the army of italy, in retirement at verrieres,
who in his time had been simultaneously, according to the mayor, a
jacobin and a bonapartist, actually ventured one day to complain to
him of the periodical mutilation of these fine trees.

'i like shade,' replied m. de renal with the touch of arrogance
appropriate when one is addressing a surgeon, a member of the legion
of honour; 'i like shade, i have my trees cut so as to give shade, and
i do not consider that a tree is made for any other purpose, unless,
like the useful walnut, it _yields a return_.'

there you have the great phrase that decides everything at verrieres:
yield a return; it by itself represents the habitual thought of more
than three fourths of the inhabitants.

_yielding a return_ is the consider
 
 ___________________________
 
tranger
arriving there, beguiled by the beauty of the cool, deep valleys on
every side, imagines at first that the inhabitants are influenced by
the idea of beauty; they are always talking about the beauty of their
scenery: no one can deny that they make a great to-do about it; but
this is because it attracts a certain number of visitors whose money
goes to enrich the innkeepers, and thus, through the channel of the
rate-collector, _yields a return_ to the town.

it was a fine day in autumn and m. de renal was strolling along the
cours de la fidelite, his lady on his arm. while she listened to her
husband, who was speaking with an air of gravity, madame de renal's
eye was anxiously following the movements of three little boys. the
eldest, who might be about eleven, was continually running to the
parapet as though about to climb on top. a gentle voice then uttered
the name adolphe, and the child abandoned his ambitious project.
madame de renal looked like a woman of thirty, but was still extremely
 
 ___________________________
 
ous as to inflict upon you the tedium
and all the clever turns of a provincial dialogue.

this fine gentleman from paris, so odious to the mayor of verrieres,
was none other than m. appert, [footnote: a contemporary
philanthropist and prison visitor.] who, a couple of days earlier, had
contrived to make his way not only into the prison and the poorhouse
of verrieres, but also into the hospital, administered gratuitously by
the mayor and the principal landowners of the neighbourhood.

'but,' madame de renal put in timidly, 'what harm can this gentleman
from paris do you, since you provide for the welfare of the poor with
the most scrupulous honesty?'

'he has only come to cast blame, and then he'll go back and have
articles put in the liberal papers.'

'you never read them, my dear.'

'but people tell us about those jacobin articles; all that distracts
us, and hinders us from doing good. [author's footnote: authentic] as
for me, i shall never forgive the cure.'




chapter 3
the bread of the poor

 
 ___________________________
 
be very sorry to lose mine,' replied the worthy cure, in
a voice swayed by ever increasing emotion.

'what a difference!' the gaoler answered promptly; 'why you, m. le
cure, we know that you have an income of 800 livres, a fine place in
the sun ...'

such are the events which, commented upon, exaggerated in twenty
different ways, had been arousing for the last two days all the evil
passions of the little town of verrieres. at that moment they were
serving as text for the little discussion which m. de renal was having
with his wife. that morning, accompanied by m. valenod, the governor
of the poorhouse, he had gone to the cure's house, to inform him of
their extreme displeasure. m. chelan was under no one's protection; he
felt the full force of their words.

'well, gentlemen, i shall be the third parish priest, eighty years of
age, to be deprived of his living in this district. i have been
here for six and fifty years; i have christened almost all the
inhabitants of the town, which was no more tha
 
 ___________________________
 
n a village when i came.
every day i marry young couples whose grandparents i married long ago.
verrieres is my family; but i said to myself, when i saw the stranger:
"this man, who has come from paris, may indeed be a liberal, there are
far too many of them; but what harm can he do to our poor people and
our prisoners?"'

the reproaches of m. de renal, and above all those of m. valenod, the
governor of the poorhouse, becoming more and more bitter:

'very well, gentlemen, have me deprived,' the old cure had cried, in a
quavering voice. 'i shall live in the town all the same. you all know
that forty-eight years ago i inherited a piece of land which brings me
800 livres; i shall live on that income. i save nothing out of my
stipend, gentlemen, and that may be why i am less alarmed when people
speak of taking it from me.'

m. de renal lived on e
 
 ___________________________
 
xcellent terms with his wife; but not knowing
what answer to make to the question, which she timidly repeated: 'what
harm can this gentleman from paris do to the prisoners?' he was just
about to lose his temper altogether when she uttered a cry. her second
son had climbed upon the parapet of the wall of the terrace, and was
running along it, though this wall rose more than twenty feet from the
vineyard beneath. the fear of alarming her son and so making him fall
restrained madame de renal from calling him. finally the child, who
was laughing at his own prowess, turned to look at his mother, noticed
how pale she was, sprang down upon the avenue and ran to join her. he
was well scolded.

this little incident changed the course of the conversation.

'i am quite determined to engage young sorel, the sawyer's son,' said
m. de renal; 'he will look after the children, who are beginning to be
too much of a handful for us. he is a young priest or thereabouts, a
good latin scholar, and wi
 
 ___________________________
 
 day. this
liberal taught young sorel latin, and left him all the pile of books
he brought here with him. not that i should ever have dreamed of
having the carpenter's son with my children; but the cure, only the
day before the scene which has made a permanent breach between us,
told me that this sorel has been studying theology for the last three
years, with the idea of entering the seminary; so he is not a liberal,
and he is a latin scholar.

'this arrangement suits me in more ways than one,' m. de renal went
on, looking at his wife with an air of diplomacy; 'valenod is
tremendously proud of the two fine norman horses he has just bought
for his calash. but he has not got a tutor for his children.'

'he is quite capable of taking this one from us.'

'then you approve of my plan?' said m. de renal, thanking his wife,
with a smile, for the excellent idea that had just occurred to her.
'there, that's settled.'

'oh, good gracious, my dear, how quickly you make up your mind!'

'that is because i hav
 
 ___________________________
 
e a strong character, as the cure has had
occasion to see. let us make no pretence about it, we are surrounded
by liberals here.  all these cloth merchants are jealous of me, i am
certain of it; two or three of them are growing rich; very well, i
wish them to see m. de renal's children go by, out walking in the care
of their tutor. it will make an impression. my grandfather used often
to tell us that in his young days he had had a tutor. it's a hundred
crowns he's going to cost me, but that will have to be reckoned as a
necessary expense to keep up our position.'

this sudden decision plunged madame de renal deep in thought. she was
a tall, well-made woman, who had been the beauty of the place, as the
saying is in this mountain district. she had a certain air of
si
 
 ___________________________
 
mplicity and bore herself like a girl; in the eyes of a parisian,
that artless grace, full of innocence and vivacity, might even have
suggested ideas of a mildly passionate nature. had she had wind of
this kind of success, madame de renal would have been thoroughly
ashamed of it. no trace either of coquetry or of affectation had ever
appeared in her nature. m. valenod, the wealthy governor of the
poorhouse, was supposed to have paid his court to her, but without
success, a failure which had given a marked distinction to her virtue;
for this m. valenod, a tall young man, strongly built, with a vivid
complexion and bushy black whiskers, was one of those coarse, brazen,
noisy creatures who in the provinces are called fine men.

mad
 
 ___________________________
 
ame de renal, being extremely shy and liable to be swayed by her
moods, was offended chiefly by the restless movements and loud voice
of m. valenod. the distaste that she felt for what at verrieres goes
by the name of gaiety had won her the reputation of being extremely
proud of her birth.  she never gave it a thought, but had been greatly
pleased to see the inhabitants of verrieres come less frequently to
her house. we shall not attempt to conceal the fact that she was
reckoned a fool in the eyes of their 
 
 ___________________________
 
 in her fine garden, she never made
any complaint.

she was a simple soul, who had never risen even to the point of
criticising her husband, and admitting that he bored her. she
supposed, without telling herself so, that between husband and wife
there could be no more tender relations. she was especially fond of m.
de renal when he spoke to her of his plans for their children, one of
whom he intended to place in the army, the second on the bench, and
the third in the church. in short, she found m. de renal a great deal
less boring than any of the other men of her acquaintance.

this wifely opinion was justified. the mayor of verrieres owed his
reputation for wit, and better still for good tone, to half a dozen
pleasantries which he had inherited from an uncle. this old captain de
renal had served before the revolution in the duke of orleans's
regiment of infantry, and, when he went to paris, had had the right of
entry into that prince's drawing-rooms. he had there seen madame de
montesson, the fa
 
 ___________________________
 
mous madame de genlis, m. ducrest, the 'inventor'
of the palais-royal.  these personages figured all too frequently in
m. de renal's stories. but by degrees these memories of things that it
required so much delicacy to relate had become a burden to him, and
for some time now it was only on solemn occasions that he would repeat
his anecdotes of the house of orleans. as he was in other respects
most refined, except when the talk ran on money, he was regarded, and
rightly, as the most aristocratic personage in verrieres.




chapter 4
father and son


  e sara mia colpa,
  se cosi e?
    machiavelli

'my wife certainly has a 
 
 ___________________________
 
ock, as
he made his way down to pere sorel's sawmill. 'although i said so to
her, to maintain my own superiority, it had never occurred to me that
if i do not take this little priest sorel, who, they tell me, knows
his latin like an angel, the governor of the poorhouse, that restless
spirit, might very well have the same idea, and snatch him from me, i
can hear the tone of conceit with which he would speak of his
children's tutor! ... this tutor, once i've secured him, will he wear
a cassock?'

m. de renal was absorbed in this question when he saw in the distance
a peasant, a man of nearly six feet in height, who, by the first
dawning light, seemed to be busily occupied in measuring pieces of
timber lying by the side of the doubs, upon the towpath. the peasant
did not appear any too well pleased to see the mayor coming towards
him; for his pieces of wood were blocking the path, and had been laid
there in contravention of the law.

pere sorel, for it was he, was greatly surprised and even more ple
 
 ___________________________
 
ased
by the singular offer which m. de renal made him with regard to his
son julien. he listened to it nevertheless with that air of
grudging-melancholy and lack of interest which the shrewd inhabitants
of those mountains know so well how to assume. slaves in the days of
spanish rule, they still retain this facial characteristic of the
egyptian fellahin.

sorel's reply was at first nothing more than a long-winded recital of
all the formal terms of respect which he knew by heart. while he was
repeating these vain words, with an awkward smi
 
 ___________________________
 
le which enhanced the
air of falsehood and almost of rascality natural to his countenance,
the old peasant's active mind was seeking to discover what reason
could be inducing so important a personage to take his scapegrace of a
son into his establishment. he was thoroughly dissatisfied with
julien, and it was for julien that m. de renal was offering him the
astounding wage of 300 francs annually, in addition to his food and
even his clothing. this last condition, which pere sorel had had the
intelligence to advance on the spur of the moment, had been granted
with equal readiness by m. de renal.

this demand impressed the mayor. 'since sorel is not delighted and
overwhelmed by my proposal, as he ought naturally to be, it is clear,'
he said to himself, 'that overtures have been made to him from another
quarter; and from whom can
 
 ___________________________
 
 they have come, except from valenod?' it
was in vain that m. de renal urged sorel to conclude the bargain there
and then: the astute old peasant met him with an obstinate refusal; he
wished, he said, to consult his son, as though, in the country, a rich
father ever consulted a penniless son, except for form's sake.

a sawmill consists of a shed by the side of a stream. the roof is held
up by rafters supported on four stout wooden pillars. nine or ten feet
from the ground, in the middle of the shed, one sees a saw which moves
up and down, while an extremely simple
 
 ___________________________
 
 me without lying,' the old peasant's harsh voice shouted in
his ear, while the hand spun him round as a child's hand spins a lead
soldier.  julien's great dark eyes, filled with tears, found
themselves starting into the little grey eyes of the old peasant, who
looked as though he sought to penetrate to the depths of his son's
heart.




chapter 5
driving a bargain


  cunctando restituit rem.
    ennius

'answer me, without lying, if you can, you miserable bookworm; how do
you come to know madame de renal? when have you spoken to her?'

'i have never spoken to her,' replied julien, 'i have never seen the
lady except in church.'

'but you must have looked at her, you shameless scoundrel?'

'never! you know that in church i see none but god,' julien added with
a hypocritical air, calculated, to his mind, to ward off further
blows.

'there is something behind this, all the same,' replied the suspicious
peasant, and was silent for a moment; 'but i shall get nothing out of
you, you damned hypocrite. 
 
 ___________________________
 
the fact is, i'm going to be rid of you,
and my saw will run all the better without you. you have made a friend
of the parson or someone, and he's got you a fine post. go and pack
your traps, and i'll take you to m. de renal's where you're to be
tutor to the children.'

'what am i to get for that?'

'board, clothing and three hundred francs in wages.'

'i do not wish to be a servant,'

'animal, who ever spoke of your being a servant? would i allow my son
to be a servant?'

'but, with whom shall i have my meals?'

this question left old sorel at a loss; he felt that if he spoke he
might be guilty of some imprudence; he flew into a rage with julien,
upon whom he showered abuse, accusing him of greed, and left him to 
 
 ___________________________
 
stament in latin; he knew also m. de
maistre's book _du pape_, and had as little belief in one as in the
other.

as though by a mutual agreement, sorel and his son avoided speaking to
one another for the rest of the day. at dusk, julien went to the cure
for his divinity lesson, but did not think it prudent to say anything
to him of the strange proposal that had been made to his father. 'it
may be a trap,' he told himself; 'i must pretend to have forgotten
about it.'

early on the following day, m. de renal sent for old sorel, who, after
keeping him waiting for an hour or two, finally appeared, beginning as
he entered the door a hundred excuses interspersed with as many
reverences. by dint of giving voice to every sort of objection, sorel
succeeded in gathering that his son was to take his meals with the
master and mistress of the house, and on days when they had company in
a room by himself with the children. finding an increasing desire to
raise difficulties the more he discerned a genuine anxie
 
 ___________________________
 
ty on the
mayor's part, and being moreover filled with distrust and
bewilderment, sorel asked to see the room in which his son was to
sleep. it was a large chamber very decently furnished, but the
servants were already engaged in carrying into it the beds of the
three children.

at this the old peasant began to see daylight; he at once asked with
assurance to see the coat which would be given to his son. m. de renal
opened his desk and took out a hundred francs.

'with this money, your son can go to m. durand, the clothier, and get
himself a suit of black.'

'and supposing i take him away from you,' said the peasant, who had
completely forgotten the reverential forms of address. 'will he take
this black coat with him?'

'certainly.'

'oh, very well!' said sorel in a drawling tone, 'then there's only one
thing for us still to settle: the money you're to give him.'

'what!' m. de renal indignantly exclaimed,
 
 ___________________________
 
ot dependent
on his for his living. all the innumerable conditions which were to
determine julien's new existence were finally settled; not only was
his salary fixed at four hundred francs, but it was to be paid in
advance, on the first day of each month.

'very well! i shall let him have thirty-five francs,' said m. de
renal.

'to make a round sum, a rich and generous gentleman like our mayor,'
the peasant insinuated in a coaxing voice, 'will surely go as far as
thirty-six.'

'all right,' said m. de renal, 'but let us have no more of this.'

for once, anger gave him a tone of resolution. the peasant saw that he
could advance no farther. thereupon m. de renal began in turn to make
headway. he utterly refused to hand over the thirty-six francs for the
first month to old sorel, who was most eager to receive the money on
his son's behalf. it occurred to m. de renal that he would be obliged
to describe to his wife the part he had played throughout this
transaction.

'let me have back the hundred fran
 
 ___________________________
 
 the most, seventeen,
who, carrying a small parcel under his arm, was entering the
magnificent church of verrieres.

he found it dark and deserted. in view of some festival, all the
windows in the building had been covered with crimson cloth; the
effect of this, when the sun shone, was a dazzling blaze of light, of
the most imposing and most religious character.  julien shuddered.
being alone in the church, he took his seat on the bench that had the
most handsome appearance. it bore the arms of m. de renal.

on the desk in front, julien observed a scrap of printed paper, spread
out there as though to be read. he looked at it closely and saw:

'details of the execution and of the last moments of louis jenrel,
executed at besancon, on the ...'

the paper was torn. on the other side he read the opening words of a
line, which were: 'the first step.'

'who can have put this paper here?' said julien. 'poor wretch!' he
added with a sigh, 'his name has the same ending as mine.' and he
crumpled up the pap
 
 ___________________________
 
er.

on his way out, julien thought he saw blood by the holy water stoup;
it was some of the water that had been spilt: the light from the red
curtains which draped the windows made it appear like blood.

finally, julien felt ashamed of his secret terror.

'should i prove coward?' he said to himself. '_to arms_!'

this phrase, so often repeated in the old surgeon's accounts of
battles, had a heroic sound in julien's ears. he rose and walked
rapidly to m. de renal's house.

despite these brave resolutions, as soon as he caught sight of the
house twenty yards away he was overcome by an unconquerable shyness.
the iron gate stood open; it seemed to him magnificent. he would have
now to go in through it.

julien was not the only person whose heart was troubled by his arrival
in this household. madame de renal's extreme timidity was disconcerted
by the idea of this stranger who, in the performance of his duty,
would be constantly coming between her and her ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ildren. she was
accustomed to having her sons sleep in her own room. that morning,
many tears had flowed when she saw their little beds being carried
into the apartment intended for the tutor. in vain did she beg her
husband to let the bed of stanislas xavier, the youngest boy, be taken
back to her room.

womanly delicacy was carried to excess in madame de renal. she formed
a mental picture of a coarse, unkempt creature, employed to scold her
children, simply because he knew latin, a barbarous tongue for the
sake of which her sons would be whipped.




chapter 6
dullness


  non so piu cosa son,
  cosa facio.
    mozart (figaro)

with the vivacity and grace which came naturally to her when she was
beyond the reach of male vision, madame de renal was coming out
through the glass door which opened from the drawing-room into the
garden, when she saw, stan
 
 ___________________________
 
ding by the front door, a young peasant,
almost a boy still, extremely pale and showing traces of recent tears.
he was wearing a clean white shirt and carried under his arm a neat
jacket of violet ratteen.

this young peasant's skin was so white, his eyes were so appealing,
that the somewhat romantic mind of madame de renal conceived the idea
at first that he might be a girl in disguise, come to ask some favour
of the mayor.  she felt sorry for the poor creature, who had come to a
standstill by the front door, and evidently could not summon up
courage to ring the bell.  madame de renal advanced, oblivious for the
moment of the bitter grief that she felt at the tutor's coming.
julien, who was facing the door, did not see her approach. he trembled
when a pleasant voice sounded close to his ear:

'what have you come 
 
 ___________________________
 
for, my boy?'

julien turned sharply round, and, struck by the charm of madame de
renal's expression, forgot part of his shyness. a moment later,
astounded by her beauty, he forgot everything, even his purpose in
coming. madame de renal had repeated her question.

'i have come to be tutor, madame,' he at length informed her, put to
shame by his tears which he dried as best he might.

madame de renal remained speechless; they were standing close
together, looking at one another. julien had never seen a person so
well dressed as this, let alone a woman with so exquisite a
complexion, to speak to him in a gentle tone. madame de renal looked
at the large tears which lingered on the cheeks (so pallid at first
and now so rosy) of this young peasant. presently she burst out
laughing, with all the wild hilarity of a girl; she was laughing at
herself, and trying in vain to realise the full extent o
 
 ___________________________
 
f her
happiness. so this was the tutor whom she had imagined an unwashed and
ill-dressed priest, who was coming to scold and whip her children.

'why, sir!' she said to him at length, 'do you know latin?'

the word 'sir' came as such a surprise to julien that he thought for a
moment before answering.

'yes, ma'am,' he said shyly.

madame de renal felt so happy that she ventured to say to julien:

'you won't scold those poor children too severely?'

'scold them? i?' asked julien in amazement. 'why should i?'

'you will, sir,' she went on after a brief silence and in a voice that
grew more emotional every moment, 'you will be kind to them, you
promise me?'

to hear himself addressed again as 'sir', in all seriousness, and by a
lady so fashionably attired, was more than julien had ever dreamed of;
in all the cloud castles of his boyhood, h
 
 ___________________________
 
e had told himself that no
fashionable lady would deign to speak to him until he had a smart
uniform. madame de renal, for her part, was completely taken in by the
beauty of julien's complexion, his great dark eyes and his becoming
hair which was curling more than usual because, to cool himself, he
had just dipped his head in the basin of the public fountain. to her
great delight, she discovered an air of girlish shyness in this fatal
tutor, whose severity and savage appearance she had so greatly
dreaded for her children's sake. to madame de renal's peace-loving
nature the contrast between her fears and what s
 
 ___________________________
 
he now saw before her
was a great event. finally she recovered from her surprise. she was
astonished to find herself standing like this at the door of her house
with this young man almost in his shirtsleeves and so close to her.

'let us go indoors, sir,' she said to him with an air of distinct
embarrassment.

never in her life had a purely agreeable sensation so profoundly
stirred madame de renal; never had so charming an apparition come in
the wake of more disturbing fears. and so those sweet children, whom
she had tended with such care, were not to fall into the hands of a
dirty, growling priest. as soon as they were in the hall, she turned
to julien who was following her shyly. his air of surprise at the
sight of so fine a house was an additional charm in the eyes of madame
de renal. she could not believe her eyes; what she felt most of all
was that the tutor ought to be wearing a bl
 
 ___________________________
 
ack coat.

'but is it true, sir,' she said to him, again coming to a halt, and
mortally afraid lest she might be mistaken, so happy was the belief
making her, 'do you really know latin?'

these words hurt julien's pride and destroyed the enchantment in which
he had been living for the last quarter of an hour.

'yes, ma'am,' he informed her, trying to adopt a chilly air; 'i know
latin as well as m. le cure; indeed, he is sometimes so kind as to say
that i know it better.'

madame de renal felt that julien had a very wicked air; he had stopped
within arm's length of her. she went nearer to him, and murmured:

'for the first few days, you won't take the whip to my children, even
if they don't know their lessons?'

this gentle, almost beseeching tone coming from so fine a lady at once
made julien forget what he owed to his reputation as a latin scholar.
madame de renal's face was close to his own, he could smell the
perfume of a woman's summer attire, so astounding a thing to a poo
 
 ___________________________
 
r
peasant. julien blushed deeply, and said with a sigh and in a faint
voice:

'fear nothing, ma'am, i shall obey you in every respect.'

it was at this moment only, when her anxiety for her children was
completely banished, that madame de renal was struck by julien's
extreme good looks. the almost feminine cast of his features and his
air of embarrassment did not seem in the least absurd to a woman who
was extremely timid herself. the manly air which is generally
considered essential to masculine beauty would have frightened her.

'how old are you, sir?' she asked julien.

'i shall soon be nineteen.'

'my eldest son is eleven,' went on madame de renal, completely
reassured; 'he will be almost a companion for you, you can talk to him
s
 
 ___________________________
 
eriously. his father tried to beat him once, the child was ill for a
whole week, and yet it was quite a gentle blow.'

'how different from me,' thought julien. 'only yesterday my father was
thrashing me. how fortunate these rich people are!'

madame de renal had by this time arrived at the stage of remarking the
most trivial changes in the state of the tutor's mind; she mistook
this envious impulse for shyness, and tried to give him fresh courage.

'what is your name, sir?' she asked him with an accent and a grace the
charm of which julien could feel without knowing whence it sprang.

'they call me julien sorel, ma'am; i am trembling as i enter a strange
house for the first time in my life; i have need of your protection,
and shall require you to f
 
 ___________________________
 
orgive me many things at first. i have never
been to college, i was too poor; i have never talked to any other men,
except my cousin the surgeon-major, a member of the legion of honour,
and the reverend father chelan. he will give you a good account of me.
my brothers have always beaten me, do not listen to them if they speak
evil of me to you; pardon my faults, ma'am, i shall never have any
evil intention.'

julien plucked up his courage again during this long speech; he was
studying madame de renal. such is the effect of perfect grace when it
is natural to the character, particularly when she whom it adorns has
no thought of being graceful. julien, who knew all that was to be
known about feminine beauty, would have sworn at that moment that she
was no more than twenty. the bold idea at once occurred to him of
kissing her hand. next, this idea frightened him; a moment later, he
said to himself: 'it would be cowardly on my part not to carry out an
action which may be of use to me, and dimin
 
 ___________________________
 
ish the scorn which this
fine lady probably feels for a poor workman, only just taken from the
sawbench.' perhaps julien was somewhat encouraged by the words
'good-looking boy' which for the last six months he had been used to
hearing on sundays on the lips of various girls. while he debated thus
with himself, madame de renal offered him a few suggestions as to how
he should begin to handle her children. the violence of julien's
effort to control himself made him turn quite pale again; he said,
with an air of constraint:

'never, ma'am, will i beat your children; i swear it before god.'

and so saying he ventured to take madame de renal's hand
and carry it to his lips. she was astonished at this action, and, on
thinking it over, shocked. as the weather was very warm, her arm was
completely bare under her shawl, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
julien's action in raising her
hand to his lips had uncovered it to the shoulder. a minute later she
scolded herself; she felt that she had not been quickly enough
offended.

m. de renal, who had heard the sound of voices, came out of his study;
with the same majestic and fatherly air that he assumed when he was
conducting marriages in the town hall, he said to julien:

'it is essential that i speak to you before the children see you.'

he ushered julien into one of the rooms and detained his wife, who was
going to leave them together. having shut the door, m. de renal seated
himself with gravity.

'the cure has told me that you were an honest fellow, everyone in this
house wil
 
 ___________________________
 
l treat you with respect, and if i am satisfied i shall help
you to set up for yourself later on. i wish you to cease to see
anything of either your family or your friends, their tone would not
be suited to my children. here are thirty-six francs for the first
month; but i must have your word that you will not give a penny of
this money to your father.'

m. de renal was annoyed with the old man, who, in this business, had
proved more subtle than he himself.

'and now, _sir_, for by my orders everyone in this house is to address
you as sir, and you will be conscious of the advantage of entering a
well-ordered household; now, sir, it is not proper that the children
should see you in a jacket. have the servants seen him?' m. de renal
asked his wife.

'no, dear,' she replied with an air of deep thought.

'good. put on this,' he said to the astonished young man
 
 ___________________________
 
, handing him
one of his own frock coats. 'and now let us go to m. durand, the
clothier.'

more than an hour later, when m. de renal returned with the new tutor
dressed all in black, he found his wife still seated in the same
place. she felt soothed by julien's presence; as she studied his
appearance she forgot to feel afraid. julien was not giving her a
thought; for all his mistrust of destiny and of mankind, his heart at
that moment was just like a child's; he seemed to have lived whole
years since the moment when, three hours earlier, he stood trembling
in the church. he noticed madame de renal's frigid manner, and
gather
 
 ___________________________
 
ed that she was angry because he had ventured to kiss her hand.
but the sense of pride that he derived from the contact of garments so
different from those which he was accustomed to wear caused him so
much excitement, and he was so anxious to conceal his joy that all his
gestures were more or less abrupt and foolish. madame de renal gazed
at him with eyes of astonishment.

'a little gravity, sir,' m. de renal told him, 'if you wish to be
respected by my children and my servants.'

'sir,' replied julien, 'i am uncomfortable in these new clothes; i, a
humble peasant, have never worn any but short jackets; with your
permission, i shall retire to my bedroom.'

'what think you of this new acquisition?' m. de renal asked his wife.

with an almost instinctive impulse, of which she herself certainly was
not aware, madame de renal concealed the truth from her husband.

'i am by no means as enchanted as you a
 
 ___________________________
 
re with this little peasant;
your kindness will turn him into an impertinent rascal whom you will
be obliged to send packing within a month.'

'very well! we shall send him packing; he will have cost me a hundred
francs or so, and verrieres will have grown used to seeing a tutor
with m. de renal's children. that point i should not have gained if i
had let julien remain in the clothes of a working man. when i dismiss
him, i shall of course keep the black suit which i have just ordered
from the clothier.  he shall have nothing but the coat i found ready
made at the tailor's, which he is now wearing.'

the hour which julien spent in his room seemed like a second to madame
de renal. the children, who had been told of their new tutor's
arrival, overwhelmed their mother with questions. final
 
 ___________________________
 
ly julien
appeared. he was another man. it would have been straining the word to
say that he was grave; he was gravity incarnate. he was introduced to
the children, and spoke to them with an air that surprised m. de renal
himself.

'i am here, young gentlemen,' he told them at the end of his address,
'to teach you latin. you know what is meant by repeating a lesson.
here is the holy bible,' he said, and showed them a tiny volume in
32mo, bound in black. 'it is in particular the story of our lord jesus
christ, that is the part which is called the new testament. i shall
often make you repeat lessons; now you must make me repeat mine.'

adolphe, the eldest boy, had taken the book.

'open it where you please,' julie
 
 ___________________________
 
n went on, 'and tell me the first
word of a paragraph. i shall repeat by heart the sacred text, the rule
of conduct for us all, until you stop me.'

adolphe opened the book, read a word, and julien repeated the whole
page as easily as though he were speaking french. m. de renal looked
at his wife with an air of triumph. the children, seeing their
parents' amazement, opened their eyes wide. a servant came to the door
of the drawing-room, julien went on speaking in latin. the servant at
first stood motionless and then vanished. presently the lady's maid
and the cook appeared in the doorway; by this time adolphe had opened
the book at eight different places, and julien continued to repeat the
words with the same ease.

'eh, what a bonny little priest,' the cook, a good a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd truly devout
girl, said aloud.

m. de renal's self-esteem was troubled; so far from having any thought
of examining the tutor, he was engaged in ransacking his memory for a
few words of latin; at last, he managed to quote a line of horace.
julien knew no latin apart from the bible. he replied with a frown:

'the sacred ministry to which i intend to devote myself has forbidden
me to read so profane a poet.'

m. de renal repeated a fair number of alleged lines of horace. he
explained to his children what horace was; but the children, overcome
with admiration, paid little attention to what he was saying. they
were watching julien.

the servants being still at the door, julien felt it incumbent upon
him to prolong the test.

'and now,' he said to the youngest boy, 'master stanislas xavier too
must set me a passage from the holy book.'

little stanislas, swelling with pride, read out to the best of his
ability the
 
 ___________________________
 
 opening words of a paragraph, and julien repeated the
whole page. that nothing might be wanting to complete m. de renal's
triumph, while julien was reciting, there entered m. valenod, the
possessor of fine norman horses, and m. charcot de maugiron,
sub-prefect of the district. this scene earned for julien the title
'sir'; the servants themselves dared not withhold it from him.

that evening, the whole of verrieres flocked to m. de renal's to
behold the marvel. julien answered them all with an air of gloom which
kept them at a distance. his fame spread so rapidly through the town
that, shortly afterwards, m. de renal, afraid of losing him, suggested
his signing a contract for two years.

'no, sir,' julien replied coldly, 'if you chose to dismiss me i should
be obliged to go. a contract which binds me without putting you under
any obligation is unfair, i must decline.'

julien managed so skilfully that, less than a month after h
 
 ___________________________
 
is coming
to the house, m. de renal himself respected him. the cure having
quarrelled with mm. de renal and valenod, there was no one who could
betray julien's former passion for napoleon, of whom he was careful to
speak with horror.




chapter 7
elective affinities


  they can only touch the heart by bruising it.
    a modern

the children adored him, he did not care for them; his thoughts were
elsewhere. nothing that these urchins could do ever tried his
patience.  cold, just, impassive, and at the same time loved, because
his coming had in a measure banished dullness from the house, he was a
 
 ___________________________
 

good tutor. for his part, he felt only hatred and horror for the high
society in which he was allowed to occupy the very foot of the
table, a position which may perhaps explain his hatred and horror.
there were certain formal dinners at which he could barely contain his
loathing of everything round about him.  on saint louis's day in
particular, m. valenod was laying down the law at m. de renal's;
julien almost gave himself away; he escaped into the garden, saying
that he must look after the children. 'what panegyrics of honesty!' he
exclaimed; 'anyone would say that was the one and only virtue; and yet
what consideration, what a cringing respect for a man who obviously
has doubled and tripled his fortune since he has been in charge of the
relief of the poor! i would wager that he makes something even out of
the fund set apart for the foundlings, those wretches whose need is
even more
 
 ___________________________
 
d by the sight of their brother's
handsome black coat, and air of extreme gentility, as well as by the
sincere contempt which he felt for them, that they had proceeded to
thrash him, leaving him there unconscious and bleeding freely. madame
de renal, who was out walking with m. valenod and the sub-prefect,
happened to turn into the little wood; she saw julien lying on the
ground and thought him dead. she was so overcome as to make m. valenod
jealous.

his alarm was premature. julien admired madame de renal's looks, but
hated her for her beauty; it was the first reef on which his fortune
had nearly foundered. he spoke to her as seldom as possible, in the
hope of making her forget the impulse which, at their first encounter,
had led him to kiss her hand.

elisa, madame de renal's maid, had not failed to fall in love with the
young tutor; she often spoke of him to her mistress. miss elisa's love
had brought upon julien the hatred of one of the footmen. one day he
heard this man say to elisa: 'you wo
 
 ___________________________
 
n't speak to me any more, since
that greasy tutor has been in the house.' julien did not deserve the
epithet; but, with the instinct of a good-looking youth, became doubly
attentive to his person. m. valenod's hatred was multiplied
accordingly. he said in public that so much concern with one's
appearance was not becoming in a young cleric. barring the cassock,
julien now wore clerical attire.

madame de renal observed that he was speaking more often than before
to miss elisa; she learned that these conversations were due to the
limitations of julien's extremely small wardrobe. he had so scanty a
supply of linen that he was obliged to send it out constantly to be
washed, and it was in performing these little services that elisa made
herself useful to him.

this extreme poverty, of which she had had no suspicion, touched
madame de renal; she longed to make him presents, but did not dare;
this inward r
 
 ___________________________
 
esistance was the first feeling of regret that julien
caused her. until then the name of julien and the sense of a pure and
wholly intellectual joy had been synonymous to her.  tormented by the
idea of julien's poverty, madame de renal spoke to her husband about
making him a present of linen:

'what idiocy!' he replied. 'what! make presents to a man with whom we
are perfectly satisfied, and who is serving us well? it is when he
neglects his duty that we should stimulate his zeal.'

madame de renal felt ashamed of this way of looking at things; before
julien came she would not have noticed it. she never saw the young
cleric's spotless, though very simple, toilet without asking herself:
'poor boy, how ever does he manage?'

as time went on she began to feel sorry for julien's deficiencies,
instead of being shocked by them.

madame de renal was one of those women to be found in the provinces
whom one may easily take to be fools until one has known them for a
fortnight.  she had no experienc
 
 ___________________________
 
she had learned in the convent; but she put nothing else in
its place, and ended by knowing nothing. the flatteries of which she
had been the precocious object, as the heiress to a large fortune, and
a marked tendency towards passionate devotion, had bred in her an
attitude towards life that was wholly inward.  with an outward show of
the most perfect submission, and a self-suppression which the husbands
of verrieres used to quote as an example to their wives, and which was
a source of pride to m. de renal, her inner life was, as a matter of
fact, dictated by the most lofty disdain. any princess who is quoted
as an illustration of pride pays infinitely more attention to what her
gentlemen are doing round about her than this meekest of women, so
modest in appearance, gave to anything that her husband said or did.
until julien arrived, she had really paid no attention to anyone but
her children. their little illnesses, their sorrows, their little
pleasures absorbed the whole sensibility of this hum
 
 ___________________________
 
sh attack
coming to one of her sons threw her almost into the same state as if
the child had died. a burst of coarse laughter, a shrug of the
shoulders, accompanied by some trivial maxim as to the foolishness of
women, had regularly greeted the confessions of grief of this sort
which the need of an outlet had led her to make to her husband during
the first years of their married life. witticisms of this sort,
especially when they bore upon the illnesses of the children, turned
the dagger in madame de renal's heart. this was all the substitute she
found for the obsequious, honeyed flatteries of the jesuitical convent
in which she had passed her girlhood.  she was educated in the school
of suffering. too proud to speak of griefs of this sort, even to her
friend madame derville, she imagined that all men resembled her
husband, m. valenod, and the sub-prefect charcot de maugiron.  coarse
wit and the most brutal insensibility to everything that did not
promise money, promotion or a cross; a blind hatr
 
 ___________________________
 
ed of every argument
that went against them seemed to her to be things natural to the male
sex, like the wearing of boots and felt hats.

after many long years, madame de renal had not yet grown accustomed to
these money-grubbing creatures among whom she had to live.

hence the success of the little peasant julien. she found much
pleasant enjoyment, radiant with the charm of novelty, in the sympathy
of this proud and noble spirit. madame de renal had soon forgiven him
his extreme ignorance, which was an additional charm, and the
roughness of his manners, which she succeeded in improving. she found
that it was worth her while to listen to him, even when they spoke of
the most ordinary things, even when it was a question of a poor dog
that had been run over, as it was crossing the street, by a peasant's
cart going by at a trot. the sight of such a tragedy made her husband
utter his coarse laugh, whereas she saw julien's fine, beautifully

 
 ___________________________
 
arched black eyebrows wince. generosity, nobility of soul, humanity,
seemed to her, after a time, to exist only in this young cleric.  she
felt for him alone all the sympathy and even admiration which those
virtues arouse in well-bred natures.

in paris, julien's position with regard to madame de renal would very
soon have been simplified; but in paris love is the child of the
novels. the young tutor and his timid mistress would have found in
three or four novels, and even in the lyrics of the gymnase, a clear
statement of their situation. the novels would have outlined for them
the part to be played, shown them the model to copy; and this model,
sooner or later, albeit without the slightest pleasure, and perhaps
with reluctance, vanity would have compelled julien to follow.

in a small town 
 
 ___________________________
 
ur of the climate. beneath
our more sombre skies, a penniless young man, who is ambitious only
because the refinement of his nature puts him in need of some of those
pleasures which money provides, is in daily contact with a woman of
thirty who is sincerely virtuous, occupied with her children, and
never looks to novels for examples of conduct. everything goes slowly,
everything happens by degrees in the provinces: life is more natural.

often, when she thought of the young tutor's poverty, madame de renal
was moved to tears. julien came upon her, one day, actually crying.

'ah, ma'am, you have had some bad news!'

'no, my friend,' was her answer: 'call the children, let us go for a
walk.'

she took his arm and leaned on it in a manner which julien thought
strange.  it was the first time that she had called him 'my friend'.

towards the end of their walk, julien observed that she was blushing
deeply. she slackened her pace.

'you will have heard,' she said without looking at him, 'that i am the
s
 
 ___________________________
 
ply you with
linen. but--' she added, blushing even more deeply, and was silent.

'what, ma'am?' said julien.

'it would be unnecessary,' she went on, lowering her head, 'to speak
of this to my husband.'

'i may be humble, ma'am, but i am not base,' replied julien coming to
a standstill, his eyes ablaze with anger, and drawing himself up to
his full height. 'that is a point which you have not sufficiently
considered. i should be less than a footman if i put myself in the
position of hiding from m. de renal anything that had to do with my
money.'

madame de renal was overwhelmed.

'the mayor,' julien went on, 'has given me thirty-six francs five
times since i came to live in his house; i am prepared to show my
account-book to m. de renal or to anyone else, including m. valenod
who hates me.'

this outburst left madame de renal pale and trembling, and the walk
came to an end before either of them could find an excuse for renewing
the conversation. love for madame de renal became more and more
impos
 
 ___________________________
 
e pretext of making
amends for the humiliation which she had unintentionally caused him,
she allowed herself to pay him the most delicate attentions. the
novelty of this procedure kept her happy for a week. its effect was to
some extent to appease julien's anger; he was far from seeing anything
in it that could be mistaken for personal affection.

'that,' he said to himself, 'is what rich people are like: they
humiliate one, and then think they can put things right by a few
monkey-tricks.'

madame de renal's heart was too full, and as yet too innocent for her,
notwithstanding the resolutions she had made, not to tell her husband
of the offer she had made to julien and the manner in which she had
been repulsed.

'what,' m. de renal retorted, with keen annoyance, 'could you tolerate
a refusal from a servant?'

and as madame de renal protested at this word:

'i speak, ma'am, as the late prince de conde spoke, when presenting
his chamberlains to his bride: "all these people," he told her, "are
our se
 
 ___________________________
 
rvants." i read you the passage from besenval's _memoirs_, it is
essential in questions of precedence. everyone who is not a gentleman,
who lives in your house and receives a salary, is your servant. i
shall say a few words to this master julien, and give him a hundred
francs.'

'ah, my dear,' said madame de renal trembling, 'please do not say
anything in front of the servants.'

'yes, they might be jealous, and rightly,' said her husband as he left
the room, thinking of the magnitude of the sum.

madame de renal sank down on a chair, almost fainting with grief. 'he
is going to humiliate julien, and it is my fault!' she felt a horror
of her husband, and hid her face in her hands. she promised herself
that she would never confide anything in him again.

when she next saw julien, she was trembling all over
 
 ___________________________
 
, her bosom was so
contracted that she could not manage to utter a single word. in her
embarrassment she took his hands and wrung them.

'well, my friend,' she said to him after a little, 'are you pleased
with my husband?'

'how should i not be?' julien answered with a bitter smile; 'he has
given me a hundred francs.'

madame de renal looked at him as though uncertain what to do.

'give me your arm,' she said at length with an accent of courage which
julien had never yet observed in her.

she ventured to enter the shop of the verrieres bookseller, in spite
of his terrible reputation as a liberal. there she chose books to the
value of ten louis which she gave to her sons. but these books were
the ones which she knew that julien wanted. she insisted that there,
in the bookseller's shop, each of the children should write his ow
 
 ___________________________
 
n
name in the books that fell to his share. while madame de renal was
rejoicing at the partial reparation which she had had the courage to
make to julien, he was lost in amazement at the quantity of books
which he saw on the bookseller's shelves. never had he dared to set
foot in so profane a place; his heart beat violently.  so far from his
having any thought of trying to guess what was occurring in the heart
of madame de renal, he was plunged in meditation as to how it would be
possible for a young student of divinity to procure some of these
books. at length the idea came to him that it might be possible, by a
skilful approach, to persuade m. de renal that he ought to set his
sons, as the subject for an essay, the lives of the celebrated
gentlemen who were natives of the province. after a month of careful
preliminaries, he saw his idea prove successful, so much so that,
shortly afterwards, he ventured, in speaking t
 
 ___________________________
 
o m. de renal, to
mention an action considerably more offensive to the noble mayor; it
was a matter of contributing to the prosperity of a liberal, by taking
out a subscription at the library.  m. de renal entirely agreed that
it was wise to let his eldest son have a _visual impression_ of various
works which he would hear mentioned in conversation when he went to
the military school; but julien found the mayor obdurate in refusing
to go any farther. he suspected a secret reason, which he was unable
to guess.

'i was thinking, sir,' he said to him one day, 'that it would be
highly improper for the name of a respectable gentleman like a renal
to appear on the dirty ledger of the librarian.'

m. de
 
 ___________________________
 
 who keeps a
library. the liberals might accuse me of having asked for the most
scandalous books; for all one knows they might even go so far as to
write in after my name the titles of those perverse works.'

but julien was going off the track. he saw the mayor's features resume
their expression of embarrassment and ill humour. julien was silent.
'i have my man hooked,' he said to himself.

a few days later, on the eldest boy's questioning julien as to a book
advertised in the _quotidienne_, in m. de renal's presence:

'to remove all occasion for triumph from the jacobin party,' said the
young tutor, 'and at the same time to enable me to answer master
adolphe, one might open a subscription at the bookshop in the name of
the lowest of your servants.'

'that is not at all a bad idea,' said m. de renal, obviously
delighted.

'only it would have to be specified,' said julien with that grave and
almost sorrowful air which becomes certain people so well, when they
see the success of the projects which 
 
 ___________________________
 
have been longest in their
minds, 'it would have to be specified that the servant shall not take
out any novels.  once they were in the house, those dangerous works
might corrupt madame's maids, not to speak of the servant himself.'

'you forget the political pamphlets,' added m. de renal, in a haughty
tone.  he wished to conceal the admiration that he felt for the clever
middle course discovered by his children's tutor.

julien's life was thus composed of a series of petty negotiations; and
their success was of far more importance to him than the evidence of a
marked preference for himself which was only waiting for him to read
it in the heart of madame de renal.

the moral environment in which he had been placed all his life was
repeated in the household of the worshipful mayo
 
 ___________________________
 
 always: 'what monsters!' or 'what fools!' the
amusing thing was that, with all his pride, frequently he understood
nothing at all of what was being discussed.

in his whole life, he had never spoken with sincerity except to the
old surgeon-major; the few ideas that he had bore reference to
napoleon's campaigns in italy, or to surgery. his youthful courage
took delight in detailed accounts of the most painful operations; he
said to himself: 'i should not have flinched.'

the first time that madame de renal attempted a conversation with him
on a subject other than that of the children's education, he began to
talk of surgical operations; she turned pale, and begged him to stop.

julien knew nothing apart from these matters. and so, as he spent his
time with madame de renal, the strangest silence grew up between them
as soon as they were alone together. in her own drawing-room, humble
as his bearing was, she found in his eyes an air of intellectual
superiority over everyone that came to the house. 
 
 ___________________________
 
, julien felt abashed, as though he himself were specially
to blame for this silence. this sensation was a hundred times more
painful when they were alone. his imagination, full of the most
extravagant, the most spanish notions as to what a man ought to say,
when he is alone with a woman, offered him in his agitation none but
inadmissible ideas. his soul was in the clouds, and yet he was
incapable of breaking the most humiliating silence. thus his air of
severity, during his long walks with madame de renal and the children,
was intensified by the most cruel sufferings. he despised himself
hideously. if by mischance he forced himself to speak, he found
himself saying the most ridiculous things. to increase his misery, he
saw and exaggerated his own absurdity; but what he did not see was the
expression in his eyes, they were so fine and revealed so burning a
soul that, like good actors, they imparted at times a charming meaning
to what was meaningless. madame de renal remarked that, when alone
with
 
 ___________________________
 
 not spoil her by
offering her new and brilliant ideas, she took a delight in the
flashes of julien's intellect.

since the fall of napoleon, all semblance of gallantry in speech has
been sternly banished from the code of provincial behaviour. people
are afraid of losing their posts. the unscrupulous seek support from
the _congregation_ and hypocrisy has made the most brilliant advances
even among the liberal classes. dulness increases. no pleasure is
left, save in reading and agriculture.

madame de renal, the wealthy heiress of a religious aunt, married at
sixteen to a worthy gentleman, had never in her life felt or seen
anything that bore the faintest resemblance to love. her confessor,
the good cure chelan, was the only person almost who had ever spoken
to her of love, with reference to the advances of m. valenod, and he
had drawn so revolting a picture of it that the word conveyed nothing
to her but the idea of the most abject immorality. she regarded as an
exception, or rather as something 
 
 ___________________________
 
h
as she had found it in the very small number of novels that chance had
brought to her notice. thanks to this ignorance, madame de
renal, entirely happy, occupied incessantly with the thought of
julien, was far from reproaching herself in the slightest degree.




chapter 8
minor events


  then there were sighs, the deeper for suppression,
    and stolen glances, sweeter for the theft,
  and burning blushes, though for no transgression.
      _don juan_, i. 74

the angelic sweetness which madame de renal derived from her own
character as well as from her present happiness was interrupted only
when she happened to think of her maid elisa. this young woman
received a legacy, went to make her confession to the cure chelan, and
revealed to him her intention to marry julien. the cure was genuinely
delighted at his friend's good fortune; but his surprise was great
when julien informed him with a resolute air that miss elisa's offer
could not be accepted.

'pay good heed, my son, to what is taking pla
 
 ___________________________
 
 the tone in which he uttered them,
the ill-concealed fire that smouldered in his eyes alarmed m. chelan.

we need not augur ill for julien's future; he hit upon the correct
form of words of a cunning and prudent hypocrisy. that is not bad at
his age. as for his tone and gestures, he lived among country folk; he
had been debarred from seeing the great models. in the sequel, no
sooner had he been permitted to mix with these gentlemen than he
became admirable as well in gesture as in speech.

madame de renal was surprised that her maid's newly acquired fortune
had not made the girl more happy; she saw her going incessantly to the
cure's, and returning with tears in her eyes; finally elisa spoke to
her mistress of her marriage.

madame de renal believed herself to have fallen ill; a sort of fever
prevented her enjoying any sleep; she was alive only when she had her
maid or julien before her eyes. she could think of nothing but them
and the happiness they would find in their married life. the poverty
 
 ___________________________
 

of the small house in which people would be obliged to live, with an
income of fifty louis, portrayed itself to her in enchanting colours.
julien might very well become a lawyer at bray, the sub-prefecture two
leagues from verrieres; in that event she would see something of
him.

madame de renal sincerely believed that she was going mad; she said so
to her husband, and finally did fall ill. that evening, as her maid
was waiting upon her, she noticed that the girl was crying. she
loathed elisa at that moment, and had spoken sharply to her; she
begged the girl's pardon. elisa's tears increased; she said that if
her mistress would allow it, she would tell her the whole tale of her
distress.

'speak,' replied madame de renal.

'well, the fact is, ma'am, he won't have me; wicked people must
 
 ___________________________
 
 have
spoken evil of me to him, and he believes them.'

'who won't have you?' said madame de renal, scarcely able to breathe.

'and who could it be, ma'am, but m. julien?' the maid replied through
her sobs. 'his reverence has failed to overcome his resistance; for
his reverence considers that he ought not to refuse a decent girl,
just because she has been a lady's maid. after all, m. julien's own
father is no better than a carpenter; and he himself, how was he
earning his living before he came to madame's?'

madame de renal had ceased to listen; surfeit of happiness had almost
deprived her o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the use of her reason. she made the girl repeat to her
several times the assurance that julien had refused in a positive
manner, which would not permit of his coming to a more reasonable
decision later on.

'i wish to make a final effort,' she said to her maid. 'i shall speak
to m. julien.'

next day after luncheon, madame de renal gave herself the exquisite
sensation of pleading her rival's cause, and of seeing elisa's hand
and fortune persistently refused for an hour on end.

little by little julien abandoned his attitude of studied reserve, and
ended by making spirited answers to the sound arguments advanced by
madame de renal. she could not hold out against the torrent of
happiness which now poured into her heart after all those days of
despair. she found herself really ill. when she had come to herself,
and was comfo
 
 ___________________________
 
rtably settled in her own room, she asked to be left
alone. she was in a state of profound astonishment.

'can i be in love with julien?' she asked herself at length.

this discovery, which at any other time would have filled her with
remorse and with a profound agitation, was no more to her than a
singular spectacle, but one that left her indifferent. her heart,
exhausted by all that she had just undergone, had no sensibility left
to place at the service of her passions.

madame de renal tried to work, and fell into a deep sleep; when she
awoke, she was less alarmed than she should have been. she was too
happy to be able to take anything amiss. artless and innocent as she
was, this honest provincial had never tormented her soul in an attempt
to wring from it some little sensibility to some novel shade of
sentiment or distress. entirely absorbed, before julien came, in that
mass of work which, outside paris, is the lot of a good wife and
mother, madame de renal thought about the
 
 ___________________________
 
 passions, as we think about
the lottery: a certain disappointment and a happiness sought by fools
alone.

the dinner bell rang; madame de renal blushed deeply when she heard
julien's voice as he brought in the children. having acquired some
adroitness since she had fallen in love, she accounted for her colour
by complaining of a splitting headache.

'there you have women,' put in m. de renal, with a coarse laugh.
'there's always something out of order in their machinery.'

accustomed as she was to this form of wit, the tone of his voice hurt
madame de renal. she sought relief in studying julien's features; had
he been the ugliest man in the world, he would have charmed her at
that moment.

always zealous in imitating the habits of the court, with the first
fine days of spring m. de renal removed his household to vergy; it is
the village rendered famous by the tragic adventure of ga
 
 ___________________________
 
brielle. a
few hundred yards from the picturesque ruins of the old gothic church,
m. de renal owned an old castle with its four towers, and a garden
laid out like that of the tuileries, with a number of box borders, and
chestnut alleys trimmed twice in the year. an adjoining field, planted
with apple trees, allowed the family to take the air. nine or ten
splendid walnuts grew at the end of the orchard; their massive foliage
rose to a height of some eighty feet.

'each of those damned walnuts,' m. de renal would say when his wife
admired them, 'costs me half an acre of crop; the corn will not grow
in their shade.'

the rustic scene appeared to come as a novelty to madame de renal; her
admiration knew no bounds. the feeling that animated her gave her a
new spirit and determination. on the second day after their removal to
vergy, m. de renal having returned to town upon some official
business, his wife engaged labourers at her own expense. julien had
given her the idea of a little gravelled path, w
 
 ___________________________
 
hich should run round
the orchard and beneath the big walnuts, and would allow the children
to walk there in the early morning without wetting their shoes in the
dew. this plan was put into execution within twenty-four hours of its
conception. madame de renal spent a long and happy day with julieu
supervising the labourers.

when the mayor of verrieres returned from the town, he was greatly
surprised to find the path finished. his coming surprised madame de
renal also; she had forgotten that he existed. for the next two
months, he continued to speak with annoyance of their presumption in
having carried out, without consulting him, so important a repair, but
madame de renal had done it at her own expense, and this to some
extent consoled him.

she sp
 
 ___________________________
 
the orchard with her children, and
chasing butterflies. they had made a number of large nets of
light-coloured gauze, with which they caught the unfortunate
lepidoptera. this was the outlandish name which julien taught madame
de renal. for she had sent to besancon for the handsome work on the
subject by m. godart; and julien read to her the strange habits of
these insects.

they fastened them, without compunction, with pins upon a large sheet
of pasteboard, also prepared by julien.

at last madame de renal and julien had a subject for conversation; he
was no longer exposed to the frightful torture inflicted on him by
intervals of silence.

they conversed incessantly, and with extreme interest, although always
of the most innocent things. this life, active, occupied and cheerful,
suited everyone, except miss elisa, who found herself worked to death.
'even at carnival-time,' she said, 'when there is a ball at verrieres,
madame has never taken so much trouble over her dress; she changes her
clothes 
 
 ___________________________
 
two or three times a day.'

as it is our intention to flatter no one, we shall not conceal the
fact that madame de renal, who had a superb skin, had dresses made for
her which exposed her arms and bosom freely. she was very well made,
and this way of dressing suited her to perfection.

'you have never _been so young_, ma'am,' her friends from verrieres used
to tell her when they came to dine at vergy. (it is a local form of
speech.)

a curious point, which our readers will scarcely believe, was that
madame de renal had no deliberate intention in taking such pains with
her appearance. she enjoyed doing so; and, wi
 
 ___________________________
 
thout giving the matter
any particular thought, whenever she was not chasing butterflies with
the children and julien, she was engaged with elisa making dresses.
her one expedition to verrieres was due to a desire to purchase new
summer clothes which had just arrived there from mulhouse.

she brought back with her to vergy a young woman, one of her cousins.
since her marriage, madame de renal had gradually formed an intimate
friendship with madame derville, who in their younger days had been
her school-fellow at the sacre-coeur.

madame derville laughed heartily at what she called her cousin's
absurd ideas. 'if i were alone, they would never occur to me,' she
used to say.  these sudden ideas, which in paris would have been
called sallies, made madame de renal feel ashamed, as of something
foolish, when she was with her husband; but madame derville's presence
gave her courage. she be
 
 ___________________________
 
gan by telling her what she was thinking in a
timid voice; when the ladies were by themselves for any length of
time, madame de renal would become animated, and a long, undisturbed
morning passed in a flash and left the friends quite merry. on this
visit, the sensible madame derville found her cousin much less merry
and much happier.

julien, meanwhile, had been living the life of a child since he had
come to the country, as happy to be running after butterflies as were
his pupils.  after so much constraint and skilful diplomacy, alone,
unobserved by his fellow-men, and, instinctively, feeling not in the
least afraid of madam
 
 ___________________________
 
erits of the novels in vogue during his reign, furnished him
now, for the first time, with several ideas which would long since
have been familiar to any other young man of his age.

the hot weather came. they formed the habit of spending the evening
under a huge lime a few yards from the house. there the darkness was
intense. one evening, julien was talking with emphasis, he was
revelling in the pleasure of talking well and to young married women;
as he gesticulated, he touched the hand of madame de renal, who was
leaning on the back of one of those chairs of painted wood that are
placed in gardens.

the hand was hurriedly withdrawn; but julien decided that it was his
_duty_ to secure that the hand should not be withdrawn when he touched
it. the idea of a duty to be performed, and of making himself
ridiculous, or rather being left with a sense of inferiority if he did
not succeed in performing it, at once took all the pleasure from his
heart.




chapter 9
an evening in the country


  m. guerin
 
 ___________________________
 
's dido, a charming sketch!
    strombeck

when he saw madame de renal again, the next morning, there was a
strange look in his eyes; he watched her like an enemy with whom he
would presently be engaged. this expression, so different from his
expression overnight, made madame de renal lose her head; she had been
kind to him, and he appeared vexed. she could not take her eyes from
his.

madame derville's presence excused julien from his share of the
conversation, and enabled him to concentrate his attention upon what
he had in mind. his sole occupation, throughout the day, was that of
fortifying himself by reading the inspired text which refreshed his
soul.

he greatly curtailed the children's lessons, and when, later on, the
presence of madame de renal recalled him to the se
 
 ___________________________
 
made
julien's heart beat with a strange excitement. night fell. he
observed, with a joy that lifted a huge weight from his breast, that
it was very dark. a sky packed with big clouds, kept in motion by a
hot breeze, seemed to forebode a tempest. the two women continued
strolling until a late hour. everything that they did this evening
seemed strange to julien.  they were enjoying this weather, which, in
certain delicate natures, seems to enhance the pleasure of love.

at last they sat down, madame de renal next to julien, and madame
derville on the other side of her friend. preoccupied with the attempt
he must shortly make, julien could think of nothing to say. the
conversation languished.

'shall i tremble like this and feel as uncomfortable the first time i
have to fight a duel?' julien wondered; for he had too little
confidence either in himself or in others not to observe the state he
was in.

in this agonising uncertainty, any danger would have seemed to him
preferable. how often did he long
 
 ___________________________
 
 to see madame de renal called by
some duty which would oblige her to return to the house and so leave
the garden!  the violence of the effort which julien had to make to
control himself was such that his voice was entirely altered;
presently madame de renal's voice became tremulous also, but julien
never noticed this. the ruthless warfare which his sense of duty was
waging with his natural timidity was too exhausting for him to be in a
condition to observe anything outside himself. the quarter before ten
had sounded from the tower clock, without his having yet ventured on
anything. julien, ashamed of his cowardice, told himself: 'at the
precise moment when ten o'clock strikes, i shall carry out the
intention which, all day long, i have been promis
 
 ___________________________
 
ing myself that i
would fulfil this evening, or i shall go up to my room and blow my
brains out.'

after a final interval of tension and anxiety, during which the excess
of his emotion carried julien almost out of his senses, the strokes of
ten sounded from the clock overhead. each stroke of that fatal bell
stirred an echo in his bosom, causing him almost a physical revulsion.

finally, while the air was still throbbing with the last stroke of
ten, he put out his hand and took that of madame de renal, who at once
withdrew it.  julien, without exactly knowing what he was doing,
grasped her hand again.  although greatly moved himself, he was struck
by the icy coldness of the hand he was clasping; he pressed it with
convulsive force; a last attempt was made to remove it from him, but
finally the hand was left in his grasp.

his heart was flooded with joy, not because he loved madame de renal,
but because a fearful torment was now at an end. so that madame
derville should not notice anything, h
 
 ___________________________
 
e felt himself obliged to speak;
his voice, now, was loud and ringing. madame de renal's, on the other
hand, betrayed such emotion that her friend thought she must be ill
and suggested to her that they should go indoors. julien saw the
danger: 'if madame de renal returns to the drawing-room, i am going to
fall back into the horrible position i have been in all day. i have
not held this hand long enough to be able to reckon it as a definite
conquest.'

when madame derville repeated her suggestion that they should go into
the drawing-room, julien pressed the hand that lay in his.

madame de renal, who was preparing to rise, resumed her seat, saying
in a faint tone:

'i do, as a matter of fact, feel a little unwell, but the fresh air is
doing me good.'

th
 
 ___________________________
 
two hearers. and yet there was still a slight want of
courage in this eloquence which had suddenly come to him. he was in a
deadly fear lest madame derville, exhausted by the wind which was
beginning to rise, and heralded the storm, might decide to go in by
herself to the drawing-room.  then he would be left alone with madame
de renal. he had found almost by accident the blind courage which was
sufficient for action; but he felt that it lay beyond his power to
utter the simplest of words to madame de renal. however mild her
reproaches might be, he was going to be defeated, and the advantage
which he had just gained wiped out.

fortunately for him, this evening, his touching and emphatic speeches
found favour with madame derville, who as a rule found him as awkward
as a schoolboy, and by no means amusing. as for madame de renal, her
hand lying clasped in julien's, she had no thought of anything; she
was allowing herself to live. the hours they spent beneath this huge
lime, which, local tradition m
 
 ___________________________
 
aintained, had been planted by charles
the bold, were for her a time of happiness. she listened with rapture
to the moaning of the wind in the thick foliage of the lime, and the
sound of the first few drops that were beginning to fall upon its
lowest leaves. julien did not notice a detail which would have greatly
reassured him; madame de renal, who had been obliged to remove her
hand from his, on rising to help her cousin to pick up a pot of
flowers which the wind had overturned at their feet, had no sooner sat
down again than she gave him back her hand almost without difficulty,
and as though it had been an understood thing between them.

midnight had long since struck; at length it was time to leave the
garden: the party broke up. madame de renal, transported by the joy of
being in love, was so ignorant that she hardly reproached h
 
 ___________________________
 
erself at
all. happiness robbed her of sleep. a sleep like lead carried off
julien, utterly worn out by the battle that had been raging all day in
his heart between timidity and pride.

next morning he was called at five o'clock; and (what would have been
a cruel blow to madame de renal had she known of it) he barely gave
her a thought. he had done _his duty, and a heroic duty_. filled with
joy by this sentiment, he turned the key in the door of his bedroom
and gave himself up with an entirely new pleasure to reading about the
exploits of his hero.

when the luncheon bell sounded, he had forgotten, in reading the
reports of the grand army, all the advantages he had won overnight. he
said to himself, in a careless tone, as he went down to the
drawing-room: 'i must tell this wom
 
 ___________________________
 
an that i love her.'

instead of that gaze charged with passion which he expected to meet,
he found the stern face of m. de renal, who, having arrived a couple
of hours earlier from verrieres, did not conceal his displeasure on
finding that julien was wasting the whole morning without attending to
the children. no sight could have been so unprepossessing as that of
this self-important man, conscious of a grievance and confident of his
right to let it be seen.

each of her husband's harsh words pierced madame de renal to the
heart. as for julien, he was so plunged in ecstasy, still so absorbed
in the great events which for
 
 ___________________________
 
 the last few hours had been happening
before his eyes, that at first he could barely lower the pitch of his
attention to listen to the stern voice of m. de renal. at length he
answered him, sharply enough:

'i was unwell.'

the tone of this reply would have stung a man far less susceptible
than the mayor of verrieres; it occurred to him to reply to julien
with an immediate dismissal. he was restrained only by the maxim which
he had laid down for himself, never to be too hasty in business
matters.

'this young fool,' he soon reminded himself, 'has made himself a sort
of reputation in my house; valenod may take him on, or else he will
marry elisa, and, in
 
 ___________________________
 
 either case, he can afford to laugh at me in his
heart.'

despite the wisdom of these reflections, m. de renal's displeasure
found an outlet nevertheless in a succession of coarse utterances
which succeeded in irritating julien. madame de renal was on the point
of subsiding in tears.  as soon as the meal was ended, she asked
julien to give her his arm for their walk; she leaned upon it in a
friendly way. to all that madame de renal said to him, julien could
only murmur in reply:

'this is what rich people are like!'

m. de renal kept close beside them; his presence increased julien's
anger.  he noticed suddenly that madame de renal was leaning upon his
arm in a marked manner; this action horrified him, he repulsed her
violently, freeing his arm from hers.

fortunately m. de renal saw nothing of this fresh impertinence; it was
noticed only by madame derville; her friend burst into tears. at this
moment m. de renal began fl
 
 ___________________________
 
ave read in
it a vague hope of the most terrible revenge. it is doubtless to such
moments of humiliation that we owe men like robespierre.

'your julien is very violent, he frightens me,' madame derville
murmured to her friend.

'he has every reason to be angry,' the other replied. 'after the
astonishing progress the children have made with him, what does it
matter if he spends a morning without speaking to them? you must admit
that gentlemen are very hard.'

for the first time in her life, madame de renal felt a sort of desire
to be avenged on her husband. the intense hatred that animated julien
against rich people was about to break forth. fortunately m. de renal
called for his gardener, with whom for the rest of the time he busied
himself in stopping up with faggots of thorn the short cut that had
been made across the orchard. julien did not utter a single word in
reply to the attentions that were shown him throughout the remainder
of the walk. as soon as m. de renal had left them, the two lad
 
 ___________________________
 
 formed a striking contrast. he despised these women, and all
tender feelings.

'what!' he said to himself, 'not even an allowance of five hundred
francs to complete my studies! ah! how i should send her packing!'

absorbed in these drastic thoughts, the little that he deigned to take
in of the polite speeches of the two ladies displeased him as being
devoid of meaning, silly, feeble, in a word _feminine_.

by dint of talking for talking's sake, and of trying to keep the
conversation alive, madame de renal found herself saying that her
husband had come from verrieres because he had made a bargain, for the
purchase of maize straw, with one of his farmers. (in this district
maize straw is used to stuff the palliasses of the beds.)

'my husband will not be joining us again,' madame de renal went on:
'he will be busy with the gardener and his valet changing the straw in
all the palliasses in the house. this morning he put fresh straw on
all the beds on the first floor, now he is at work on the second
 
 ___________________________
 
.'

julien changed colour; he looked at madame de renal in an odd manner,
and presently drew her apart, so to speak, by increasing his pace.
madame derville allowed them to move away from her.

'save my life,' said julien to madame de renal, 'you alone can do it;
for you know that the valet hates me like poison. i must confess to
you, ma'am, that i have a portrait; i have hidden it in the palliasse
on my bed.'

at these words, madame de renal in turn grew pale.

'you alone, ma'am, can go into my room at this moment; feel, without
letting yourself be observed, in the corner of the palliasse nearest
to the window; you will find there a small box of shiny black
pasteboard.'

'it contains a portrait?' said madame de renal, barely able to stand.

her air of disappointment was noticed by julien, who at once took
advantage of it.

'i have a second favour to ask of you, ma'am; i beg you not to look at
the portrait, it is my secret.'

'it is
 
 ___________________________
 
 a secret!' repeated madame de renal, in faint accents.

but, albeit she had been reared among people proud of their wealth,
and sensible of pecuniary interests alone, love had already instilled
some generosity into her heart. though cruelly wounded, it was with an
air of the simplest devotion that madame de renal put to julien the
questions necessary to enable her to execute his commission properly.

'and so,' she said, as she left him, 'it is a little round box, of
black pasteboard, and very shiny.'

'yes, ma'am,' replied julien in that hard tone which danger gives a
man.

she mounted to the second floor of the house, as pale as though she
were going to her death. to complete her misery she felt that she was
on the point of fainting, but the necessity of doing julien a service
restored her strength.

'
 
 ___________________________
 
er extreme
ignorance was of service to her again at this moment; astonishment
tempered her grief.  julien appeared, snatched the box, without
thanking her, without saying a word, and ran into his bedroom, where
he struck a light and immediately destroyed it. he was pale,
speechless; he exaggerated to himself the risk he had been running.

'the portrait of napoleon,' he said to himself with a toss of the
head, 'found hidden in the room of a man who professes such hatred for
the usurper! found by m. de renal, so _ultra_ and so angry! and, to
complete the imprudence, on the white card at the back of the
portrait, lines in my writing! and lines that can leave no doubt as to
the warmth of my admiration! and each of those transports of love is
dated! there was one only two days ago!

'all my reputation brought down, destroyed in a moment!' julien said
to himself as he watched the box burn, 'and my reputation is all i
have, i live by it alone ... and what a life at that, great god!'

an hour later, his 
 
 ___________________________
 
exhaustion and the pity he felt for himself
disposed him to feel affection. he met madame de renal and took her
hand which he kissed with more sincerity than he had ever yet shown.
she coloured with delight, and almost simultaneously repulsed julien
with the anger of a jealous woman. julien's pride, so recently
wounded, made a fool of him at that moment. he saw in madame de renal
only a rich woman, he let fall her hand with contempt, and strode
away. he went out and walked pensively in the garden; presently a
bitter smile appeared on his lips.

'here i am walking about as calm as a man who is his own master! i am
not looking after the children! i am exposing myself to the
humiliating remarks of m. de renal, and he will be justified.' he
hastened to the children's room.

the caresses of the youngest boy, to whom he was greatly attached, did
something to soothe his agonis
 
 ___________________________
 
ing pain.

'this one does not despise me yet,' thought julien. but presently he
blamed himself for this relief from pain, as for a fresh weakness.
these children fondle me as they might fondle the puppy that was
bought yesterday.'




chapter 10
a large heart and a small fortune

  but passion most dissembles, yet betrays,
  even by its darkness; as the blackest sky
  foretells the heaviest tempest.
    _don juan_, i. 73

m. de renal, who was visiting every room in the house, reappeared in
the children's room with the servants who brought back the palliasses
refilled.  the sudden entry of this man was the last straw to julien.

paler, more sombre than usual, he advanced towards him. m. de renal
stood still and looked at his servants.

'sir,' julien began, 'do you suppose that with any other tutor your
children would have made the same progress that they have made with
me? if your answer is no,' he went on without giving m. 
 
 ___________________________
 
de renal time
to speak, 'how dare you presume to reproach me with neglecting them?'

m. de renal, who had barely recovered from his alarm, concluded from
the strange tone which he saw this young peasant adopt that he had in
his pocket some more attractive offer and was going to leave him.
julien's anger increasing as he spoke:

'i can live without you, sir,' he concluded.

'i am extremely sorry to see you so agitated,' replied m. de renal,
stammering a little. the servants were a few feet away, and were
occupied in making the beds.

'that is not enough for me, sir,' julien went on, beside himself with
rage; 'think of the abominable things you said to me, and in the
presence of ladies, too!'

m. de renal was only too well aware of what julien was asking, and
conflicting passions did battle in his heart. it so happened that
julien, now really mad with rage, exclaimed: 'i know where to go, sir,
when i leave your house.'

on hearing
 
 ___________________________
 
 these words, m. de renal had a vision of julien established
in m. valenod's household.

'very well, sir,' he said at length with a sigh, and the air of a man
calling in a surgeon to perform the most painful operation, 'i agree
to your request. from the day after tomorrow, which is the first of
the month, i shall give you fifty francs monthly.'

julien wanted to laugh and remained speechless: his anger had
completely vanished.

'i did not despise the animal enough,' he said to himself. 'this, no
doubt, is the most ample
 
 ___________________________
 
 apology so base a nature is capable of
making.'

the children, who had listened to this scene open-mouthed, ran to the
garden to tell their mother that m. julien was in a great rage, but
that he was to have fifty francs a month.

julien went after them from force of habit, without so much as a
glance at m. de renal, whom he left in a state of intense annoyance.

'that's a hundred and sixty-eight francs,' the mayor said to himself,
'that m. valenod has cost me. i must really say a few firm words to
him about his contract to supply the foundlings.'

a moment later, julien again stood before him.

'i have a matter of conscience to discuss with m. chelan. i have the
honour to inform you that i shall be absent for some hours.'

'ah, my dear julien,' said m. de renal, laughing in the most insincere
manner, 'the
 
 ___________________________
 
 whole day, if you wish, the whole of tomorrow, my worthy
friend. take the gardener's horse to go to verrieres.'

'there,' m. de renal said to himself, 'he's going with an answer to
valenod; he's given me no promise, but we must let the young hothead
cool down.'

julien made a speedy escape and climbed up among the big woods through
which one can go from vergy to verrieres. he was in no hurry to reach
m. chelan's. so far from desiring to involve himself in a fresh
display of hypocrisy, he needed time to see clearly into his own
heart, and to give audience to the swarm of conflicting feelings that
disturbed it.

'i have won a b
 
 ___________________________
 
attle,' he said to himself as soon as he found himself
in the shelter of the woods and out of sight of anyone, 'i have really
won a battle!'

the last word painted his whole position for him in glowing colours,
and restored some degree of tranquillity to his heart.

'here i am with a salary of fifty francs a month; m. de renal must be
in a fine fright. but of what?'

his meditation as to what could have frightened the prosperous and
powerful man against whom, an hour earlier, he had been seething with
rage completely restored julien's serenity. he was almost conscious,
for a moment, of the exquisite beauty of the woods through which he
was walking.  enormous fragments of bare rock had in times past fallen
into the heart of the forest from the side of the mountain. tall
beeches rose almost as high as these rocks whose
 
 ___________________________
 
-men. this natural position made him smile,
it suggested to him the position to which he was burning to attain in
the moral sphere. the pure air of these lofty mountains breathed
serenity and even joy into his soul.  the mayor of verrieres might
still, in his eyes, be typical of all the rich and insolent denizens
of the earth, but julien felt that the hatred which had convulsed him
that afternoon contained, notwithstanding its violence, no element of
personal ill-feeling. should he cease to see m. de renal, within a
week he would have forgotten him, the man himself, his house, his
dogs, his children and all that was his. 'i have forced him, i do not
know how, to make the greatest of sacrifices. what, more than fifty
crowns a year? a moment earlier i had just escaped from the greatest
danger. that makes two victories in one day; the second contains no
merit, i must try to discover the reason. but we can leave such
arduous research for tomorrow.'

julien, erect upon his mighty rock, gazed at the sk
 
 ___________________________
 
ts of the fair cousins. they awaited his
coming with impatience. he took his accustomed seat, by madame de
renal's side. the darkness soon became intense. he attempted to clasp
a white hand which for some time he had seen close beside him, resting
on the back of a chair.  there was some hesitation shown, but finally
the hand was withdrawn from him in a manner which betokened
displeasure. julien was prepared to regard this as final, and to
continue the conversation in a light tone, when he heard m. de renal
approach.

the rude words of the morning still rang in julien's ears. 'would it
not,' he said to himself, 'be a good way of scoring off this creature,
so lavishly endowed with every material advantage, to take possession
of his wife's hand under his very eyes? yes, i will do it, i, for whom
he has shown such contempt.'

>from that moment peace of mind, so ill assorted to julien's character,
speedily vanished; he desired most anxiously, and without being able
to fix his mind on anything else, th
 
 ___________________________
 
at madame de renal might consent
to let him hold her hand.

m. de renal talked politics in an angry tone: two or three
manufacturers at verrieres were becoming decidedly richer than
himself, and wished to oppose him at the elections. madame derville
listened to him. julien, irritated by this talk, moved his chair
nearer to madame de renal's. the darkness hid every movement. he
ventured to place his hand close to the pretty arm which her gown left
bare. troubled, no longer conscious of what he was doing, he moved his
cheek in the direction of this pretty arm, and made bold to press his
lips to it.

madame de renal shuddered. her husband was a few feet away, she
hastened to give julien her hand, at the same time thrusting him
slightly from her.  while m. de renal continued his abuse of the
good-for-nothings and jacobins who were m
 
 ___________________________
 
aking fortunes, julien
covered the hand which had been left in his with passionate kisses, or
so at least they seemed to madame de renal.  and yet the poor woman
had been furnished with proof, on this fatal day, that the heart of
the man whom she adored without confessing it was pledged elsewhere!
throughout the hours of julien's absence, she had been a prey to the
most abject misery, which had made her think.

'what,' she said to herself, 'am i to love, to have love offered to
me? am i, a married woman, to fall in love? but,' she reminded
herself, 'i have never felt that dark passion for my husband, and so i
cannot tear my mind
 
 ___________________________
 
 from julien. at heart he is only a boy filled with
respect for me! this folly will pass. how can it concern my husband
what feelings i may entertain for this young man? m. de renal would be
bored by the talks i have with julien, about things of the
imagination. he himself thinks only about his business.  i am taking
nothing from him to give to julien.'

no trace of hypocrisy came to sully the purity of this simple soul,
carried away by a passion such as she had never felt. she was
deceived, but quite unawares, and at the same time a virtuous instinct
had taken alarm. such were the conflicts that were agitating her when
julien appeared in the garden. she heard his voice, a
 
 ___________________________
 
t, prevails over everything else.

presently, however, he put down the book. by dint of dreaming of
napoleon's victories, he had discerned a new element in his own. 'yes,
i have won a battle,' he told himself, 'but i must follow it up, i
must crush the arrogance of this proud gentleman while he is still
retreating. that is napoleon out and out. i must ask him for three
days' holiday, to go and see my friend fouque. if he refuses, i again
offer to break the agreement; but he will give way.'

madame de renal could not close an eye. she felt that she had never
lived until that moment. she could not tear her mind from the
happiness of feeling julien cover her hand with burning kisses.

suddenly the horrid word _adultery_ occurred to her. all the most
disgusting implications that the vilest debauchery can impart to the
idea of sensual love came crowding into her imagination. these ideas
sought to tarnish the tender and godlike image that she had made for
herself of julien and of the pleasure of loving
 
 ___________________________
 
riage. it warned her of the danger of
confiding in a husband, who is after all a master. in the intensity of
her grief she wrung her hands.

she was carried away indiscriminately by conflicting and painful
imaginings. at one moment she was afraid of not being loved in return,
at another the fearful thought of the crime tortured her as though on
the morrow she would have to be exposed in the pillory, on the public
square of verrieres, with a placard proclaiming her adultery to the
populace.

madame de renal was without any experience of life; even when wide
awake and in the full exercise of her reason, she would have seen no
distinction between being guilty in the sight of god and finding
herself publicly greeted with all the most flagrant marks of general
opprobrium.

when the frightful idea of adultery and of all the ignominy which (she
supposed) that crime brings in its train gave her at length a respite,
and she began to dream of the delight of living with julien
innocently, as in the past, sh
 
 ___________________________
 
und herself swept away by the
horrible thought that julien was in love with another woman.  she saw
once again his pallor when he was afraid of losing her portrait, or of
compromising her by letting it be seen. for the first time, she had
surprised signs of fear on that calm and noble countenance. never had
he shown himself in such a state for her or for her children. this
additional grief carried her to the utmost intensity of anguish which
the human soul is able to endure.  unconsciously, madame de renal
uttered cries which roused her maid.  suddenly she saw appear by her
bedside the light of a lamp, and recognised elisa.

'is it you that he loves?' she cried in her frenzy.

the maid, amazed at the fearful distress in which she found her
mistress, paid no attention fortunately to this singular utterance.
madame de renal realised her own imprudence: 'i am feverish,' she told
her, 'and i think, a little light-headed; stay beside me.'

thoroughly awakened by the necessity of controlling herself, s
 
 ___________________________
 
he felt
less wretched; reason resumed the sway of which her state of
drowsiness had deprived it. to escape from the fixed stare of her
maid, she ordered her to read the newspaper aloud, and it was to the
monotonous sound of the girl's voice, reading a long article from the
_quotidienne_, that madame de renal formed the virtuous resolution to
treat julien with absolute coldness when next she saw him.




chapter 12
a journey


  in paris you find elegant people, there may be people with character
  in the provinces.
    sieyes

next morning, at five o'clock, before madame de renal was visible,
julien had obtained from her husband three days' leave of absence.
contrary to his expectation, julien found himself longing to see her
again, and could think of nothing but that shapely hand. he went down
to 
 
 ___________________________
 
the garden, madame de renal was long in coming. but if julien had
been in love with her he would have seen her, behind her half-closed
shutters on the first floor, her face pressed to the glass. she was
watching him. at length, in spite of her resolutions, she decided to
show herself in the garden. her customary pallor had given place to
the most glowing colour. this simple-minded woman was evidently
agitated: a feeling of constraint and even of resentment marred that
expression of profound serenity, as though raised abov
 
 ___________________________
 
renal was greatly distressed by this. the virtuous coldness which
she had meant to impart to her greeting gave way to an expression of
interest, and of an interest animated by the surprise of the sudden
change which she had just beheld in him. the flow of idle words that
people exchange in the morning with regard to one another's health, to
the beauty of the day, and so forth, dried up at once in them both.
julien, whose judgment was not disturbed by any passion, soon found a
way of letting madame de renal see how little he regarded himself as
being on terms of friendship with her; he said nothing to her of the
little expedition on which he was starting, bowed to her, and set off.

as she watched him go, overwhelmed by the sombre pride which she read
in that glance, so friendly the evening before, her eldest son, who
came running up from the other end of the garden, said to her as he
embraced her:

'we have a holiday, m. julien is going on a journey.'

at these words madame de renal felt herself 
 
 ___________________________
 
ged by the sum of 600 francs, which he must now be prepared to
spend annually.  yesterday, at verrieres, he will have asked for three
days in which to think things over; and this morning, so as not to be
obliged to give me an answer, the young gentleman goes off to the
mountains. to have to reckon with a wretched workman who puts on airs,
that's what we've come to!'

'since my husband, who does not know how deeply he has wounded julien,
thinks he is going to leave us, what am i to suppose?' madame de renal
asked herself. 'ah! it is all settled!'

so as to be able at least to weep in freedom, and without having to
answer madame derville's questions, she pleaded a splitting headache,
and retired to bed.

'there you have a woman all over,' m. de renal repeated; 'there's
always something wrong with those complicated machines.' and he went
on his way jeering.

while madame de renal was at the mercy of the most cruel inflictions
of the terrible passion into which accident had led her, julien was
making
 
 ___________________________
 
o
cover before coming down to the hamlet in which fouque lived. before
leaving the little cave, julien struck a light and carefully destroyed
all that he had written.

he greatly astonished his friend by knocking at his door at one
o'clock in the morning. he found fouque engaged in making up his
accounts. he was a young man of tall stature, none too well made, with
large, hard features, a huge nose, and plenty of good nature concealed
beneath this repellent aspect.

'you've quarrelled with your m. de renal, then, that you come here of
a sudden like this?'

julien related to him, with suitable omissions, the events of the
previous evening.

'stay with me,' fouque said to him; 'i see that you know m. de renal,
m. valenod, the sub-prefect maugiron, the cure chelan; you have
grasped all the subtle points of their natures; you're ripe now to put
yourself up for auction. you know arithmetic better than i do, you
shall keep my books; i am making a big profit from my business. the
impossibility of doing 
 
 ___________________________
 
her i shall still
preserve the sacred fire with which one makes oneself a name?'

the following morning, julien replied with great coolness to the
worthy fouque, who looked upon the matter of their partnership as
settled, that his vocation to the sacred ministry of the altar did not
allow him to accept. fouque could not believe his ears.

'but do you realise,' he kept on saying, 'that i make you my partner,
or, if you prefer, give you four thousand francs a year? and you want
to go back to your m. de renal, who despises you like the mud on his
shoes! when you have two hundred louis in hand, what is to prevent you
from entering the seminary? i will say more, i undertake to procure
for you the best parish in the district. for,' fouque went on,
lowering his voice, 'i supply firewood to the ----, and the ----, and
m. ----. i give them the best quality of oak, for which they pay me
the price of white wood, but never was money better invested.'

nothing could prevail against julien's vocation. in the e
 
 ___________________________
 
himself; and this was the doubt that pained him most. 'i am not
of the stuff of which great men are made, since i am afraid that eight
years spent in providing myself with bread may rob me of that sublime
energy which makes men do extraordinary things.'




chapter 13
open-work stockings

  a novel is a mirror taken along a road.
    saint-real

when julien caught sight of the picturesque ruins of the old church of
vergy, it occurred to him that for two whole days he had not once
thought of madame de renal. the other day, as i was leaving, that
woman reminded me of the vast gulf that separates us, she treated me
like a workman's son. no doubt she wished to show me that she repented
of having let me hold her hand the night before ... it is a lovely
hand, all the same! what charm, what nobility dwells in that woman's
glance!'

the possibility of making a fortune with fouque gave a certain
facility to the course of julien's reasoning; it was less often
interrupted by irritation, and the keen sense o
 
 ___________________________
 
f his own poverty and
humble position in the eyes of the world. as though perched on a lofty
promontory, he was able to judge, and, so to speak, overlooked extreme
poverty on the one hand and that life of comfort which he still called
riches on the other. he was far from considering his position like a
philosopher, but he had sufficient perception to feel that he was
_different_ after this little expedition among the mountains.

he was struck by the extreme uneasiness with which madame de renal
listened to the short account of his journey, for which she had asked
him.

fouque had had thoughts of marriage, unhappy love affairs; the
conversation between the friends had been filled with long confidences
of this nature.  after finding happiness too soon, fouque had
discovered that he was not the sole possessor of his mistress's heart.
these disclosures had astonished julien; he had learned much that was
new to him. his solitary life, compounded of imagination and
suspicion, had kept him a
 
 ___________________________
 
loof from everything that could have
enlightened him.

during his absence, life had been for madame de renal nothing more
than a succession of torments, each different but all alike
intolerable; she was really ill.

'you must not, on any account,' madame derville told her when she saw
julien return, 'feeling as you do, sit in the garden this evening, the
damp air would make you worse.'

madame derville was surprised to see that her friend, who was always
being scolded by m. de renal for the undue simplicity of her attire,
had put on open-work stockings and a pair of charming little shoes
that had arrived from paris. for the last three days madame de renal's
sole distraction had been to cut out and make elisa put together in
all haste a summer gown, of a charming little fabric greatly in
fashion. it was just possible to finish this gown a few minutes after
julien's arrival; madame de renal at once put it on. her friend had no
longer any doubt.

'she is in love, poor woman!'
 
 ___________________________
 
 madame derville said to herself. she
understood all the strange symptoms of her illness.

she saw her speak to julien. pallor took the place of the most vivid
blushes. anxiety stood revealed in her eyes, fastened on those of the
young tutor. madame de renal expected every moment that he was going
to offer an explanation, and announce that he was leaving the house,
or would remain.  it never occurred to julien to say anything about
this subject, which had not entered his thoughts. after a terrible
struggle, madame de renal at last ventured to say to him, in a
tremulous voice, in which the whole extent of her passion lay
revealed:

'are you going to leave your pupils to take a post elsewhere?'

julien was struck by her quavering voice and by the loo
 
 ___________________________
 
ogance.' this
glimpse of their respective positions came to julien like a flash of
lightning; he replied, hesitatingly:

'i should greatly regret leaving such attractive and _well-born_
children, but perhaps it will be inevitable. a man has duties towards
himself also.'

as he uttered the words well born (this was one of the aristocratic
expressions which julien had recently acquired), he burned with a
strong feeling of antipathy.

'to this woman,' he said to himself, 'i am not well born.'

madame de renal, as she listened to him, was admiring his
intelligence, his beauty, her heart was pierced by the possibility of
departure which he dangled before her. all her friends from verrieres
who, during julien's absence, had come out to dine at vergy, had
almost vied in complimenting her upon the astonishing young man that
her husband had had the good fortune to unearth. this was not to say
that they understood anything of the progress that the children had
made. the fact of his knowing the bible by hea
 
 ___________________________
 
rt, and in latin, too,
had provoked in the inhabitants of verrieres an admiration that will
endure for, it may be, a century.

julien, who spoke to no one, knew nothing of all this. if madame de
renal had had the slightest self-control, she would have congratulated
him on the reputation he had won, and julien, his pride set at rest,
would have been pleasant and affable to her, all the more as her new
gown seemed to him charming. madame de renal, also pleased with her
pretty gown, and with what julien said to her about it, had proposed a
turn in the garden; soon she had confessed that she was not well
enough to walk. she had taken the returned traveller's arm, and, far
from restoring her strength, the contact of that arm deprived her of
what little strength remained to her.

it was dark; no sooner were they seated than julien, relying on the
privilege he had already won, ventured to press his lips to the arm of
his pretty neighbour, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d to take her hand. he was thinking of the
boldness which fouque had used with his mistresses, and not of madame
de renal; the phrase _well born_ still weighed upon his heart. his own
hand was pressed, but this afforded him no pleasure. far from his
being proud, or even grateful for the affection which madame de renal
betrayed this evening by unmistakable signs, beauty, elegance,
freshness found him almost unconscious of their appeal. purity of
heart, freedom from any feeling of hatred, serve doubtless to prolong
the duration of youth. it is the face that ages first in the majority
of beautiful women.

julien was sullen all the evening; hitherto he had been angry only
with fortune and with society; now that fouque had offered him an
ignoble way of arriving at comfort, he was angry with himself.
absorbed in h
 
 ___________________________
 
rred
to him before he received the artless confidences of his friend.

the sudden resolution he had just made formed a pleasing distraction.
he said to himself: 'i must have one of these two women'; he realised
that he would greatly have preferred to pay his court to madame
derville; it was not that she was more attractive, but she had seen
him always as a tutor honoured for his learning, and not as a working
carpenter, with a ratteen jacket folded under his arm, as he had first
appeared to madame de renal.

it was precisely as a young workman, blushing to the whites of his
eyes, hesitating outside the door of the house and not venturing to
ring the bell, that madame de renal delighted most to picture him.

as he followed up this survey of his position, julien saw that he must
not think of attempting the conquest of madame derville, who had
probably noticed the weakness that madame de renal showed for him.
forced to return to the latter: 'what do i know of this woman's
character?' julien asked hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 the heart of a young man, if he has any education, is a
thousand leagues from that devil-may-care attitude without which love
is often only the most tedious duty.

'i owe it to myself all the more,' went on julien's petty vanity, 'to
succeed with this woman, so that if i ever make my fortune, and
someone reproaches me with having filled the humble post of tutor, i
may let it be understood that it was love that brought me into that
position.'

julien once more withdrew his hand from that of madame de renal, then
took her hand again and pressed it. as they returned to the
drawing-room, towards midnight, madame de renal murmured in his ear:

'are you leaving us, are you going away?'

julien answered with a sigh:

'i must indeed go away, for i love you passionately; it is a sin ...
and what a sin for a young priest!'

madame de renal leaned upon his arm, bending towards him until her
cheek felt the warmth of his.

the night passed for these two people very differently. madame de
renal was exalted by
 
 ___________________________
 
 transports of the most lofty moral pleasure. a
coquettish girl who falls in love early grows accustomed to the
distress of love; when she comes to the age of true passion, the charm
of novelty is lacking. as madame de renal had never read any novels,
all the refinements of her happiness were new to her. no melancholy
truth came to freeze her heart, not even the spectre of the future.
she saw herself as happy in ten years' time as she was at that moment.
even the thought of virtue and of the fidelity she had vowed to m. de
renal, which had distressed her some days before, presented itself in
vain, she dismissed it like an importunate stranger. 'never will i
allow julien to take any liberty,' madame de renal told he
 
 ___________________________
 
age. he was afraid of madame de
renal because of her pretty gown. this gown was in his eyes the
advance guard of paris. his pride was determined to leave nothing to
chance and to the inspiration of the moment. drawing upon fouque's
confessions and the little he had read about love in the bible, he
prepared a plan of campaign in great detail. since, though he did not
admit it to himself, he was extremely anxious, he committed this plan
to writing.

the following morning, in the drawing-room, madame de renal was alone
with him for a moment.

'have you no other name besides julien?' she asked him.

our hero did not know what answer to give to so flattering a question.
no provision had been made in his plan for such an event. but for the
stupid mistake of making a plan, julien's quick mind would soon have
come to his rescue, his surprise would only have added to the keenness
of his perceptions.

he was awkward and exaggerated his own awkwardness. madame de renal
soon forgave him that. she saw in it t
 
 ___________________________
 
he effect of a charming candour.
and the one thing lacking, to her mind, in this man, who was
considered so brilliant, was an air of candour.

'i don't at all trust your little tutor,' madame derville said to her
on several occasions. 'he seems to me to be always thinking and to act
only from motives of policy. he's crafty.'

julien remained deeply humiliated by the disaster of not having known
what answer to make to madame de renal.

'a man of my sort owes it to himself to make up for this check'; and,
seizing the moment at which she passed from one room to another, he
did what he considered his duty by giving madame de renal a kiss.

nothing could have been less appropriate, less agreeable either to
himself or to her, nor could anything have been more imprudent. they
barely escaped being caught. madame de renal thought him mad. she was
frightened and even more shocked. this stupidity reminded her of m.
valenod.

'what wo
 
 ___________________________
 
she asked herself, 'if i were left alone
with him?' all her virtue returned, for her love was in eclipse.

she arranged matters so that there should always be one of her
children with her.

the day passed slowly for julien, he spent the whole of it in clumsily
carrying out his plan of seduction. he never once looked at madame de
renal without embodying a question in his look; he was not, however,
such a fool as not to see that he was failing completely to be
agreeable, let alone seductive.

madame de renal could not get over her astonishment at finding him so
awkward and at the same time so bold. 'it is the timidity of love in a
man of parts!' she said to herself at length, with an inexpressible
joy. 'can it be possible that he has never been loved by my rival!'

after luncheon, madame de renal returned to the drawing-room to
entertain m. charcot de maugiron, the sub-prefect of bray. she was
working at a little tapestry frame on a tall stand. madame derville
was by her side. it was in this positi
 
 ___________________________
 
on, and in the full light of
day, that our hero thought fit to thrust forward his boot and press
the pretty foot of madame de renal, whose open-work stocking and smart
parisian shoe were evidently attracting the gaze of the gallant
sub-prefect.

madame de renal was extremely alarmed; she let fall her scissors, her
ball of wool, her needles, and julien's movement could thus pass for a
clumsy attempt to prevent the fall of the scissors, which he had seen
slipping down. fortunately these little scissors of english steel
broke, and madame de renal could not sufficiently express her regret
that julien had not been nearer at hand.

'you saw them falling before i did, you might have caught them; your
zeal has only succeeded in giving me a violent kick.'

all
 
 ___________________________
 
 this play-acting took in the sub-prefect, but not madame derville.
'this pretty youth has very bad manners!' she thought; the
worldly-wisdom of a provincial capital can never pardon mistakes of
this sort. madame de renal found an opportunity of saying to julien:

'be careful, i order you.'

julien realised his own clumsiness, and was annoyed. for a long time
he debated within himself whether he ought to take offence at the
words: 'i order you.' he was foolish enough to think: 'she might say
to me "i order you" if it was something to do with the children's
education; but in responding to my love, she assumes equality. one
cannot love without equality'; and he lost himself in composing
commonplaces on the subject
 
 ___________________________
 
ity. he repeated angrily to
himself the verse of corneille which madame derville had taught him a
few days earlier:

  love creates equalities, it does not seek them.

julien, insisting upon playing the part of a don juan, he who had
never had a mistress in his life, was deadly dull for the rest of the
day. he had only one sensible idea; bored with himself and with madame
de renal, he saw with alarm the evening approach when he would be
seated in the garden, by her side and in the dark. he told m. de renal
that he was going to verrieres to see the cure; he set off after
dinner, and did not return until late at night.

at verrieres, julien found m. chelan engaged in packing up; he had at
last been deprived of his benefice; the vicar maslon was to succeed
him. julien helped the good cure, and it occurred to him to write to
fouque that the irresistible vocation which he felt for the sacred
ministry had prevented him at first from accepting his friend's
obliging offer, but that he had just witnessed 
 
 ___________________________
 
ient d'amour la mort,
  et, par avant, soulcy qui mord,
  deuil, plours, pieges, forfaitz, remord . ..
    _blason d'amour_

if julien had had a little of that discernment which he so
gratuitously supposed himself to possess, he might have congratulated
himself next day on the effect produced by his visit to verrieres. his
absence had caused his clumsiness to be forgotten. all that day too,
he was inclined to sulk; towards nightfall a preposterous idea
occurred to him, and he imparted it to madame de renal with a rare
intrepidity.

no sooner had they sat down in the garden than, without waiting for a
sufficient cloak of darkness, julien put his lips to madame de renal's
ear, and, at the risk of compromising her horribly, said to her:

'tonight, ma'am, at two o'clock, i am coming to your room, i have
something to say to you.'

julien was trembling lest his request should be granted; the part of a
seducer was so horrible a burden that if he had been free to follow
his own inclination, he would have
 
 ___________________________
 
 retired to his room for some days,
and not set eyes on the ladies again. he realised that, by his clever
tactics of yesterday, he had squandered all the promise of the day
before, and really he did not know where to turn.

madame de renal replied with a genuine and by no means exaggerated
indignation to the impertinent announcement which julien had had the
audacity to make. he thought he could read scorn in her brief answer.
it was certain that in this answer, uttered in the lowest of tones,
the word 'fie!' had figured. making the excuse that he had something
to say to the children, julien went up to their room, and on his
return placed himself by the side of madame derville and at a distance
from madame de renal. he thus remove
 
 ___________________________
 
d from himself all possibility of
taking her hand. the conversation took a serious turn, and julien held
his own admirably, apart from a few intervals of silence during which
he cudgelled his brains. 'why cannot i think of some fine plan,' he
asked himself, 'to force madame de renal to show me those unmistakable
marks of affection which made me imagine, three days ago, that she was
mine!'

julien was extremely disconcerted by the almost desperate situation
into which he had been led. and yet nothing could have embarrassed him
so much as success.

when the party broke up at midnight, his pessimism led him to believe
that madame derville looked upon him with contempt, and that probably
he stood no higher in the favour of madame de renal.

being in an extremely bad temper and
 
 ___________________________
 
 at two o'clock,' he said to
himself as he rose; 'i may be inexperienced and coarse, as is natural
in the son of a peasant, madame derville has let me see that plainly
enough; but at any rate i will not be weak.'

julien had every right to praise his own courage, never had he set
himself a more painful task. as he opened the door of his room, he
trembled so much that his knees gave way beneath him, and he was
obliged to lean against the wall.

he was in his stockinged feet. he went to listen at m. de renal's
door, through which he could hear him snoring. this dismayed him. he
had no longer any excuse for not going to her. but, great god! what
should he do when he got there? he had no plan, and even if he had had
one, he was in such distress of mind that he would not have been in a
fit state to put it into practice.

finally, with an anguish a thousand times keener than if he had been
going to the scaffold, he entered the little corridor that led to
madame de renal's room. he opened the door with 
 
 ___________________________
 
a trembling hand,
making a fearful noise as he did so.

there was a light in the room, a night light was burning in the
fireplace; he had not expected this fresh calamity. seeing him enter,
madame de renal sprang quickly out of bed. 'wretch!' she cried. there
was some confusion.  julien forgot his futile plans and returned to
his own natural character.  not to please so charming a woman seemed
to him the greatest disaster possible. his only answer to her
reproaches was to fling himself at her feet, clasping her round the
knees. as she spoke to him with extreme harshness, he burst into
tears.

some hours later, when julien emerged from madame de renal's room, one
might have said, in the language o
 
 ___________________________
 
 their vivacity, the idea of duty was
continually before his eyes. he feared a terrible remorse, and undying
ridicule, should he depart from the ideal plan that he had set himself
to follow. in a word, what made julien a superior being was precisely
what prevented him from enjoying the happiness that sprang up at his
feet. he was like a girl of sixteen who has a charming complexion and,
before going to a ball, is foolish enough to put on rouge.

in mortal terror at the apparition of julien, madame de renal was soon
a prey to the cruellest alarms. julien's tears and despair distressed
her greatly.

indeed, when she had no longer anything to refuse him, she thrust him
from her, with genuine indignation, and then flung herself into his
arms. no purpose was apparent in all this behaviour. she thought
herself damned without remission, and sought to shut out the vision of
hell by showering the most passionate caresses on julien. in a word,
nothing would have been wanting to complete our hero's happines
 
 ___________________________
 
desire, and has not yet acquired
any memories. like a soldier returning from a parade, julien was
busily engaged in reviewing all the details of his conduct. 'have i
failed in one of the duties i owe to myself? have i really played my
part?'

and what a part! the part of a man accustomed to shine before women.




chapter 16
the day after


  he turn'd his lips to hers, and with his hand
  call'd back the tangles of her wandering hair.
    _don juan_, i. 170

fortunately for julien's pride, madame de renal had been too greatly
agitated and surprised to notice the fatuity of the man who in a
moment had become everything in the world to her.

as she was imploring him to withdraw, seeing the day begin to break:

'oh, heavens!' she said, 'if my husband has heard any sound, i am
lost.'

julien, who had leisure for composing phrases, remembered one to the
point:

'should you regret your life?'

'ah! very much at this moment, but i should not regret having known
you.'

julien found that his dignity requ
 
 ___________________________
 
ired him to return to his room in
broad daylight and with deliberate want of precaution.

the continuous attention with which he watched his own slightest
actions, in the insane idea of being taken for a man of experience,
had this one advantage; when he saw madame de renal again, at
luncheon, his behaviour was a miracle of prudence.

as for her, she could not look at him without blushing to the whites
of her eyes, and could not live for an instant without looking at him;
she noticed her own confusion, and her efforts to conceal it
increased. julien raised his eyes to hers once only. at first, madame
de renal admired his prudence.  presently, seeing that this solitary
glance was not repeated, she took alarm: 'can it be that he does not
love me any more,' she asked
 
 ___________________________
 
 herself; 'alas, i am far too old for him;
i am ten years his senior.'

on the way from the dining-room to the garden, she pressed julien's
hand.  in the surprise that he felt at so extraordinary a token of
affection, he gazed at her with passion; for she had struck him as
looking very pretty at luncheon, and, without raising his eyes, he had
spent his time making a detailed catalogue of her charms. this look
consoled madame de renal; it did not remove all her uneasiness; but
her uneasiness removed, almost entirely, the remorse she felt when she
thought of her husband.

at luncheon, the said husband had noticed nothing; not so with madame
derville; she feared madame de renal to be on the point of succumbing.
all through the day, her bold, incisive friendship did not spare the
other those hinted suggestions intended to portray in hideous colours
the danger that she was running.

madame de renal was burning to be left alone w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith julien; she wanted
to ask him whether he still loved her. despite the unalterable
gentleness of her nature, she was more than once on the point of
letting her friend know what a nuisance she was making of herself.

that evening, in the garden, madame derville arranged things so
skilfully that she found herself placed between madame de renal and
julien. madame de renal, who had formed a delicious image of the
pleasure of pressing julien's hand and carrying it to her lips, could
not so much as address a word to him.

this catastrophe increased her agitation. remorse for one thing was
gnawing her. she had so scolded julien for the imprudence he had shown
in coming to her room the night before, that she trembled lest he
might not come that night. she left the garden early, and went up to
wait in her room. but, beside herself with impatience, she rose and
went to
 
 ___________________________
 
seemed to her the last word in lowness, for it serves as text to a
country maxim.

the servants were not all in bed. prudence obliged her finally to
return to her own room. two hours of waiting were two centuries of
torment.

but julien was too loyal to what he called his duty, to fail in the
execution, detail by detail, of what he had laid down for himself.

as one o'clock struck, he slipped quietly from his room, made sure
that the master of the house was sound asleep, and appeared before
madame de renal.  on this occasion he found greater happiness with his
mistress, for he was less continually thinking of the part he had to
play. he had eyes to see and ears to hear. what madame de renal said
to him about his age contributed to give him some degree of
self-assurance.

'alas! i am ten years older than you! how can you love me?' she
repeated without any object, simply because the idea oppressed her.

julien could not conceive such a thing, but he saw that her distress
was genuine, and almost ent
 
 ___________________________
 
nsports reassured his coy
mistress, she recovered some degree of happiness and the faculty of
criticising her lover. fortunately, he showed almost nothing, on this
occasion, of that borrowed air which had made their meeting the night
before a victory, but not a pleasure. had she noticed his intentness
upon playing a part, the painful discovery would have robbed her of
all happiness for ever. she could have seen in it nothing else than a
painful consequence of their disparity of age.

albeit madame de renal had never thought about theories of love,
difference of age is, next to difference of fortune, one of the great
commonplaces of provincial humour, whenever there is any talk of love.

in a few days, julien, all the ardour of his youth restored, was madly
in love.

'one must admit,' he said to himself, 'that her kindness of heart is
angelic, and that no one could be prettier.'

he had almost entirely lost the idea of a part to be played. in a
moment of unrestrained impulse, he even confessed to 
 
 ___________________________
 
her all his
anxieties. this confidence raised to its climax the passion that he
inspired. 'so i have not had any fortunate rival,' madame de renal
said to herself with ecstasy.  she ventured to question him as to the
portrait in which he took such an interest; julien swore to her that
it was that of a man.

when madame de renal was calm enough to reflect, she could not get
over her astonishment that such happiness could exist and that she had
never had the slightest idea of it.

'ah!' she said to herself, 'if i had known julien ten years ago, when
i might still be considered pretty!'

julien's thoughts were worlds apart from these. his love was still
founded in ambition: it was the joy of possessing--he, a poor creature
so unfortunate and so despised--so noble and beautiful a woman. his
acts of adoration, his transpor
 
 ___________________________
 
ts at the sight of his mistress's
charms, ended by reassuring her somewhat as to the difference in age.
had she possessed a little of that worldly wisdom a woman of thirty
has long enjoyed in more civilised lands, she would have shuddered for
the continuance of a love which seemed to exist only upon surprise and
the titillation of self-esteem.

in the moments when he forgot his ambition, julien went into
transports over everything that madame de renal possessed, including
her hats and gowns. he could not tire of the pleasure of inhaling
their perfume. he opened her wardrobe and stood for hours on end
marvelling at the beauty and neat arrangement of everything inside.
his mistress, leaning upon his shoulder, gazed at him; he himself
gazed at those ornaments and fripperies which on a wedding day are
displayed among the presents.

'i might have married a man like this!' madame de renal sometimes
thought; 'what a fiery spirit! what a rapturous l
 
 ___________________________
 
le things this young man endowed
with genius whom everyone regarded as bound one day to go so far. even
the sub-prefect and m. valenod could not help admiring him: she
thought the better of them accordingly. as for madame derville, these
were by no means her sentiments. in despair at what she thought she
could discern, and seeing that her wise counsel was becoming hateful
to a woman who had positively lost her head, she left vergy without
offering an explanation for which she was not asked. madame de renal
shed a few tears at her departure, and soon it seemed to her that
her happiness was doubled. by the withdrawal of her guest she found
herself left alone with her lover almost all day long.

julien gave himself all the more readily to the pleasant society of
his mistress inasmuch as, whenever he was left too long by himself,
fouque's fatal offer recurred to his mind to worry him. in the first
days of this new life, there were moments when he, who had never
loved, who had never been loved by anyo
 
 ___________________________
 
ne, found so exquisite a
pleasure in being sincere, that he was on the point of confessing to
madame de renal the ambition which until then had been the very
essence of his existence. he would have liked to be able to consult
her as to the strange temptation which he felt in fouque's offer, but
a trifling occurrence put a stop to all frankness.




chapter 17
the principal deputy


  o! how this spring of love resembleth
  the uncertain glory of an april day,
  which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
  and by and by a cloud takes all away!
    _the two gentlemen of verona_

one evening as the sun se
 
 ___________________________
 
s of manhood when one has no money.

'ah!' he cried, 'napoleon was indeed the man sent by god to help the
youth of france! who is to take his place? what will the poor wretches
do without him, even those who are richer than i, who have just the
few crowns needed to procure them a good education, and not enough
money to purchase a man at twenty and launch themselves in a career!
whatever happens,' he added with deep sigh, 'that fatal memory will
for ever prevent us from being happy!'

he saw madame de renal frown suddenly; she assumed a cold, disdainful
air; this line of thought seemed to her worthy of a servant. brought
up in the idea that she was extremely rich, it seemed to her a thing
to be taken for granted that julien was also. she loved him a thousand
times more than life itself, and money to her meant nothing.

julien was far from guessing what was in her mind. this frown brought
him back to earth. he had presence of mind enough to arrange his
sentence and to make it plain to the noble lad
 
 ___________________________
 
irst
check administered to the illusion that was bearing julien away. he
said to himself: 'she is good and kind, her feeling for me is strong,
but she has been brought up in the enemy's camp. they are bound to be
specially afraid of that class of men of spirit who, after a good
education, have not enough money to enter upon a career. what would
become of these nobles, if it were granted us to fight them with equal
weapons? myself, for instance, as mayor of verrieres, well
intentioned, honest as m. de renal is at heart, how i should deal with
the vicar, m. valenod and all their rascalities! how justice should
triumph in verrieres. it is not their talents that would prove an
obstacle. they are endlessly feeling their way.'

julien's happiness was, that day, on the point of becoming permanent.
what our hero lacked was the courage to be sincere. he needed the
courage to give battle, but on the spot; madame de renal had been
surprised by his speech, because the men whom she was in the habit of
meeting
 
 ___________________________
 
 were always saying that the return of robespierre was made
possible especially by these young men of the lower orders, who had
been too well educated. madame de renal's cold manner persisted for
some time, and seemed to julien to be marked. this was because the
fear of having said to him indirectly something unpleasant followed
her repugnance at his unfortunate speech.  this distress was clearly
shown on her pure countenance; so simple when she was happy and away
from bores.

julien no longer dared give himself up freely to his dreams. more calm
and less amorous, he decided that it was imprudent in him to go to
madame de renal in her room. it would be better
 
 ___________________________
 
 be a score of
possible reasons to account for her action.

but this arrangement also had its drawbacks. julien had received from
fouque certain books for which he, as a student of divinity, could
never have asked a bookseller. he ventured to open them only at night.
often he would have been just as well pleased not to be interrupted by
an assignation, the tension of waiting for which, even before the
little scene in the orchard, would have left him incapable of reading.

he was indebted to madame de renal for an entirely new understanding
of the books he read. he had ventured to ply her with questions as to
all sorts of little things ignorance of which seriously handicaps the
intelligence of a young man born outside the ranks of society,
whatever natural genius one may choose to attribute to him.

this education in love, given by an extremely ignorant woman, was a
blessing. julien was at once enabled to see society as it is today.
his mind was not perplexed by accounts of what it was in the past
 
 ___________________________
 
 prefect at besancon. they were supported
by letters that came from paris, and bore all the most illustrious
signatures.  it was a question of making m. de moirod, the most
bigoted man in the place, the principal instead of the second deputy
to the mayor of verrieres.

his rival was an extremely rich manufacturer, whom it was absolutely
essential to confine to the post of second deputy.

julien at last understood the hints that he had overheard, when the
cream of local society came to dine with m. de renal. this privileged
class was greatly taken up with this selection of a principal deputy,
of which the rest of the town and especially the liberals did not even
suspect the possibility. what gave it its importance was that, as
everybody knew, the eastern side of the main street of verrieres must
be moved back more than nine feet, for this street was now a royal
highway.

well, if m. de moirod, who owned three houses that would have to be
moved back, succeeded in becoming principal deputy, and so m
 
 ___________________________
 
ayor in
the event of m. de renal's being returned to parliament, he would shut
his eyes, and it would be possible to make little, imperceptible
repairs to the houses that encroached on the public thoroughfare, as a
result of which they would be good for a hundred years. despite the
great piety and admitted probity of m. de moirod, it was certain that
he _could be managed_, for he had a large family. among the houses
that would have to be moved back, nine belonged to the very best
people in verrieres.

in julien's eyes, this in
 
 ___________________________
 
trigue was far more important than the
history of the battle of fontenoy, a name which he saw for the first
time in one of the books that fouque had sent him. many things had
astonished julien during the five years since he had begun to spend
his evenings with the cure. but discretion and a humble spirit being
the chief qualities required in a divinity student, it had always been
impossible for him to ask any questions.

one day, madame de renal had given an order to her husband's valet,
julien's enemy.

'but, ma'am, today is the last friday of the month,' the man answered
her with a curious expression.

'go,' said madame de renal.

'well,' said julien, 'he is going to that hay store, which used to be
a church, and was recently restored to the faith; but why? that is one
of the mysteries which i have never been able to penetrate.'

'it is a most beneficial, but a very strange institution,' replied
madame de renal. 'women are not admitt
 
 ___________________________
 
ws that his majesty the king of -- was coming
the following sunday, and it was now tuesday.  the prefect authorised,
that is to say ordered, the formation of a guard of honour; he must be
received with all the pomp possible. a courier was sent to vergy. m.
de renal arrived during the night and found the whole town in a
ferment. everybody was claiming a right to something; those who had no
other duty were engaging balconies to see the king enter the town.

who was to command the guard of honour? m. de renal saw at once how
important it was, in the interest of the houses that would have to be
moved back, that m. de moirod should fill this post. it might be held
to constitute a claim to the place of principal deputy. there was
nothing to be said against m. de moirod's devotion; it went beyond all
comparison, but he had never ridden a horse in his life. he was a man
of six and thirty, timid in every way, and equally afraid of falls and
of being laughed at.

the mayor sent for him at five o'clock in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he king's
interests, those of the monarchy, and above all those of our holy
religion. to whom do you think, sir, that we ought to entrust the
command of the guard of honour?'

in spite of the horrible fear that a horse inspired in him, m. de
moirod ended by accepting this honour like a martyr. 'i shall manage
to adopt the right manner,' he told the mayor. there was barely time
to overhaul the uniforms which had been used seven years before on the
passage of a prince of the blood.

at seven, madame de renal arrived from vergy with julien and the
children.  she found her drawing-room full of liberal ladies who were
preaching the union of parties, and had come to implore her to make
her husband find room in the guard of honour for theirs. one of them
asserted that if her husband were not chosen he would go bankrupt from
grief. madame de renal sent them all packing at once. she seemed
greatly occupied.

julien was surprised and even more annoyed by her making a mystery to
him of what was disturbing h
 
 ___________________________
 
n, sons of manufacturers in easy circumstances, at least two of whom
were of an exemplary piety. m. valenod, who was reckoning on lending
his carriage to the prettiest women of the town, in order to have his
fine norman horses admired, agreed to let julien, the person he hated
most, have one of them. but each of the members of the guard of honour
possessed or had borrowed one of those sky-blue coats with a pair of
colonel's epaulettes in silver, which had shone in public seven years
before. madame de renal wanted a new coat, and she had but four days
in which to send to besancon, and to procure from there the uniform,
the weapons, the hat, and all the other requisites for a guard of
honour. what is rather amusing is that she thought it imprudent to
have julien's coat made at verrieres. she wished to take him by
surprise, him and the town.

the work of organising the guard of honour and popular feeling
finished, the mayor had next to deal with a great religious ceremony;
the king of ---- refused t
 
 ___________________________
 
o pass through verrieres without paying a
visit to the famous relic of saint clement which is preserved at
bray-le-haut, a short league from the town. the clergy must be present
in full force, and this was the most difficult thing to arrange; m.
maslon, the new cure, was determined, at any price, to keep m. chelan
out. in vain did m. de renal point out to him the imprudence of this
action. the marquis de la mole, whose ancestors for so long were
governors of the province, had been chosen to accompany the king of
----. he had known the abbe chelan for thirty years.  he would be
certain to inquire for him on arriving at verrieres, and, if he found
that he was in disgrace, was quite capable of going in search of him,
to the little house to which he had retired, accompanied by such of
the procession as were under his orders. what a rebu
 
 ___________________________
 
ff that would be!

'i am dishonoured here and at besancon,' replied the abbe maslon, 'if
he appears among my clergy. a jansenist, great heavens!'

'whatever you may say, my dear abbe,' m. de renal assured him, 'i
shall not expose the municipal government of verrieres to the risk of
an insult from m. de la mole. you don't know the man, he is sound
enough at court; but here, in the country, he has a satirical, mocking
spirit, and likes nothing so much as to embarrass people. he is
capable, simply for his own amusement, of covering us with ridicule in
the eyes of the liberals.'

it was not until the night between saturday and sunday, after three
days of discussion, that the abbe maslon's pr
 
 ___________________________
 
gently into the
one puddle to be found along the whole road, which created a scandal,
because he had to be pulled out of the way to enable the king's
carriage to pass.

his majesty alighted at the fine new church, which was decked out for
the occasion with all its crimson hangings. the king was to halt for
dinner, immediately after which he would take the road again to go and
venerate the famous relic of saint clement. no sooner was the king
inside the church than julien went off at a gallop to m. de renal's.
there he discarded with a sigh his fine sky-blue coat, his sabre, his
epaulettes, to resume the little threadbare black coat. he mounted his
horse again, and in a few minutes was at bray-le-haut, which stands on
the summit of an imposing hill. 'enthusiasm is multiplying these
peasants,' thought julien. 'one cannot move at verrieres, and here
there are more than ten thousand of them round this old abbey.' half
ruined by the vandalism of the revolution, it had been magnificently
restored since
 
 ___________________________
 
elf quite close to his lordship, as being attached to the abbe
chelan. they moved down the long corridors of the abbey of
bray-le-haut; in spite of the brilliant sunshine, these were dark and
damp. at length they arrived at the door of the cloister. julien was
speechless with admiration of so fine a ceremony.  his heart was
divided between the ambition aroused by the bishop's youthfulness, and
the sensibility and exquisite manners of this prelate.  his courtesy
was of a very different kind from m. de renal's, even on his good
days. 'the more one rises towards the highest rank of society,'
thought julien, 'the more one finds these charming manners.'

they entered the church by a side door; suddenly an appalling crash
made its ancient vaults resound; julien thought that the walls were
collapsing.  it was again the small cannon; drawn by eight horses at a
gallop, it had just arrived; and immediately on its arrival, brought
into action by the gunners of leipsic, it was firing five rounds a
minute, as
 
 ___________________________
 
hop of agde, the marquis de la mole, the ten thousand bottles
of wine, the unseated moirod (who, in the hope of a cross, did not set
foot outside his own door for a whole month after his fall) were in
turn subjected, was the utter indelicacy of having jockeyed into the
guard of honour, julien sorel, the son of a carpenter. you ought to
have heard, on this topic, the wealthy calico printers, who, morning,
noon and night, used to talk themselves hoarse in preaching equality.
that proud woman, madame de renal, was the author of this abomination.
her reason? the flashing eyes and pink cheeks of that young abbe sorel
were reason enough and to spare.

shortly after their return to vergy, stanislas xavier, the youngest of
the children, took fever; at once madame de renal was seized by the
most fearful remorse. for the first time she blamed herself for
falling in love in a coherent fashion. she seemed to understand, as
though by a miracle, the appalling sin into which she had let herself
be drawn. althou
 
 ___________________________
 
; she feared him in the same way in this predicament.
the struggles that rent her heart asunder were all the more terrible
in that there was nothing reasonable in her fear. julien discovered
that any recourse to argument irritated instead of calming her; she
saw in it the language of hell. however, as julien himself was greatly
attached to little stanislas, he was more welcome to speak to her of
the child's illness: presently it assumed a grave character. then her
incessant remorse deprived madame de renal even of the power to sleep;
she never emerged from a grim silence: had she opened her mouth, it
would have been to confess her crime to god and before men.

'i beg of you,' julien said to her, as soon as they were alone, 'say
nothing to anyone; let me be the sole confidant of your griefs. if you
still love me, do not speak! your words cannot cure our stanislas of
his fever.'

but his attempts at consolation produced no effect; he did not know
that madame de renal had taken it into her head that
 
 ___________________________
 
ed.'

julien was deeply touched. he was unable to see in this attitude
either hypocrisy or exaggeration. 'she believes that she is killing
her son by loving me, and yet the unhappy woman loves me more than her
son. that, how can i doubt it, is the remorse that is killing her;
there is true nobility of feeling. but how can i have inspired such
love, i, so poor, so ill-bred, so ignorant, often so rude in my
manners?'

one night the child's condition was critical. about two o'clock in the
morning, m. de renal came to see him. the boy, burning with fever, was
extremely flushed and did not recognise his father. suddenly madame de
renal threw herself at her husband's feet: julien saw that she was
going to reveal everything and to ruin herself for ever.

fortunately, this strange exhibition annoyed m. de renal.

'good night! good night!' he said and prepared to leave the room.

'no, listen to me,' cried his wife on her knees before him, seeking to
hold him back. 'learn the whole truth. it is i that am k
 
 ___________________________
 
illing my son.
i gave him his life, and i am taking it from him. heaven is punishing
me; in the eyes of god, i am guilty of murder. i must destroy and
humble myself; it may be that such a sacrifice will appease the lord.'

if m. de renal had been a man of imagination, he would have guessed
everything.

'romantic stuff,' he exclaimed, thrusting away his wife who sought to
embrace his knees. 'romantic stuff, all that! julien, tell them to
fetch the doctor at daybreak.'

and he went back to bed. madame de renal sank on her knees, half
unconscious, with a convulsive movement thrusting away julien, who was
coming to her assistance.

julien stood watching her with amazement.

'so this is adultery!' he said to himself ... 'can it be p
 
 ___________________________
 
ossible
that those rascally priests are right after all? that they, who commit
so many sins, have the privilege of knowing the true theory of sin?
how very odd!'

for twenty minutes since m. de renal had left the room, julien had
seen the woman he loved, her head sunk on the child's little bed,
motionless and almost unconscious. 'here we have a woman of superior
intelligence reduced to the last extremes of misery, because she has
known me,' he said to himself.

the hours passed rapidly. 'what can i do for her? i must make up my
mind. i have ceased to count here. what do i care for men, and their
silly affectations? what can i do for her? ... go from her? but i
shall be leaving her alone, to
 
 ___________________________
 
ow.

'if i leave her, if i cease to watch over her, she will tell him
everything. and then, for all one knows, in spite of the fortune he is
to inherit through her, he will make a scandal. she may tell
everything, great god, to that--abbe maslon, who makes the illness of
a child of six an excuse for never stirring out of this house, and not
without purpose. in her grief and her fear of god, she forgets all
that she knows of the man; she sees only the priest.'

'leave me,' came suddenly from madame de renal as she opened her eyes.

'i would give my life a thousand times to know how i can be of most
use to you,' replied julien; 'never have i so loved you, my dear
angel, or rather, from this instant only, i begin to adore you as you
deserve to be adored.  what is to become of me apart from you, and
with the knowledge that you are wretched by my fault! but i must not
speak of my own sufferings. i shall go, yes, my love. but, if i leave
you, if i cease to watch over you, to be constantly interposing m
 
 ___________________________
 
the sight of all, is
perhaps a public penance. so far as my frailty can judge, is it not
the greatest sacrifice that i can make to god? perhaps he will deign
to accept my humiliation and to spare me my son! show me a harder
sacrifice and i will hasten to perform it.'

'let me punish myself. i too am guilty. would you have me retire to la
trappe? the austerity of the life there may appease your god ... oh,
heaven! why can i not take upon myself stanislas's illness?'

'ah! you love him,' said madame de renal, rising and flinging herself
into his arms.

immediately she thrust him from her with horror.

'i believe you! i believe you!' she went on, having fallen once more
on her knees; 'o my only friend, why are not you stanislas's father?
then it would not be a horrible sin to love you more than your son.'

'will you permit me to stay, and henceforward only to love you as a
brother? it is the only reasonable expiation; it may appease the wrath
of the most high.'

'and i,' she exclaimed, rising, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
commit my
sin again, were it to be committed. let heaven only refrain from
punishing me in this world and in my children, and i shall have more
than i deserve. but you, at least, my julien,' she cried at other
moments, 'are you happy? do you feel that i love you enough?'

julien's distrust and suffering pride, which needed above all a love
that made sacrifices, could not stand out against the sight of so
great, so indubitable a sacrifice, and one that was made afresh every
moment. he adored madame de renal. 'she may well be noble, and i the
son of a working man; she loves me ... i am not to her a footman
employed in the part of lover.' once rid of this fear, julien fell
into all the follies of love, into its mortal uncertainties.

'at least.' she cried when she saw that he doubted her love, 'let me
make you happy during the few days we still have to spend together!
let us make haste; tomorrow perhaps i shall be no longer yours. if
heaven strikes me through my children, in vain shall i seek to liv
 
 ___________________________
 
e nature of the sentiment that
united julien to his mistress. his love was no longer merely
admiration of her beauty, pride in the possession of her.

their joy was thenceforward of a far higher nature, the flame that
devoured them was more intense. they underwent transports of utter
madness. their happiness would have seemed great in the eyes of other
people. but they never recaptured the delicious serenity, the
unclouded happiness, the spontaneous joy of the first days of their
love, when madame de renal's one fear was that of not being loved
enough by julien. their happiness assumed at times the aspect of
crime.

in what were their happiest, and apparently their calmest moments:
'oh!  great god! i see hell before me,' madame de renal would suddenly
exclaim, gripping julien's hand with a convulsive movement. 'what
fearful torments!  i have well deserved them.' she clutched him,
clinging to him like the ivy to the wall.

julien tried in vain to calm this agitated soul. she took his hand,
which s
 
 ___________________________
 
he covered with kisses. then, relapsing into a sombre
meditation; 'hell,' she said, 'hell would be a blessing to me; i
should still have some days in this world to spend with him, but hell
here on earth, the death of my children ... yet, at that price,
perhaps my crime would be forgiven me ...  oh! great god! grant me not
my pardon at that price. these poor children have done nothing to
offend thee; 'tis i, i, the guilt is mine alone! i love a man who is
not my husband.'

julien next saw madame de renal reach a state that was outwardly
tranquil.  she sought to take the burden upon herself, she wished not
to poison the existence of him whom she loved.

in the midst of these alternations of love, remorse and pleasure, the
days passed for them with lightning rapidity. julien lost the habit of
reflection.

miss elisa went to conduct a little lawsuit which she had at
verrieres. she found m. valenod greatly annoyed with julien. she hated
the tutor and often spoke about him to m. valenod.

'you would
 
 ___________________________
 
.
valenod found a way of cutting short, he learned the most mortifying
things in the world for his own self-esteem.

this woman, the most distinguished in the place, whom for six years he
had surrounded with every attention, and, unluckily, before the eyes
of all the world; this proudest of women, whose disdain had so often
made him blush, had taken as her lover a little journeyman dressed up
as a tutor. and that nothing might be wanting to the discomfiture of
the governor of the poorhouse, madame de renal adored this lover.

'and,' the maid added with a sigh, 'm. julien went to no pains to make
this conquest, he has never departed from his habitual coldness with
madame.'

it was only in the country that elisa had become certain of her facts,
but she thought that this intrigue dated from far earlier.

'that, no doubt, is why,' she continued bitterly, 'he refused at the
time to marry me. and i, like a fool, going to consult madame de
renal, begging her to speak to the tutor!'

that same evening m.
 
 ___________________________
 
edigrees
of the best families of burgundy.




chapter 20
the anonymous letters

    do not give dalliance
  too much the rein; the strongest oaths are straw
  to the fire i'the blood.
    _the tempest_

as they left the drawing-room about midnight, julien found time to say
to his mistress: 'do not let us meet tonight, your husband has
suspicions; i would swear that that long letter he was reading with
such displeasure is an anonymous one.'

fortunately, julien locked himself into his room. madame de renal
conceived the mad idea that this warning was simply a pretext for not
coming to see her. she lost her head absolutely, and at the usual hour
came to his door.  julien, hearing a sound in the corridor, instantly
blew out his lamp.  someone was attempting to open his door; was it
madame de renal, was it a jealous husband?

early the next morning, the cook, who took an interest in julien,
brought him a book on the cover of which he read these words written
in italian: _guardate alia pagina 130_.


 
 ___________________________
 
julien shuddered at the imprudence, turned to page one hundred and
thirty and found fastened to it with a pin the following letter
written in haste, bedewed with tears, and without the least attempt at
spelling. ordinarily madame de renal spelt quite well; he was moved by
this detail and began to forget the frightful imprudence.

'so you would not let me in tonight? there are moments when i feel
that i have never seen into the depths of your heart. your look
frightens me. i am afraid of you. great god! can it be, you have never
loved me? in that case, my husband can discover our love, and shut me
up in lifelong imprisonment, in the country, apart from my children.
perhaps god wills it so. i shall soon die; but you will be a mons
 
 ___________________________
 


'if things go amiss,' she went on with the same coolness, 'i shall be
stripped of everything. bury this store somewhere in the mountains; it
may some day be my last resource.'

she handed him a glass-topped case, in red morocco, filled with gold
and a few diamonds.

'go now,' she said to him.

she embraced her children, the youngest of them twice over. julien
stood spellbound. she left him at a rapid pace and without looking at
him again.

>from the moment of his opening the anonymous letter, m. de renal's life
had been a burden to him. he had not been so agitated since a duel
that he had nearly had to fight in 1816, and, to do him justice, the
prospect of receiving a bullet in his person would now have distressed
him less. he examined the letter from every angle. 'is not this a
woman's hand?' he asked himself.  'in that case, what woman can have
written it?' he considered in turn all the women he knew at verrieres,
without finding a definite object for his suspicions. could a man have
dictated
 
 ___________________________
 
ity of the men he knew. 'i must consult my wife,' he said to
himself, from force of habit, as he rose from the armchair in which he
had collapsed.

no sooner had he risen than 'good god!' he exclaimed, clapping his
hand to his head, 'she is the one person whom i cannot trust; from
this moment she is my enemy.' and tears of anger welled into his eyes.

it was a fitting reward for that barrenness of heart in which
practical wisdom in the provinces is rooted, that the two men whom, at
that moment, m. de renal most dreaded were his two most intimate
friends.

'apart from them, i have ten friends perhaps,' and he turned them over
in his mind, calculating the exact amount of comfort that he would be
able to derive from each. 'to all of them, to all of them,' he cried in
his rage, 'my appalling misfortune will give the most intense
pleasure.' happily for him, he supposed himself to be greatly envied,
and not without reason.  apart from his superb house in town on which
the king of ---- had just conferre
 
 ___________________________
 
of, he had made an admirable piece of work of his
country house at vergy. the front was painted white, and the windows
adorned with handsome green shutters. he was comforted for a moment by
the thought of this magnificence. the fact of the matter was that this
mansion was visible from a distance of three or four leagues, to the
great detriment of all the country houses or so-called _chateaux_ of
the neighbourhood, which had been allowed to retain the humble grey
tones imparted to them by time.

m. de renal could reckon upon the tears and pity of one of his
friends, the churchwarden of the parish; but he was an imbecile who
shed tears at everything. this man was nevertheless his sole resource.

'what misfortune is comparable to mine?' he exclaimed angrily. 'what
isolation!

'is it possible,' this truly pitiable man asked himself, 'is it
possible that, in my distress, i have not a single friend of whom
to ask advice? for my mind is becoming unhinged, i can feel it! ah,
falcoz!  ah, ducros!' he crie
 
 ___________________________
 
y his arrogance in
1814. they were not noble, and he had tried to alter the terms of
equality on which they had been living all their lives.

one of them, falcoz, a man of spirit and heart, a paper merchant at
verrieres, had purchased a printing press in the chief town of the
department and had started a newspaper. the _congregation_ had
determined to ruin him: his paper had been condemned, his printer's
licence had been taken from him. in these unfortunate circumstances he
ventured to write to m. de renal for the first time in ten years. the
mayor of verrieres felt it incumbent on him to reply in the ancient
roman style: 'if the king's minister did me the honour to consult me,
i should say to him: "ruin without compunction all provincial
printers, and make printing a monopoly like the sale of tobacco."'
this letter to an intimate friend which had set the whole of verrieres
marvelling at the time, m. de renal now recalled, word for word, with
horror. 'who would have said that with my rank, my for
 
 ___________________________
 
a man of straw, a mere
ragamuffin, to make a mock of me with her lover? is the whole of
verrieres to be allowed to sneer at my complacency? what have they not
said about charmier?' (a notorious local cuckold). 'when he is
mentioned, is there not a smile on every face? he is a good pleader,
who is there that ever mentions his talent for public speaking? "ah!
charmier!" is what they say; "bernard's charmier." they actually give
him the name of the man that has disgraced him.

'thank heaven,' said m. de renal at other moments, 'i have no
daughter, and the manner in which i am going to punish their mother
will not damage the careers of my children; i can surprise that young
peasant with my wife, and kill the pair of them; in that event, the
tragic outcome of my misfortune may perhaps make it less absurd.' this
idea appealed to him: he worked it out in the fullest detail. 'the
penal code is on my side, and, whatever happens, our _congregation_
and my friends on the jury will save me.' he examined his 
 
 ___________________________
 
roach her with her offence. she is proud, we are bound to quarrel,
and all this will happen before she has inherited her aunt's estate.
and then, how they will all laugh at me! my wife loves her children,
it will all come to them in the end. but i, i shall be the talk of
verrieres. what, they will say, he couldn't even punish his wife!
would it not be better to stick to my suspicions and to verify
nothing? then i tie my own hands, i cannot afterwards reproach her
with anything.'

a moment later m. de renal, his wounded vanity once more gaining the
mastery, was laboriously recalling all the stories told in the
billiard-room of the casino or noble club of verrieres, when some
fluent talker interrupted the pool to make merry at the expense of
some cuckolded husband. how cruel, at that moment, those pleasantries
seemed.

'god! why is not my wife dead! then i should be immune from ridicule.
why am i not a widower! i should go and spend six months in paris in
the best society.' after this momentary hap
 
 ___________________________
 
taining
enlightenment seemed to him decidedly the best, and he was thinking of
adopting it, when at a bend in the path he came upon that wife whom he
would have liked to see dead.

she was returning from the village. she had gone to hear mass in the
church of vergy. a tradition of extremely doubtful value in the eyes
of the cold philosopher, but one in which she believed, made out that
the little church now in use had been the chapel of the castle of the
lord of vergy. this thought obsessed madame de renal throughout the
time which she had meant to pass in prayer in this church. she kept on
picturing to herself her husband killing julien during the chase, as
though by accident, and afterwards, that evening, making her eat his
heart.

'my fate,' she said to herself, 'depends on what he will think when he
hears me. after these terrible moments, perhaps i shall not find
another opportunity to speak to him. he is not a wise creature, swayed
by reason. i might, if he were, with the aid of my own feebl
 
 ___________________________
 
es showed that he had not slept. she handed him a letter which,
though the seal was broken, was still folded. he, without opening it,
gazed at his wife with madness in his eyes.

'here is an abomination,' she said to him, 'which an evil-looking man
who claims to know you and that you owe him a debt of gratitude,
handed to me as i came past the back of the lawyer's garden. one thing
i must ask of you, and that is that you send back to his own people,
and without delay, that monsieur julien.' madame de renal made haste
to utter this name, even beginning a little too soon perhaps, in order
to rid herself of the fearful prospect of having to utter it.

she was filled with joy on beholding the joy that it gave her husband.
>from the fixed stare which he directed at her she realised that julien
had guessed aright. instead of worrying about a very present trouble,
'what intelligence,' she thought to herself. 'what perfect tact! and
in a young man still quite devoid of experience! to what heights will
he
 
 ___________________________
 
 not rise in time? alas! then his success will make him forget me.'

this little act of admiration of the man she adored completely
restored her composure.

she congratulated herself on the step she had taken. 'i have proved
myself not unworthy of julien,' she said to herself, with a sweet and
secret relish.

without saying a word, for fear of committing himself, m. de renal
examined this second anonymous letter composed, as the reader may
remember, of printed words gummed upon a sheet of paper of a bluish
tinge. 'they are making a fool of me in every way,' m. de renal said
to himself, utterly worn out.

'fresh insults to be looked into, and all owing to my wife!' he was on
the point of deluging her with a stream of the coarsest invective; the
thought of the fortune awaiting her at besancon just stopped him.
overpowered by the necessity of venting his anger on some
 
 ___________________________
 
that he could not endure his wife's
company. a minute later, he returned to her, already more calm.

'we must take action at once and dismiss julien,' she immediately
began; 'after all he is only the son of a working man. you can
compensate him with a few crowns, besides, he is clever and can easily
find another place, with m. valenod, for instance, or the sub-prefect
maugiron; they both have families. and so you will not be doing him
any harm ...'

'you speak like the fool that you are,' cried m. de renal in a voice
of thunder. 'how can one expect common sense of a woman? you never pay
attention to what is reasonable; how should you have any knowledge?
your carelessness, your laziness leave you just enough activity to
chase butterflies, feeble creatures which we are so unfortunate as to
have in our households ...'

madame de renal let him speak, and he spoke at length; he passed his
anger, as they say in those parts.

'sir,' she answered him finally, 'i speak as a woman whose honour,
that is to 
 
 ___________________________
 
say her most priceless possession, has been outraged.'

madame de renal preserved an unalterable calm throughout the whole of
this trying conversation, upon which depended the possibility of her
continuing to live beneath the same roof as julien. she sought out the
ideas that seemed to her best fitted to guide her husband's blind
anger. she had remained unmoved by all the insulting remarks that he
had addressed to her, she did not hear them, she was thinking all the
time of julien. 'will he be pleased with me?'

'this little peasant upon whom we have lavished every
 
 ___________________________
 

or i should leave your roof.'

'do you wish to create a scandal that will dishonour me and yourself
as well? you'll be giving a fine treat to many people in verrieres.'

'that is true; they are all jealous of the state of prosperity to
which your wise management has brought you, your family and the town ...
very well, i shall go and bid julien ask you for leave to spend a
month with that timber merchant in the mountain, a fit companion for
that little workman.'

'take care what you do,' put in m. de renal, calmly enough. 'the one
thing i must insist on is that you do not speak to him. you would show
temper and make him cross with me; you know how touchy the little
gentleman is.'

'that young man has no tact,' went on madame de renal; 'he may be
learned, you know about that, but at bottom he is nothing but a
peasant. for my own part, i have never had any opinion of him since he
refused to marry elisa, it was a fortune ready made; and all because
now and again she pays a secret visit to m. valenod
 
 ___________________________
 
.'

'ah!' said m. de renal, raising his eyebrows as far as they would go,
'what, did julien tell you that?'

'no, not exactly; he has always spoken to me of the vocation that is
calling him to the sacred ministry; but believe me, the first vocation
for the lower orders is to find their daily bread. he made it fairly
clear to me that he was not unaware of these secret visits.'

'and i, i, knew nothing about them!' cried m. de renal, all his fury
returning, emphasising every word. 'there are things going on in my
house of which i know nothing ... what! there has been something
between elisa and valenod?'

'oh, that's an old story, my dear friend,' madame de renal said
laughing, 'and i daresay no harm was done. it was in the days when
your good friend valenod would not have been sorry to have it thought
in verrieres that there was a little love--of a purely platonic
sort--exchanged between him and me.'

'i had that idea at 
 
 ___________________________
 
one time,' cried m. de renal striking his head in
his fury as he advanced from one discovery to another, 'and you never
said a word to me about it?'

'was i to make trouble between two friends all for a little outburst
of vanity on the part of our dear governor? what woman is there in
society to whom he has not addressed one or more letters, extremely
witty and even a trifle gallant?'

'has he written to you?'

'he writes frequently.'

'show me his letters this instant, i order you'; and m. de renal added
six feet to his stature.

'i shall do nothing of the sort,' the answer came in a tone so gentle
as to be almost indifferent, 'i shall let you see them some other day,
when you are more yourself.'

'this very instant, damn it!' cried m. de renal, blind with rage, and
yet happier than he had been at any time in the last twelve hours.

'will you swear to me,' said madame de renal solemnly, 'never to
quarrel with the governor of the poorhouse over these letters?'

'quarrel or no quarrel, i ca
 
 ___________________________
 
foundlings away from him; but,'
he continued, furiously, 'i want those letters this instant; where are
they?'

'in a drawer in my desk; but you may be certain, i shall not give you
the key of it.'

'i shall be able to force it,' he cried as he made off in the
direction of his wife's room.

he did indeed break open with an iron bar a valuable mahogany writing
desk, imported from paris, which he used often to polish with the tail
of his coat when he thought he detected a spot on its surface.

madame de renal meanwhile had run up the hundred and twenty steps of
the dovecote; she knotted the corner of a white handkerchief to one of
the iron bars of the little window. she was the happiest of women.
with tears in her eyes she gazed out at the wooded slopes of the
mountain. 'doubtless,' she said to herself, 'beneath one of those
spreading beeches, julien is watching for this glad signal.' for long
she strained her ears, then cursed the monotonous drone of the
grasshoppers and the twitter of the birds. b
 
 ___________________________
 
tion, 'to think of some signal to tell me that his happiness
is no less than mine?' she came down from the dovecote only when she
began to be afraid that her husband might come up in search of her.

she found him foaming with rage. he was running through m. valenod's
anodyne sentences, that were little used to being read with such
emotion.

seizing a moment in which a lull in her husband's exclamations gave
her a chance to make herself heard:

'i cannot get away from my original idea,' said madame de renal,
'julien ought to go for a holiday. whatever talent he may have for
latin, he is nothing more, after all, than a peasant who is often
coarse and wanting in tact; every day, thinking he is being polite, he
plies me with extravagant compliments in the worst of taste, which he
learns by heart from some novel ...'

'he never reads any,' cried m. de renal; 'i am positive as to that. do
you suppose that i am a blind master who knows nothing of what goes on
under his roof?'

'very well, if he doesn't 
 
 ___________________________
 
read those absurd compliments anywhere, he
invents them, which is even worse. he will have spoken of me in that
tone in verrieres; and, without going so far,' said madame de renal,
with the air of one making a discovery, 'he will have spoken like that
before elisa, which is just as though he had spoken to m. valenod.'

'ah!' cried m. de renal, making the table and the whole room shake
with one of the stoutest blows that human fist ever gave, 'the
anonymous letter in print and valenod's letters were all on the same
paper.'

'at last!' thought madame de renal; she appeared thunderstruck by this
discovery, and without having the courage to add a single word went
and sat down on the divan, at the farther end of the room.

the battle was now won; she had her work cut out to prevent m. de
renal from going and talking to the supposed autho
 
 ___________________________
 
 it you do not feel that to make a scene, without sufficient
proof, with m. valenod would be the most deplorable error? if you are
envied, sir, who is to blame? your own talents: your wise
administration, the buildings you have erected with such good taste,
the dowry i brought you, and above all the considerable fortune we may
expect to inherit from my worthy aunt, a fortune the extent of which
is vastly exaggerated, have made you the principal person in
verrieres.'

'you forget my birth,' said m. de renal, with a faint smile.

'you are one of the most distinguished gentlemen in the province,'
madame de renal hastily added; 'if the king were free and could do
justice to birth, you would doubtless be figuring in the house of
peers,' and so forth. 'and in this magnificent position do you seek to
provide jealousy with food for comment?

'to speak to m. valenod of his anonymous letter is to proclaim
throughout verrieres, or rather in besancon, throughout the province,
that this petty cit, admitted pe
 
 ___________________________
 
him. did these letters which
you have just discovered prove that i had responded to m. valenod's
overtures, then it would be for you to kill me, i should have deserved
it a hundred times, but not to show anger with him. think that all
your neighbours only await a pretext to be avenged for your
superiority; think that in 1816 you were instrumental in securing
certain arrests. that man who took refuge on your roof ...'

'what i think is that you have neither respect nor affection for me,'
shouted m. de renal with all the bitterness that such a memory
aroused, 'and i have not been made a peer!'

'i think, my friend,' put in madame de renal with a smile, 'that i
shall one day be richer than you, that i have been your companion for
twelve years, and that on all these counts i ought to have a voice in
your councils, especially in this business today. if you prefer
monsieur julien to me,' she added with ill-concealed scorn, 'i am
prepared to go and spend the winter with my aunt.'

this threat was uttere
 
 ___________________________
 
d _with gladness_. it contained the firmness
which seeks to cloak itself in courtesy; it determined m. de renal.
but, obeying the provincial custom, he continued to speak for a long
time, harked back to every argument in turn; his wife allowed him to
speak, there was still anger in his tone. at length, two hours of
futile discourse wore out the strength of a man who had been helpless
with rage all night. he determined upon the line of conduct which he
was going to adopt towards m. valenod, julien, and even elisa.

once or twice, during this great scene, madame de renal came within an
ace of feeling a cer
 
 ___________________________
 
tain sympathy for the very real distress of this
man who for ten years had been her friend. but our true passions are
selfish.  moreover she was expecting every moment an avowal of the
anonymous letter which he had received overnight, and this avowal
never came. to gain complete confidence, madame de renal required to
know what ideas might have been suggested to the man upon whom her
fate depended. for, in the country, husbands control public opinion. a
husband who denounces his wife covers himself with ridicule, a thing
that every day is becoming less dangerous in france; but his wife, if
he does not supply her with money, declines to the position of a
working woman at fifteen sous daily, and even then the virtuous souls
have scruples about employing her.

an odalisque in the seraglio may love t
 
 ___________________________
 
he sultan with all her heart;
he is all powerful, she has no hope of evading his authority by a
succession of clever little tricks. the master's vengeance is
terrible, bloody, but martial and noble: a dagger blow ends
everything. it is with blows dealt by public contempt that a husband
kills his wife in the nineteenth century; it is by shutting the doors
of all the drawing-rooms in her face.

the sense of danger was keenly aroused in madame de renal on her
return to her own room; she was horrified by the disorder in which she
found it. the locks of all her pretty little boxes had been broken;
several planks in the floor had been torn up. 'he would have been
without pity for me!' she told herself. 'to spoil so this floor of
coloured parquet, of which he is so proud; when one of his children
comes in with muddy shoes, he flushes with rage. and now it is ruined
for ever!' the sight of this violence rapidly silenced the last
reproaches with wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ich she had been blaming herself for her too rapid
victory.

shortly before the dinner bell sounded, julien returned with the
children.  at dessert, when the servants had left the room, madame de
renal said to him very drily:

'you expressed the desire to me to go and spend a fortnight at
verrieres; m. de renal is kind enough to grant you leave. you can go
as soon as you please. but, so that the children shall not waste any
time, their lessons will be sent to you every day, for you to
correct.'

'certainly,' m. de renal added in a most bitter tone, 'i shall not
allow you more than a week.'

julien read in his features the uneasiness of a man in cruel torment.

'he has not yet come to a decision,' he said to his mistress, during a
moment of solitude in the drawing-room.

madame de renal informed him ra
 
 ___________________________
 
i find you at once enlightened and blinded by your love,' he said to
her with a certain coldness; 'your behaviour today has been admirable;
but is there any prudence in our attempting to see each other tonight?
this house is paved with enemies; think of the passionate hatred that
elisa has for me.'

'that hatred greatly resembles the passionate indifference that you
must have for me.'

'indifferent or not, i am bound to save you from a peril into which i
have plunged you. if chance decrees that m. de renal speaks to elisa,
by a single word she may disclose everything to him. what is to
prevent him from hiding outside my room, well armed ...'

'what! lacking in courage even!' said madame de renal, with all the
pride of a woman of noble birth.

'i shall never sink so low as to speak of my courage,' said julien
coldly, 'that is mean. let the world judge by my actions. but,' he
went on, taking her hand, 'you cannot conceive how attached i am to
you, and what a joy it is to me to be able to take leave
 
 ___________________________
 
 of you before
this cruel parting.'




chapter 22.
manners and customs in 1830

  speech was given to man to enable him to conceal his thoughts.
    malagrida, s.j.

the first thing that julien did on arriving in verrieres was to
reproach himself for his unfairness to madame de renal. 'i should have
despised her as a foolish woman if from weakness she had failed to
bring off the scene with m. de renal! she carried it through like a
diplomat, and my sympathies are with the loser, who is my enemy. there
is a streak of middle-class pettiness in my nature; my vanity is hurt,
because m. de renal is a man!  that vast and illustrous corporation to
which i have the honour to belong; i am a perfect fool.'

m. chelan had refused the offers of hospitality which the most
respected liberals of the place had vied with one another in making
him, when his deprivation drove him from the presbytery. the pair 
 
 ___________________________
 
to be a priest, went and fetched from
his father's store a dozen planks of firwood, which he carried on his
back the whole length of the main street. he borrowed some tools from
an old friend and had soon constructed a sort of bookcase in which he
arranged m. chelan's library.

'i supposed you to have been corrupted by the vanity of the world,'
said the old man, shedding tears of joy; 'this quite redeems the
childishness of that dazzling guard of honour uniform which made you
so many enemies.'

m. de renal had told julien to put up in his house. no one had any
suspicion of what had happened. on the third day after his arrival,
there came up to his room no less a personage than the sub-prefect, m.
de maugiron. it was only after two solid hours of insipid
tittle-tattle, and long jeremiads on the wickedness of men, on the
lack of honesty in the people entrusted with the administration of
public funds, on the dangers besetting poor france, etc., etc., that
julien saw him come at length to the purpose
 
 ___________________________
 
 of his visit. they were
already on the landing, and the poor tutor, on the verge of disgrace,
was ushering out with all due respect the future prefect of some
fortunate department, when it pleased the latter gentleman to occupy
himself with julien's career, to praise his moderation where his own
interests were concerned, etc., etc. finally m. de maugiron, taking
him in his arms in the most fatherly manner, suggested to him that he
should leave m. de renal and enter the household of an official who
had children to educate, and who, like king philip, would thank
heaven, not so much for having given him them as for having caused
them to be born in the neighbourhood of m. julien. their tutor would
receive a salary of eight hundred francs, payable not month by month,
'which is not noble,' said m. de maugiron, but quarterly, and in
advance to boot.

it was now the turn of julien who, for an hour and a half, had been
waiting impatiently for an opportun
 
 ___________________________
 
ity to speak. his reply was
perfect, and as long as a pastoral charge; it let everything be
understood, and at the same time said nothing definite. a listener
would have found in it at once respect for m. de renal, veneration for
the people of verrieres and gratitude towards the illustrious
sub-prefect. the said sub-prefect, astonished at finding a bigger
jesuit than himself, tried in vain to obtain something positive.
julien, overjoyed, seized the opportunity to try his skill and began
his answer over again in different terms. never did the most eloquent
minister, seeking to monopolise the last hours of a sitting when the
chamber seems inclined to wake up, say less in more words. as soon as
m. de maugir
 
 ___________________________
 
on had left him, julien broke out in helpless laughter. to
make the most of his jesuitical bent, he wrote a letter of nine pages
to m. de renal, in which he informed him of everything that had been
said to him, and humbly asked his advice. 'why, that rascal never even
told me the name of the person who is making the offer! it will be m.
valenod, who sees in my banishment to verrieres the effect of his
anonymous letter.'

his missive dispatched, julien, as happy as a hunter who at six in the
morning on a fine autumn day emerges upon a plain teeming with game,
went out to seek the advice of m. chelan. but before he arrived at the
good cu
 
 ___________________________
 
ing presented to madame valenod; she was
making her toilet and could not see him. to make up for this, he had
the privilege of witnessing that of the governor of the poorhouse.
they then proceeded to join madame valenod, who presented her children
to him with tears in her eyes. this woman, one of the most important
people in verrieres, had a huge masculine face, which she had
plastered with rouge for this great ceremony.  she displayed all the
pathos of maternal feelings.

julien thought of madame de renal. his distrustful nature made him
scarcely susceptible to any memories save those that are evoked by
contrast, but such memories moved him to tears. this tendency was
increased by the sight of the governor's house. he was taken through
it. everything in it was sumptuous and new, and he was told the price
of each article. but julien felt that there was something mean about
it, a taint of stolen money.  everyone, even the servants, wore a bold
air that seemed to be fortifying them against contempt
 
 ___________________________
 
 m. rubigneau' (this was the
member of the two academies) 'will be so good as to read out any
sentence in latin, instead of going on with the latin text, i shall
endeavour to improvise a translation.'

this second test set the crown of glory on his achievement.

there were in the room a number of liberals, men of means, but the
happy fathers of children who were capable of winning bursaries, and
in this capacity suddenly converted after the last mission. despite
this brilliant stroke of policy, m. de renal had never consented to
have them in his house. these worthy folk, who knew julien only by
reputation and from having seen him on horseback on the day of the
king of ----'s visit, were his most vociferous admirers. 'when will
these fools tire of listening to this biblical language, of which they
understand nothing?' he thought. on the contrary, this language amused
them by its unfamiliarity; they laughed at it. but julien had grown
tired.

he rose gravely as six o'clock struck and mentioned a ch
 
 ___________________________
 
unicipal funds,
to enable him to continue his studies in paris.

while this rash idea was making the dining-room ring, julien had
stolen away to the porch. 'oh, what scum! what scum!' he murmured
three or four times, as he treated himself to the pleasure of drinking
in the fresh air.

he felt himself a thorough aristocrat for the moment, he who for long
had been so shocked by the disdainful smile and the haughty
superiority which he found lurking behind all the compliments that
were paid him at m. de renal's. he could not help feeling the extreme
difference. 'even if we forget,' he said to himself as he walked away,
'that the money has been stolen from the poor prisoners, and that they
are forbidden to sing as well, would it ever occur to m. de renal to
tell his guests the price of each bottle of wine that he offers them?
and this m. valenod, in going over the list of his property, which he
does incessantly, cannot refer to his house, his land and all the rest
of it, if his wife is present, witho
 
 ___________________________
 
ly so conscious of the joy of ownership, had just
made an abominable scene, during dinner, with a servant who had broken
a wineglass and spoiled one of her sets; and the servant had answered
her with the most gross insolence.

'what a household!' thought julien; 'if they were to give me half of
all  the money they steal, i wouldn't live among them. one fine day i
should give myself away; i should be unable to keep back the contempt
they inspire in me.'

he was obliged, nevertheless, obeying madame de renal's orders, to
attend several dinners of this sort; julien was the fashion; people
forgave him his uniform and the guard of honour, or rather that
imprudent display was the true cause of his success. soon, the only
question discussed in verrieres was who would be successful in the
struggle to secure the learned young man's services, m. de renal or
the governor of the poorhouse. these two gentlemen formed with m.
maslon a triumvirate which for some years past had tyrannised the
town. people were j
 
 ___________________________
 
s and
was reckoned a jacobin. julien, having made a vow never to say
anything except what he himself believed to be false, was obliged to
make a show of being suspicious of m. gros. he received from vergy
large packets of exercises.  he was advised to see much of his father,
and complied with this painful necessity. in a word, he was quite
redeeming his reputation, when one morning he was greatly surprised to
find himself awakened by a pair of hands which were clapped over his
eyes.

it was madame de renal who had come in to town and, running upstairs
four steps at a time and leaving her children occupied with a
favourite rabbit that they had brought with them, had reached julien's
room a minute in advance of them. the moment was delicious but all too
brief: madame de renal had vanished when the children arrived with
the rabbit, which they wanted to show to their friend. julien welcomed
them all, including the rabbit. he seemed to be once more one of a
family party; he felt that he loved these ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ility of their manners; he required to
wash his imagination clean of all the vulgar behaviour, all the
unpleasant thoughts the atmosphere of which he had to breathe at
verrieres. there was always the dread of bankruptcy, wealth and
poverty were always fighting for the upper hand. the people with whom
he dined, in speaking of the joint on their table, made confidences
humiliating to themselves, and nauseating to their hearers.

'you aristocrats, you have every reason to be proud,' he said to
madame de renal. and he told her of all the dinners he had endured.

'why, so you are in the fashion!' and she laughed heartily at the
thought of the rouge which madame valenod felt herself obliged to put
on whenever she expected julien. 'i believe she has designs on your
heart,' she added.

luncheon was a joy. the presence of the children, albeit apparently a
nuisance, increased as a matter of fact the general enjoyment. these
poor children did not know how to express their delight at seeing
julien again.  th
 
 ___________________________
 
s the value of his
silver spoon and fork and of the mug out of which he was drinking.

'why do you want to know?'

'i want to sell them to give the money to m. julien, so that he shan't
be a _dupe_ to stay with us.'

julien embraced him, the tears standing in his eyes. the mother wept
outright, while julien, who had taken stanislas on his knees,
explained to him that he must not use the word _dupe_, which, employed
in that sense, was a servant's expression. seeing the pleasure he was
giving madame de renal, he tried to explain, by picturesque examples,
which amused the children, what was meant by a dupe.

'i understand,' said stanislas, 'it's the crow who is silly and drops
his cheese, which is picked up by the fox, who is a flatterer.'

madame de renal, wild with joy, smothered her children in kisses,
which she could hardly do without leaning slightly upon julien.

suddenly the door opened; it was m. de renal. his stern, angry face
formed a strange contrast with the innocent gaiety which his pre
 
 ___________________________
 
sence
banished.  madame de renal turned pale; she felt herself incapable of
denying anything. julien seized the opportunity and, speaking very
loud, began to tell the mayor the incident of the silver mug which
stanislas wanted to sell. he was sure that this story would be ill
received. at the first word m. de renal frowned, from force of habit
at the mere name of silver. 'the mention of that metal,' he would say,
'is always a preliminary to some call upon my purse.'

but here there was more than money at stake; there was an increase of
his suspicions. the air of happiness which animated his family in his
absence was not calculated to improve matters with a man dominated by
so sensitive a vanity. when his wife praised the graceful and witty
manner in which julien imparted fresh ideas to his pupils:

'yes, 
 
 ___________________________
 
yes, i know, he is making me odious to my children; it is very
easy for him to be a hundred times pleasanter to them than i, who am,
after all, the master. everything tends in these days to bring
_lawful_ authority into contempt. unhappy france!'

madame de renal did not stop to examine the implications of her
husband's manner. she had just seen the possibility of spending twelve
hours in julien's company. she had any number of purchases to make in
the town, and declared that she absolutely must dine in a tavern; in
spite of anything her husband might say or do, she clung to her idea.
the children were in ecstasies at the mere word tavern, which modern
prudery finds such pleasure in pronouncing.

m. de renal left his wife in the first linen-draper's sho
 
 ___________________________
 
ore gloomy than in the
morning; he was convinced that the whole town was thinking about
nothing but himself and julien. as a matter of fact, no one had as yet
allowed him to form any suspicion of the offensive element in the
popular comments.  those that had been repeated to the mayor had dealt
exclusively with the question whether julien would remain with him at
six hundred francs or would accept the eight hundred francs offered by
the governor of the poorhouse.

the said governor, when he met m. de renal in society, gave him the
cold shoulder. his behaviour was not without a certain subtlety; there
is not much thoughtless action in the provinces: sensations are so
infrequent there that people suppress them.

m. valenod was what is called, a hundred leagues from paris, a
_faraud_; this is a species marked by coarseness and natural
effrontery. his triumphant existence, since 1815, had confirmed him in
his habits. he reigned, so to speak, at verrieres, under the orders of
m. de renal; but being fa
 
 ___________________________
 
 having no personal pretensions, he
had succeeded in equalling the credit of his mayor in the eyes of
ecclesiastical authority. m. valenod had as good as told the grocers
of the place: 'give me the two biggest fools among you'; the lawyers:
'point me out the two most ignorant'; the officers of health: 'let me
have your two biggest rascals.' when he had collected the most
shameless representatives of each profession, he had said to them:
'let us reign together.'

the manners of these men annoyed m. de renal. valenod's coarse nature
was offended by nothing, not even when the young abbe maslon gave him
the lie direct in public.

but, in the midst of this prosperity, m. valenod was obliged to
fortify himself by little insolences in points of detail against the
harsh truths which he was well aware that everyone was entitled to
address to him. his activity had multiplied since the alarms which m.
appert's visit had left in its wake. he had made three journeys to
besancon; he wrote several letters for e
 
 ___________________________
 
s of good birth, as a profoundly wicked man. moreover this
service rendered had placed him in the absolute power of the
vicar-general de frilair, from whom he received strange orders. he had
reached this stage in his career when he yielded to the pleasure of
writing an anonymous letter. to add to his embarrassment, his wife
informed him that she wished to have julien in the house; the idea
appealed to her vanity.

in this situation, m. valenod foresaw a final rupture with his former
confederate m. de renal. the mayor would address him in harsh
language, which mattered little enough to him; but he might write to
besancon, or even to paris. a cousin of some minister or other might
suddenly descend upon verrieres and take over the governorship of the
poorhouse. m. valenod thought of making friends with the liberals; it
was for this reason that several of them were invited to the dinner at
which julien recited. he would find powerful support there against the
mayor. but an election might come, and it
 
 ___________________________
 
 went without saying that the
poorhouse and a vote for the wrong party were incompatible. the
history of these tactics, admirably divined by madame de renal, had
been imparted to julien while he gave her his arm to escort her from
one shop to another, and little by little had carried them to the
cours de la fidelite, where they spent some hours, almost as peaceful
as the hours at vergy.

at this period, m. valenod was seeking to avoid a final rupture with
his former chief, by himself adopting a bold air towards him. on the
day of which we treat, this system proved successful, but increased
the mayor's ill humour.

never can vanity, at grips with al
 
 ___________________________
 
l the nastiest and shabbiest
elements of a petty love of money, have plunged a man in a more
wretched state than that in which m. de renal found himself, at the
moment of his entering the tavern. never, on the contrary, had his
children been gayer or more joyful.  the contrast goaded him to fury.

'i am not wanted in my own family, so far as i can see!' he said as he
entered, in a tone which he sought to make imposing.

by way of reply, his wife drew him aside and explained to him the
necessity of getting rid of julien. the hours of happiness she had
just enjoyed had given her back the ease and resolution necessary for
carrying ou
 
 ___________________________
 
attachment to _hard cash_: m. valenod was as
generous as a robber, whereas he had shown himself in a prudent rather
than a brilliant light in the last five or six subscription lists for
the confraternity of saint joseph, the congregation of our lady, the
congregation of the blessed sacrament, and so forth.

among the country gentlemen of verrieres and the neighbourhood,
skilfully classified in the lists compiled by the collecting brethren,
according to the amount of their offerings, the name of m. de renal
had more than once been seen figuring upon the lowest line. in vain
might he protest that he _earned nothing_. the clergy allow no joking
on that subject.




chapter 13
the sorrows of an official


  il piacere di alzar la testa tutto l'anno e ben pagato da certi quarti
  d'ora che bisogna passar.
    casti

but let us leave this little man to his little fears; why has he taken
into his house a man of feeling, when what he required was the soul of
a flunkey? why does he not know how to select 
 
 ___________________________
 
his servants? the
ordinary procedure of the nineteenth century is that when a powerful
and noble personage encounters a man of feeling, he kills, exiles,
imprisons or so humiliates him that the other, like a fool, dies of
grief. in this instance it so happens that it is not yet the man of
feeling who suffers. the great misfortune of the small towns of france
and of elected governments, like that of new york, is an inability to
forget that there exist in the world persons like m. de renal. in a
town of twenty thousand inhabitants, these men form public opinion,
and public opinion is a terrible force in a country that has the
charter. a man endowed with a noble soul, of generous instincts, who
would have been your friend did he not live a hundred leagues away,
judges you by the public opinion of your town, which is formed by the
fools whom chance has made noble, rich and moderate. woe to him who
distinguishes himself!

immediately after dinner, they set off again for vergy; but, 
 
 ___________________________
 
two days
later, julien saw the whole family return to verrieres.

an hour had not gone by before, greatly to his surprise, he discovered
that madame de renal was making a mystery of something. she broke off
her conversations with her husband as soon as he appeared, and seemed
almost to wish him to go away. julien did not wait to be told twice.
he became cold and reserved; madame de renal noticed this, and did not
seek an explanation. 'is she going to provide me with a successor?'
thought julien.  'only the day before yesterday, she was so intimate
with me! but they say that this is how great ladies behave.  they are
like kings, no one receives so much attention as the minister who, on
going home, finds the letter announcing his dismissal.'

julien remarked that in these conversations, which ceased abruptly on
his approach, there was frequent mention of a big house belonging to

 
 ___________________________
 
the municipality of verrieres, old, but large and commodious, and
situated opposite the church, in the most valuable quarter of the
town. 'what connection can there be between that house and a new
lover?' julien asked himself. in his distress of mind, he repeated to
himself those charming lines of francois i, which seemed to him new,
because it was not a month since madame de renal had taught them to
him. at that time, by how many vows, by how many caresses had not each
line been proved false!

  souvent femme varie
  bien fol est qui s'y fie.

m. de renal set off by post for besancon. this journey was decided
upon at two hours' notice, he seemed greatly troubled. on his return,
he flung a large bundle wrapped in grey paper on the table.

'so much for that stupid business,' he said to his wife.

an hour later, julien saw the bill-sticker carrying off this large
bundle; he
 
 ___________________________
 
 followed him hastily. 'i shall learn the secret at the
first street corner.'

he waited impatiently behind the bill-sticker, who with his fat brush
was slapping paste on the back of the bill. no sooner was it in its
place than julien's curiosity read on it the announcement in full
detail of the sale by public auction of the lease of that large and
old house which recurred so frequently in m. de renal's conversations
with his wife. the assignation was announced for the following day at
two o'clock, in the town hall, on the extinction of the third light.
julien was greatly disappointed; he considered the interval to be
rather short: how could all the possible bidders come to know of the
sale in time? but apart from this, the bill, which was dated a
fortnight earlier and which he read from beginning to end in three
different places, told him nothing.

he went to inspect the vacant house. the p
 
 ___________________________
 
town of verrieres is simply bound to increase his
income with an allowance of five hundred francs; that is all.'

'and to think that the mayor hasn't been able to stop it!' remarked a
third. 'for he may be an ultra, if you like, but he's not a thief.'

'he's not a thief?' put in another; 'it's a regular thieves' kitchen.
everything goes into a common fund, and is divided up at the end of
the year. but there's young sorel; let us get away.'

julien went home in the worst of tempers; he found madame de renal
greatly depressed.

'have you come from the sale?' she said to him.

'yes, ma'am, where i had the honour to be taken for the mayor's spy.'

'if he had taken my advice, he would have gone away somewhere.'

at that moment, m. de renal appeared; he was very sombre. dinner was
eaten in silence. m. de renal told julien to accompany the children to
vergy; they travelled in unbroken gloom. madame de renal tried to
comfort her husband.

'surely you are accustomed to it, my dear.'

that evening, they we
 
 ___________________________
 
les magistrate
merindol, who in sentencing him to a fine had made use of the
common southern expression 'nonante-cinq' for 'quatre-vingt-quinze.]

a good-looking man, with bushy black whiskers, entered the room at
this moment in the wake of the servant.

'm. le maire, i am signor geronimo. here is a letter which m. le
chevalier de beauvaisis, attache at the embassy at naples, gave me for
you when i came away; it is only nine days ago,' signor geronimo
added, with a sprightly air, looking at madame de renal. 'signor de
beauvaisis, your cousin, and my good friend, madame, tells me that
you know italian.'

the good humour of the neapolitan changed this dull evening into one
that was extremely gay. madame de renal insisted upon his taking
supper. she turned the whole house upside down; she wished at all
costs to distract julien's thoughts from the description of him as a
spy which twice in that day he had heard ringing in his ear. signer
geronimo was a famous singer, a man used to good company, and a
 
 ___________________________
 
t the
same time the best of company himself, qualities which, in france,
have almost ceased to be compatible. he sang after supper a little
duet with madame de renal. he told charming stories. at one o'clock in
the morning the children protested when julien proposed that they
should go to bed.

'just this story,' said the eldest.

'it is my own, signorino,' replied signer geronimo. 'eight years ago i
was, like you, a young scholar in the conservatorio of naples, by
which i mean that i was your age; for i had not the honour to be the
son of the eminent mayor of the beautiful town of verrieres.'

this allusion drew a sigh from m. de renal, who looked at his w
 
 ___________________________
 
 pocket, "_carta canta_! here is his
signature."

'immediately zingarelli, furious, flew to the bell-rope: "turn
geronimo out of the conservatorio," he shouted, seething with rage. so
out they turned me, i splitting my sides with laughter. that same
evening, i sang the _aria del moltiplico_. polichinelle intends to
marry, and counts up on his fingers the different things he will need
for the house, and loses count afresh at every moment.'

'oh, won't you, sir, please sing us that air?' said madame de renal.

geronimo sang, and his audience all cried with laughter.

signor geronimo did not go to bed until two in the morning, leaving
the family enchanted with his good manners, his obliging nature and
his gay spirits.

next day m. and madame de renal gave him the letters which he required
for the french court.

'and so, falsehood everywhere,' said julien. 'there is signor geronimo
on his way to london with a salary of sixty thousand francs. but for
the cleverness of the director of san carlino, his 
 
 ___________________________
 
divine voice might
not have been known and admired for another ten years, perhaps ...
upon my soul, i would rather be a geronimo than a renal. he is not so
highly honoured in society, but he has not the humiliation of having
to grant leases like that one today, and his is a merry life.'

one thing astonished julien: the weeks of solitude spent at verrieres,
in m. de renal's house, had been for him a time of happiness. he had
encountered disgust and gloomy thoughts only at the dinners to which
he had been invited; in that empty house, was he not free to read,
write, meditate, undisturbed? he had not been aroused at every moment
from his radiant dreams by the cruel necessity of studying the motions
of a base soul, and that in order to deceive it by hypocritical words
or actions.

'could happiness be thus within my reach? ... the cost of such a life
is nothing; i c
 
 ___________________________
 
an, as i choose, marry miss elisa, or become fouque's
partner ... but the traveller who has just climbed a steep mountain,
sits down on the summit, and finds a perfect pleasure in resting.
would he be happy if he were forced to rest always?'

madame de renal's mind was a prey to carking thoughts. in spite of her
resolve to the contrary, she had revealed to julien the whole business
of the lease. 'so he will make me forget all my vows!' she thought.

she would have given her life without hesitation to save that of her
husband, had she seen him in peril. hers was one of those noble and
romantic natures, for which to see the possibility of a generous
action, and not to perform it gives rise to a remorse almost equal to
that which one feels for a past 
 
 ___________________________
 
 julien, all perfectly happy.

a strange effect of marriage, such as the nineteenth century has made
it!  the boredom of married life inevitably destroys love, when love
has preceded marriage. and yet, as a philosopher has observed, it
speedily brings about, among people who are rich enough not to have to
work, an intense boredom with all quiet forms of enjoyment. and it is
only dried up hearts, among women, that it does not predispose to
love.

the philosopher's observation makes me excuse madame de renal, but
there was no excuse for her at verrieres, and the whole town, without
her suspecting it, was exclusively occupied with the scandal of her
love.  thanks to this great scandal, people that autumn were less
bored than usual.

the autumn, the first weeks of winter had soon come and gone. it was
time to leave the woods of vergy. the high society of verrieres began
to grow indignant that its anathemas were making so little impression
upon m. de renal. in less than a week, certain grave personage
 
 ___________________________
 
made no answer; he was considering whether his honour ought to
take offence at the arrangements which m. chelan, who after all was
not his father, had made for him.

'tomorrow at this hour i shall have the honour of seeing you again,'
he said at length to the cure.

m. chelan, who reckoned upon overcoming the young man by main force,
spoke volubly. his attitude, his features composed in the utmost
humility, julien did not open his mouth.

at length he made his escape, and hastened to inform madame de renal,
whom he found in despair. her husband had just been speaking to her
with a certain frankness. the natural weakness of his character,
seeking encouragement in the prospect of the inheritance from
besancon, had made him decide to regard her as entirely innocent. he
had just confessed to her the strange condition in which he found
public opinion at verrieres. the public were wrong, had been led
astray by envious ill-wishers, but what was to be done?

madame de renal had the momentary illusion tha
 
 ___________________________
 
rless to secure my own happiness!
he will forget me. charming as he is, he will be loved, he will love.
ah, unhappy woman! of what can i complain? heaven is just, i have not
acquired merit by putting a stop to my crime; it blinds my judgment.
it rested with me alone to win over elisa with a bribe, nothing would
have been easier. i did not take the trouble to reflect for a moment,
the wild imaginings of love absorbed all my time. and now i perish.'

one thing struck julien; as he conveyed to madame de renal the
terrible news of his departure, he was met with no selfish objection.
evidently she was making an effort not to cry.

'we require firmness, my friend.'

she cut off a lock of her hair.

'i do not know what is to become of me,' she said to him, 'but if i
die, promise me that you will never forget my children.  far or near,
try to make them grow up honourable men. if there is another
revolution, all the nobles will be murdered, their father may
emigrate, perhaps, because of that peasant who w
 
 ___________________________
 
as killed upon a roof.
watch over the family ... give me your hand. farewell, my friend!
these are our last moments together. this great sacrifice made, i hope
that in public i shall have the courage to think of my reputation.'

julien had been expecting despair. the simplicity of this farewell
touched him.

'no, i do not accept your farewell thus. i shall go; they wish it; you
wish it yourself. but, three days after my departure, i shall return
to visit you by night.'

madame de renal's existence was changed. so julien really did love her
since he had had the idea, of his own accord, of seeing her again. her
bitter grief changed into one of the keenest bursts of joy that she
had ever felt in her life. everything became easy to her. the
certainty of seeing her lover again took from these last moments all
their lacerating force. from that instant the conduct, like the
features of madame de renal was noble, firm, and perfectly
conventional.

m. de renal presently returned; he w
 
 ___________________________
 
as beside himself. for the first
time he mentioned to his wife the anonymous letter which he had
received two months earlier.

'i intend to take it to the casino, to show them all that it comes
from that wretch valenod, whom i picked up out of the gutter and made
into one of the richest citizens of verrieres. i shall disgrace him
publicly, and then fight him. it is going too far.'

'i might be left a widow, great god!' thought madame de renal. but
almost at the same instant she said to herself: 'if i do not prevent
this duel, as i certainly can, i shall be my husband's murderess.'

never before had she handled his vanity with so much skill. in less
than two hours she made him see, always by the use of arguments that
had occurred first to him, that he must show himself friendlier than
ever towards m. valenod, and even take elisa into the house again.
madame de renal required courage to make up her mind to set eyes on
this girl, the c
 
 ___________________________
 
ause of all her troubles. but the idea had come to her
from julien.

finally, after having been set three or four times in the right
direction, m. de renal arrived of his own accord at the idea (highly
distressing, from the financial point of view) that the most
unpleasant thing that could happen for himself was that julien, amid
the seething excitement and gossip of the whole of verrieres, should
remain there as tutor to m. valenod's children. it was obviously in
julien's interest to accept the offer made him by the governor of the
poorhouse. it was essential however to m. de renal's fair fame that
julien should leave verrieres to enter the semin
 
 ___________________________
 
ary at besancon or at
dijon. but how was he to be made to agree, and after that how was he
to maintain himself there?

m. de renal, seeing the imminence of a pecuniary sacrifice, was in
greater despair than his wife. for her part, after this conversation,
she was in the position of a man of feeling who, weary of life, has
taken a dose of _stramonium_; he ceases to act, save, so to speak,
automatically, and no longer takes an interest in anything. thus louis
xiv on his deathbed was led to say: 'when i was king.' an admirable
speech!

on the morrow, at break of day, m. de renal received an anonymous
letter.  it was couched i
 
 ___________________________
 
g a duel with m. valenod. soon his courage had risen
to the idea of an immediate execution of his design. he left the house
unaccompanied, and went to the gunsmith's to procure a brace of
pistols, which he told the man to load.

'after all,' he said to himself, 'should the drastic rule of the
emperor napoleon be restored, i myself could not be charged with the
misappropriation of a halfpenny. at the most i have shut my eyes; but
i have plenty of letters in my desk authorising me to do so.'

madame de renal was frightened by her husband's cold anger, it brought
back to her mind the fatal thought of widowhood, which she found it so
hard to banish. she shut herself up with him. for hours on end she
pleaded with him in vain, the latest anonymous letter had determined
him. at length she succeeded in transforming the courage required to
strike m. valenod into that required to offer julien six hundred
francs for his maintenance for one year in a seminary. m. de renal,
heaping a thousand curses on the da
 
 ___________________________
 
y on which he had conceived the
fatal idea of taking a tutor into his household, forgot the anonymous
letter.

he found a grain of comfort in an idea which he did not communicate to
his wife: by skilful handling, and by taking advantage of the young
man's romantic ideas, he hoped to bind him, for a smaller sum, to
refuse m. valenod's offers.

madame de renal found it far harder to prove to julien that, if he
sacrificed to her husband's convenience a post worth eight hundred
francs, publicly offered him by the governor of the poorhouse, he
might without blushing accept some compensation.

'but,' julien continued to object, 'i have never had, even for a
moment, the slightest thought of accepting that offer. you have made
me too familiar with a life of refinement, the vulgarity of those
people would kill me.'

cruel necessity, with its hand of iron, b
 
 ___________________________
 
ent julien's will. his pride
offered him the self-deception of accepting only as a loan the sum
offered by the mayor of verrieres, and giving him a note of hand
promising repayment with interest after five years.

madame de renal had still some thousands of francs hidden in the
little cave in the mountains.

she offered him these, trembling, and feeling only too sure that they
would be rejected with fury.

'do you wish,' julien asked her, 'to make the memory of our love
abominable?'

at length julien left verrieres. m. de renal was overjoyed; at the
decisive moment of accepting money from him, this sacrifice proved to
be too great for julien. he refused point-blank. m. de renal fell upon
his neck, with tears in his eyes
 
 ___________________________
 
 julien having asked him for a
testimonial to his character, he could not in his enthusiasm find
terms laudatory enough to extol the young man's conduct. our hero had
saved up five louis and intended to ask fouque for a similar amount.

he was greatly moved. but when he had gone a league from verrieres,
where he was leaving such a treasure of love behind him, he thought
only of the pleasure of seeing a capital, a great military centre like
besancon.

during this short parting of three days, madame de renal was duped by
one of love's most cruel illusions. her life was tolerable enough,
there was between her and the last extremes of misery this final
meeting that she was still to have with julien.

she counted the hours, the minutes that divided her from it. finally,
during the night that followed the third day, she heard in the
distance the signal arranged between them. having surmounted a
thousand perils, julien appeared before her.

>from that moment, she had but a single thought: 'i am looking 
 
 ___________________________
 
uld take her mind from the cruel
thought of eternal separation. the suspicious julien fancied for a
moment that she had already forgotten him. his hints at such a
possibility were received only with huge tears that flowed in silence,
and with a convulsive pressure of his hand.

'but, great god! how do you expect me to believe you?' was julien's
reply to his mistress's chill protestations. 'you would show a hundred
times more of sincere affection to madame derville, to a mere
acquaintance.'

madame de renal, petrified, did not know how to answer.

'it would be impossible for a woman to be more wretched ... i hope i
am going to die ... i feel my heart freezing ...'

such were the longest answers he was able to extract from her.

when the approach of day made his departure necessary, madame de
renal's tears ceased all at once. she saw him fasten a knotted cord to
the window without saying a word, without returning his kisses. in
vain might julien say to her:

'at last we have reached the state for w
 
 ___________________________
 
endless. julien changed
colour when fouque said to him:

'have you heard, by the way? the mother of your pupils has become most
devoutly religious.'

and he spoke with that detached air which makes so singular an
impression on the passionate soul whose dearest interests the speaker
unconsciously destroys.

'yes, my friend, the most exalted strain of piety. they say that she
makes pilgrimages. but, to the eternal shame of the abbe maslon, who
has been spying so long upon that poor m. chelan, madame de renal will
have nothing to do with him. she goes to confession at dijon or
besancon.'

'she comes to besancon!' said julien, his brow flushing.

'quite often,' replied fouque with a questioning air.

'have you any _constitutionnels_ on you?'

'what's that you say?' replied fouque.

'i ask you if you have any _constitutionnels_?' julien repeated, in a
calmer tone. 'they are sold here for thirty sous a copy.'

'what! liberals even in the seminary!' cried fouque. 'unhappy france!'
he went on, copying th
 
 ___________________________
 
e who was kneeling in the confessional turned her head slightly
on hearing the sound of julien's step amid the prevailing silence. all
at once she gave a little cry, and fainted.

as her strength left her, this kneeling lady fell back; her friend,
who was close at hand, hastened to the rescue. at the same time julien
caught sight of the shoulders of the lady who had fallen back. a rope
of large seed pearls, well known to him, caught his eye. what was his
state when he recognised the hair of madame de renal! it was she. the
lady who was trying to hold up her head, and to arrest her fall, was
madame derville. julien, beside himself with emotion, sprang forward;
madame de renal's fall would perhaps have brought down her friend if
he had not supported them. he saw madame de renal's head, pale,
absolutely devoid of consciousness, drooping upon her shoulder. he
helped madame derville to prop that charming head against the back of
a straw chair; he was on his knees.

madame derville turned and recognise
 
 ___________________________
 
ut when the bishop passed, julien was so tremulous that the abbe chas
abandoned the idea of presenting him.

'do not worry yourself about it,' he told him, 'i shall find another
opportunity.'

that evening, he sent down to the chapel of the seminary ten pounds of
candles, saved, he said, by julien's efforts and the rapidity with
which he extinguished them. nothing could have been farther from the
truth. the poor boy was himself extinguished; he had not had a thought
in his head after seeing madame de renal.




chapter 29
the first step


  he knew his times, he knew his departement, and he is rich.
    _le precurseur_

julien had not yet recovered from the profound abstraction in which
the incident in the cathedral had plunged him, when one morning the
grim abbe pirard sent for him.

'here is m. l'abbe chas-bernard writing to me to commend you. i am
quite satisfied with your conduct as a whole. you are extremely
imprudent and indeed stupid, without showing it; however, up to the
present your hea
 
 ___________________________
 
n
receiving the official letter announcing the result of the
competition, he saw the number 198 set against the name of that pupil
whom he regarded as the glory of his establishment. the only
consolation for this stern character was to concentrate upon julien
all the vigilance at his command. he was delighted to find in him
neither anger nor thoughts of revenge, nor discouragement.

some weeks later, julien shuddered on receiving a letter; it bore the
paris postmark. 'at last,' he thought, 'madame de renal has remembered
her promises.' a gentleman who signed himself paul sorel, and
professed to be related to him, sent him a bill of exchange for five
hundred francs. the writer added that if julien continued to study
with success the best latin authors, a similar sum would be sent to
him every year.

'it is she, it is her bounty!' julien said to himself with emotion,
'she wishes to comfort me; but why is there not one word of
affection?'

he was mistaken with regard to the letter; madame de renal, 
 
 ___________________________
 
was
at last going to appear on the stage of great events. the good fortune
of going to paris, which he peopled in his imagination with men of
intelligence, great intriguers, great hypocrites, but as courteous as
the bishop of besancon and the bishop of agde, eclipsed everything
else in his eyes. he represented himself to his friend as deprived of
his free will by the abbe pirard's letter.

towards noon on the following day he arrived in verrieres the happiest
of men, he reckoned upon seeing madame de renal again. he went first
of all to his original protector, the good abbe chelan. he met with a
stern reception.

'do you consider that you are under any obligation to me?' said m.
chelan, without acknowledging his greeting. 'you will take luncheon
with me, meanwhile another horse will be hired for you, and you will
leave verrieres, without seeing anyone.'

'to hear is to obey,' replied julien, with the prim face of a
seminarist; and there was no further discussion save of theology and
latin scholar
 
 ___________________________
 
 the torrent, which ran through m. de
renal's magnificent gardens at a depth of ten feet, and confined
between walls.  julien climbed up easily by his ladder. 'what sort of
greeting will the watch-dogs give me?' he wondered. 'that is the whole
question.' the dogs barked, and rushed towards him; but he whistled
softly, and they came and fawned upon him.

then climbing from terrace to terrace, although all the gates were
shut, he had no difficulty in arriving immediately beneath the window
of madame de renal's bedroom, which, on the garden side, was no more
than nine or ten feet above the ground.

there was in the shutters a small opening in the shape of a heart,
which julien knew well. to his great dismay, this little opening was
not lighted by the glimmer of a nightlight within.

'great god!' he said to himself; 'tonight, of all nights, this room is
not occupied by madame de renal! where can she be sleeping? the family
are at verrieres, since i found the dogs here; but i may in this room,
without
 
 ___________________________
 
 a light, come upon m. de renal himself or a stranger, and then
what a scandal!'

the most prudent course was to retire; but the idea filled julien with
horror. 'if it is a stranger, i shall make off as fast as my legs will
carry me, leaving my ladder behind; but if it is she, what sort of
welcome awaits me? she is steeped in repentance and the most extreme
piety, i may be sure of that; but after all, she has still some memory
of me, since she has just written to me.' with this argument he made
up his mind.

his heart trembli
 
 ___________________________
 
no answer; the white
phantom had vanished. 'for pity's sake, open the window. i must speak
to you, i am too wretched!' and he knocked until the window nearly
broke.

a little sharp sound was heard; the catch of the window gave way; he
pushed it open and sprang lightly into the room.

the white phantom moved away; he seized it by the arms; it was a
woman. all his ideas of courage melted. 'if it is she, what will she
say to me?' what was his state when he realised from a faint cry that
it was madame de renal.

he gathered her in his arms; she trembled, and had barely the strength
to repulse him.

'wretch! what are you doing?'

scarcely could her tremulous voice articulate the words. julien saw
that she was genuinely angry.

'i have come to see you after fourteen months of a cruel parting.'

'go, leave me this instant. ah! m. chelan, why did you forbid me to
write to him? i should have prevented this horror.' she thrust him
from her with a force that was indeed extraordinary. 'i repent of my
crime; 
 
 ___________________________
 
heaven has deigned to enlighten me,' she repeated in a stifled
voice. 'go! fly!'

'after fourteen months of misery, i shall certainly not leave you
until i have spoken to you. i wish to know all that you have been
doing. ah! i have loved you well enough to deserve this confidence ...
i wish to know all.'

in spite of herself madame de renal felt this tone of authority exert
its influence over her heart.

julien, who was holding her in a passionate embrace, and resisting her
efforts to liberate herself, ceased to press her in his arms. this
relaxation helped to reassure madame de renal.

'i am going to draw up the ladder,' he said, 'so that it may not
compromise us if one of the servants, awakened by the noise, goes the
rounds.'

'ah! leave me, leave me rather,' the answer came with unfeigned anger.
'what do men matter to me? it is
 
 ___________________________
 
e strength to speak.

'and so i am completely forgotten by the one person who has ever loved
me!  what use to live any longer?' all his courage had left him as
soon as he no longer had to fear the danger of encountering a man;
everything had vanished from his heart, save love.

he wept for a long time in silence. he took her hand, she tried to
withdraw it; and yet, after a few almost convulsive movements, she let
him keep it.  the darkness was intense; they found themselves both
seated upon madame de renal's bed.

'what a difference from the state of things fourteen months ago!'
thought julien, and his flow of tears increased. 'so absence
unfailingly destroys all human feelings!

'be so kind as to tell me what has happened to you,' julien said at
length, embarrassed by his silence and in a voice almost stifled by
tears.

'there can be no doubt,' replied madame de renal in a harsh voice, the
tone of which offered a cutting reproach to julien, 'my misdeeds were
known in the town, at the time of you
 
 ___________________________
 
r departure. you were so
imprudent in your behaviour. some time later, when i was in despair,
the respectable m. chelan came to see me. it was in vain that, for a
long time, he sought to obtain a confession. one day, the idea
occurred to him to take me into that church at dijon in which i made
my first communion. there, he ventured to broach the subject...'
madame de renal's speech was interrupted by her tears. 'what a
shameful moment! i confessed all. that worthy man was kind enough not
to heap on me the weight of his indignation: he shared my distress. at
that time i was writing you day after day letters which i dared not
send you; i concealed them carefully, and when i was too wretched used
to shut myself up in my room and read over my own letters.

'at length, m. chelan persuaded me to hand them over to him ... some
of them, written with a little more prudenc
 
 ___________________________
 
 at the
seminary.'

'great god! who can have intercepted them?'

'imagine my grief; until the day when i saw you in the cathedral, i
did not know whether you were still alive.'

'god in his mercy made me understand how greatly i was sinning against
him, against my children, against my husband,' replied madame de
renal. 'he has never loved me as i believed then that you loved me
...'

julien flung himself into her arms, without any definite intention but
with entire lack of self-control. but madame de renal thrust him from
her, and continued quite firmly:

'my respectable friend m. chelan made me realise that, in marrying m.
de renal, i had pledged all my affections to him, even those of which
i was still ignorant, which i had never felt before a certain fatal
intimacy ...  since the great sacrifice of those letters, which were
so precious to me, my life has flowed on, if not happily, at any rate
quietly enough. do not disturb it any more; be a friend to me ... the
best of friends.' julien covered
 
 ___________________________
 
 to know what sort of life you led at the seminary,'
she repeated, 'then you shall go.'

without a thought of what he was telling her, julien spoke of the
endless intrigues and jealousies which he had encountered at first,
then of his more peaceful life after he was appointed tutor.

'it was then,' he added, 'that after a long silence, which was
doubtless intended to make me understand what i see only too clearly
now, that you no longer love me, and that i had become as nothing to
you ...'

madame de renal gripped his hands. 'it was then that you sent me a sum
of five hundred francs.'

'never,' said madame de renal.

'it was a letter postmarked _paris_ and signed paul sorel, to avoid all
suspicion.'

a short discussion followed as to the possible source of this letter.
the atmosphere began to change. unconsciously, madame de renal and
julien had departed from their solemn tone; they had returned to that
of a tender intimacy. they could not see each other, so intense was
the darkness, but the soun
 
 ___________________________
 
nged in a black darkness, perfectly well aware that
for the last minute she had been crying, feeling, from the movement of
her bosom, that she was convulsed with sobs, he unfortunately became a
frigid politician, almost as calculating and as frigid as when, in the
courtyard of the seminary, he saw himself made the butt of some
malicious joke by one of his companions stronger than himself. julien
spun out his story, and spoke of the wretched life he had led since
leaving verrieres. 'and so,' madame de renal said to herself, 'after a
year's absence, almost without a single token of remembrance, while i
was forgetting him, his mind was entirely taken up with the happy days
he had enjoyed at vergy.' her sobs increased in violence. julien saw
that his story had been successful. he realised that he must now try
his last weapon: he came abruptly to the letter that he had just
received from paris.

'i have taken leave of monseigneur, the bishop.'

'what! you are not returning to besancon! you are leaving
 
 ___________________________
 
 us for
ever?'

'yes,' replied julien, in a resolute tone; 'yes, i am abandoning the
place where i am forgotten even by her whom i have most dearly loved
in all my life, and i am leaving it never to set eyes on it again. i
am going to paris ...'

'you are going to paris!' madame de renal exclaimed quite aloud.

her voice was almost stifled by her tears, and showed the intensity of
her grief. julien had need of this encouragement; he was going to
attempt a course which might decide everything against him; and before
this exclamation, seeing no light, he was absolutely ignorant of the
effect that he was producing. he hesitated no longer; the fear of
remorse gave him complete command of himself; he added coldly as he
rose to his feet:

'yes, madame, i leave you for ever, may you b
 
 ___________________________
 
e happy; farewell.'

he took a few steps towards the window; he was already opening it.
madame de renal sprang after him and flung herself into his arms.

thus, after three hours of conversation, julien obtained what he had
so passionately desired during the first two. had they come a little
earlier, this return to tender sentiments, the eclipse of remorse in
madame de renal would have been a divine happiness; obtained thus by
artifice, they were no more than mere pleasure. julien positively
insisted, against the entreaties of his mistress, upon lighting the
nightlight.

'do you then wish me,' he asked her, 'to retain no memory of having
seen you? the love that is doubtless glowing in those charming eyes,
shall it then be lost to me? shall the whiteness of that lovely hand
be invisible to me? think that i am leaving you for a very long time
perhaps!'

madame de ren
 
 ___________________________
 
al could refuse nothing in the face of this idea which
made her dissolve in tears. dawn was beginning to paint in clear hues
the outline of the fir trees on the mountain to the least of
verrieres. instead of going away, julien, intoxicated with pleasure,
asked madame de renal to let him spend the whole day hidden in her
room, and not to leave until the following night.

'and why not?' was her answer. 'this fatal relapse destroys all my
self-esteem, and dooms me to lifelong misery,' and she pressed him to
her heart. 'my husband is no longer the same, he has suspicions; he
believes that i have been fooling him throughout this affair, and is
in the worst of tempers with me. if he hears the least sound i am
lost, he will drive me from the house like the wretch that i am
 
 ___________________________
 
 recovered all the
exquisite sensations of pride when he was once more able to see in his
arms and almost at his feet this charming woman, the only woman that
he had ever loved, who, a few hours earlier, had been entirely wrapped
up in the fear of a terrible god and in devotion to duty. resolutions
fortified by a year of constancy had not been able to hold out against
his boldness.

presently they heard a sound in the house; a consideration to which
she had not given a thought now disturbed madame de renal.

'that wicked elisa will be coming into the room, what are we to do
with that enormous ladder?' she said to her lover; 'where are we to
hide it? i am going to take it up to the loft,' she suddenly
exclaimed, with a sort of playfulness.

'but you will have to go through the servant's room,' said julien with
astonishment.

'i shall leave the ladder in the corridor, call the man and send him
on an errand.'

'remember to have some excuse ready in case the man notices the ladder
when he passes it i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the passage.'

'yes, my angel,' said madame de renal as she gave him a kiss. 'and
you, remember to hide yourself quickly under the bed if elisa comes
into the room while i am away.'

julien was amazed at this sudden gaiety. 'and so,' he thought, 'the
approach of physical danger, so far from disturbing her, restores her
gaiety because she forgets her remorse! indeed a superior woman! ah!
there is a heart in which it is glorious to reign!' julien was in
ecstasies.

madame de renal took the ladder; plainly it was too heavy for her.
julien went to her assistance; he was admiring that elegant figure,
which suggested anything rather than strength, when suddenly, without
help, she grasped the ladder and picked it up as she might have picked
up a chair.  she carried it swiftly to the corridor on the third
storey, where she laid it down by the wall. she called the manservant,
and, to give him time to put on his clothes, went up to the dovecote.
five minutes later, when she retu
 
 ___________________________
 
he
added with a laugh.

'come; first of all, i am going to hide you in madame derville's room,
which is always kept locked.' she kept watch at the end of the
corridor and julien slipped from door to door. 'remember not to
answer, if anyone knocks,' she reminded him as she turned the key
outside; 'anyhow, it would only be the children playing.'

'make them go into the garden, below the window,' said julien, 'so
that i may have the pleasure of seeing them, make them speak.'

'yes, yes,' cried madame de renal as she left him.

she returned presently with oranges, biscuits, a bottle of malaga; she
had found it impossible to purloin any bread.

'what is your husband doing?' said julien.

'he is writing down notes of the deals he proposes to do with some
peasants.'

but eight o'clock had struck, the house was full of noise. if madame
de renal were not to be seen, people would begin searching everywhere
for her; she was obliged to leave him. presently she returned, in
defiance of all the rules of pruden
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, to bring him a cup of coffee;
she was afraid of his dying of hunger.  after luncheon she managed to
shepherd the children underneath the window of madame derville's room.
he found that they had grown considerably, but they had acquired a
common air, or else his ideas had changed. madame de renal spoke to
them of julien. the eldest replied with affection and regret for his
former tutor, but it appeared that the two younger had almost
forgotten him.

m. de renal did not leave the house that morning; he was incessantly
going up and downstairs, engaged in striking bargains with certain
peasants, to whom he was selling his potato crop. until dinner time,
madame de renal had not a moment to spare for her prisoner. when
dinner was on the table, it occurred to her to steal a plateful of hot
soup for him. as she silently approached the door of the room in which
he was, carrying the plate carefully, she found herself face to face
with the servant who had hidde
 
 ___________________________
 
n the ladder that morning. at that
moment, he too was coming silently along the corridor, as though
listening. probably julien had forgotten to tread softly. the servant
made off in some confusion. madame de renal went boldly into julien's
room; her account of the incident made him shudder.

'you are afraid'; she said to him; 'and i, i would brave all the
dangers in the world without a tremor. i fear one thing only, that is
the moment when i shall be left alone after you have gone,' and she
ran from the room.

'ah!' thought julien, greatly excited, 'remorse is the only danger
that sublime soul dreads!'

night came at last. m. de renal went to the casino.

his wife had announced a severe headache, she ret
 
 ___________________________
 
ired to her room,
made haste to dismiss elisa, and speedily rose from her bed to open
the door to julien.

it so happened that he really was faint with hunger. madame de renal
went to the pantry to look for bread. julien heard a loud cry. she
returned and told him that on entering the dark pantry, making her way
to a cupboard in which the bread was kept, and stretching out her
hand, she had touched a woman's arm. it was elisa who had uttered the
cry which julien had heard.

'what was she doing there?'

'she was stealing a few sweetmeats, or possibly spying on us,' said
madame de renal with complete indifference. 'but fortunately i have
found a pate and a big loaf.'


 
 ___________________________
 
'and what have you got there?' said julien, pointing to the pockets of
her apron.

madame de renal had forgotten that, ever since dinner, they had been
filled with bread.

julien clasped her in his arms with the keenest passion; never had she
seemed to him so beautiful. 'even in paris,' he told himself vaguely,
'i shall not be able to find a nobler character.' she had all the
awkwardness of a woman little accustomed to attentions of this sort,
and at the same time the true courage of a person who fears only
dangers of another kind and far more terrible.

while julien was devouring his supper
 
 ___________________________
 
 with a keen appetite, and his
mistress was playfully apologising for the simplicity of the repast,
for she had a horror of serious speech, the door of the room was all
at once shaken violently. it was m. de renal.

'why have you locked yourself in?' he shouted to her.

julien had just time to slip beneath the sofa.

'what! you are fully dressed,' said m. de renal, as he entered; 'you
are having supper, and you have locked your door?'

on any ordinary day, this question, put with all the brutality of a
husband, would have troubled madame de renal, but she felt that her
husband had only to lower his eyes a little to catch sight of julien;
for m. de renal had flung himself upon the chair on which julien had
been sitting a moment earlier, facing the sofa.

her headache served as an excuse for everything. while in his turn her
husband was giving her a long a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd detailed account of the pool he had
won in the billiard room of the casino, 'a pool of nineteen francs,
begad!' he added, she saw lying on a chair before their eyes, and
within a few feet of them, julien's hat. cooler than ever, she began
to undress, and, choosing her moment, passed swiftly behind her
husband and flung a garment over the chair with the hat on it.

at length m. de renal left her. she begged julien to begin over again
the story of his life in the seminary: 'yesterday i was not listening
to you, i was thinking, while you were speaking, only of how i was to
bring myself to send you away.'

she was the embodiment of imprudence. they spoke very loud; and it
might have been two o'clock in the morning when they were interrupted
by a violent blow on the door. it was m. de renal again:

'let me in at once, there are burglars in the house!' he said,
'saint-jean found th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir ladder this morning.'

'this is the end of everything,' cried madame de renal, throwing
herself into julien's arms. 'he is going to kill us both, he does not
believe in the burglars; i am going to die in your arms, more
fortunate in my death than i have been in my life.' she made no answer
to her husband, who was waiting angrily outside, she was holding
julien in a passionate embrace.

'save stanislas's mother,' he said to her with an air of command. 'i
am going to jump down into the courtyard from the window of the
closet, and escape through the garden, the dogs know me
 
 ___________________________
 
sole anxiety.

she went with him to the window of the closet; she then took such time
as she required to conceal his garments. finally she opened the door
to her husband, who was boiling with rage. he searched the bedroom,
the closet, without uttering a word, and then vanished. julien's
clothes were thrown down to him, he caught them and ran quickly down
the garden towards the doubs.

as he ran, he heard a bullet whistle past him, and simultaneously the
sound of a gun being fired.

'that is not m. de renal,' he decided, 'he is not a good enough shot.'
the dogs were running by his side in silence, a second shot apparently
shattered the paw of one dog, for it began to emit lamentable howls.
julien jumped the wall of a terrace, proceeded fifty yards under
cover, then continued his flight in a different direction. he heard
voices calling, and could distinctly see the servant, his enemy, fire
a gun; a farmer also came and shot at him from the other side of the
garden, but by this time julien had reach
 
 ___________________________
 
whether i shall not begin my political career, in the
roule quarter, by presenting the blessed bread in the parish church.'

'none of that would have happened to you under bonaparte,' said
falcoz, his eyes shining with anger and regret.

'that's all very well, but why couldn't he keep going, your bonaparte?
everything that i suffer from today is his doing.'

here julien began to listen with increased attention. he had realised
from the first that the bonapartist falcoz was the early playmate of
m. de renal, repudiated by him in 1816, while the philosopher
saint-giraud must be a brother of that chief clerk in the prefecture
of ----, who knew how to have municipal property knocked down to him
on easy terms.

'and all that has been your bonaparte's doing,' saint-giraud
continued: 'an honest man, harmless if ever there was one, forty years
old and with five hundred thousand francs, can't settle down in the
country and find peace there. bonaparte's priests and nobles drive him
out again.'

'ah! you mu
 
 ___________________________
 
y which they earn their living. would there be these
insolent gentlemen today if your bonaparte had not created barons and
counts? no, the fashion had passed. next to the priests, it is the
minor country nobles that have annoyed me most, and forced me to turn
liberal.'

the discussion was endless, this theme will occupy the minds and
tongues of france for the next half-century. as saint-giraud kept on
repeating that it was impossible to live in the provinces, julien
timidly cited the example of m. de renal.

'egad, young man, you're a good one!' cried falcoz, 'he has turned
himself into a hammer so as not to be made the anvil, and a terrible
hammer at that. but i can see him cut out by valenod. do you know that
rascal? he's the real article. what will your m. de renal say when he
finds himself turned out of office one of these fine days, and valenod
filling his place?'

'he will be left to meditate on his crimes,' said saint-giraud. 'so
you know verrieres, young man, do you? very good! bonaparte,
 
 ___________________________
 
id memory of the twenty-four hours
which he had just spent at verrieres. he made a vow that he would
never abandon his mistress's children, but would give up everything to
protect them, should the impertinences of the priests give us a
republic and lead to persecutions of the nobility.

what would have happened to him on the night of his arrival at
verrieres if, at the moment when he placed his ladder against madame
de renal's bedroom window, he had found that room occupied by a
stranger, or by m. de renal?

but also what bliss in those first few hours, when his mistress really
wished to send him away, and he pleaded his cause, seated by her side
in the darkness! a mind like julien's is pursued by such memories for
a lifetime. the rest of their meeting had already merged into the
first phases of their love, fourteen months earlier.

julien was awakened from his profound abstraction by the stopping of
the carriage. they had driven into the courtyard of the posthouse in
the rue jean-jacques roussea
 
 ___________________________
 
r's salary.'

as they came down from the attic, the marquis summoned an elderly man:
'arsene,' he said to him, 'you will look after m. sorel.' a few
minutes later, julien found himself alone in a magnificent library: it
was an exquisite moment. so as not to be taken by surprise in his
emotion, he went and hid himself in a little dark corner; from which
he gazed with rapture at the glittering backs of the books. 'i can
read all of those,' he told himself. 'and how should i fail to be
happy here? m. de renal would have thought himself disgraced for ever
by doing the hundredth part of what the marquis de la mole has just
done for me.

'but first of all, we must copy the letters.' this task ended, julien
ventured towards the shelves; he almost went mad with joy on finding
an edition of voltaire. he ran and opened the door of the library so
as not to be caught. he then gave himself the pleasure of opening each
of the eighty volumes in turn. they were magnificently bound, a
triumph of the best craftsma
 
 ___________________________
 
s admiration beyond all bounds.

an hour later, the marquis entered the room, examined the copies, and
was surprised to see that julien wrote cela with a double _l_, _cella_
'so all that the abbe has been telling me of his learning is simply a
tale!' the marquis, greatly discouraged, said to him gently:

'you are not certain of your spelling?'

'that is true,' said julien, without the least thought of the harm he
was doing himself; he was moved by the marquis's kindness, which made
him think of m. de renal's savage tone.

'it is all a waste of time, this experiment with a little
franc-comtois priest,' thought the marquis; 'but i did so want a
trustworthy man.

'_cela_ has only one _l_,' the marquis told him; 'when you have
finished your copies, take the dictionary and look out all the words
of which you are not certain.'

at six o'clock the marquis sent for him; he looked with evident dismay
at julien's boots: 'i am to blame. i forgot to tell you that every
evening at half-past five you must dres
 
 ___________________________
 
s.'

julien looked at him without understanding him.

'i mean put on stockings. arsene will remind you; today i shall make
your apologies.'

so saying, m. de la mole ushered julien into a drawing-room
resplendent with gilding. on similar occasions, m. de renal never
failed to increase his pace so that he might have the satisfaction of
going first through the door.

the effect of his old employer's petty vanity was that julien now trod
upon the marquis's heels, and caused him considerable pain, owing to
his gout.  'ah! he is even more of a fool than i thought,' the marquis
said to himself. he presented him to a woman of tall stature and
imposing aspect.  it was the marquise. julien decided that she had an
impertinent air, which reminded him a little o
 
 ___________________________
 
quise utter a word of rebuke, slightly raising her voice. almost at
the same moment he noticed a young person extremely fair and very
comely, who was taking her place opposite to him. she did not attract
him at all; on studying her attentively, however, he thought that he
had never seen such fine eyes; but they hinted at great coldness of
heart. later, julien decided that they expressed a boredom which
studies other people but keeps on reminding itself that it is one's
duty to be imposing. 'madame de renal, too, had the most beautiful
eyes,' he said to himself; 'people used to compliment her on them; but
they had nothing in common with these.' julien had not enough
experience to discern that it was the fire of wit that shone from time
to time in the eyes of mademoiselle mathilde, for so he heard her
named. when madame de renal's eyes became animated, it was with the
fire of her passions, or was due to a righteous indignation upon
hearing of some wicked action. towards the end of dinner, julien fo
 
 ___________________________
 
rted, there remained only the stars and ribands.

round the table, which the servants had just brought in already laid,
were seated seven or eight ladies, extremely noble, extremely
religious, extremely affected, between thirty and thirty-five years of
age. the brilliant wife of marshal de fervaques entered the room,
apologising for the lateness of the hour. it was after midnight; she
took her place next to the marquise. julien was deeply stirred; her
eyes and her expression reminded him of madame de renal.

the group round mademoiselle de la mole was still numerous. she and
her friends were engaged in making fun of the unfortunate comte de
thaler. this was the only son of the famous jew, celebrated for the
riches that he had acquired by lending money to kings to make war on
the common people. the jew had recently died leaving his son a monthly
income of one hundred thousand crowns, and a name that, alas, was only
too well known! this singular position required either simplicity of
character or g
 
 ___________________________
 
il with whom he used
often to fence. julien was frank with him.

'i shall be glad to be your second,' said lieven, 'but upon one
condition: if you do not hit your man, you shall fight with me, there
and then.'

'agreed,' said julien, with delight; and they went to find m. c. de
beauvoisis at the address indicated upon his cards, in the heart of
the faubourg saint-germain.

it was seven o'clock in the morning. it was only when he sent in his
name that it occurred to julien that this might be madame de renal's
young relative, formerly attached to the embassy at rome or naples,
who had given the singer geronimo a letter of introduction.

julien had handed to a tall footman one of the cards flung at him the
day before, together with one of his own.

he was kept waiting, with his second, for fully three quarters of an
hour; finally they were shown into an admirably furnished apartment.
they found a tall young man, got up like a doll; his features
exemplified the perfection and the insignificance of gr
 
 ___________________________
 
 rest; he began to talk far more
freely. he felt himself less frequently insulted and made a butt by
those remarks, susceptible of some scarcely polite interpretation,
which, in the course of an animated conversation, may fall from the
lips of anyone.

his cross was the cause of an unexpected visit; this was from m. le
baron de valenod, who came to paris to thank the minister for his
barony and to come to an understanding with him. he was going to be
appointed mayor of verrieres in the place of m. de renal.

julien was consumed with silent laughter when m. de valenod gave him
to understand that it had just been discovered that m de renal was a
jacobin.  the fact was that, in a new election which was in
preparation, the new baron was the ministerial candidate, and in the
combined constituency of the department, which in reality was strongly
ultra, it was m. de renal who was being put forward by the liberals.

it was in vain that julien tried to learn something of madame de
renal; the baron appeare
 
 ___________________________
 
t of the family was in black.

after dinner, he found himself entirely recovered from the fit of
enthusiasm which had possessed him all day. fortunately, the
academician who knew latin was present at dinner. there is the man who
will be least contemptuous of me, if, as i suppose, my question about
mademoiselle de la mole's mourning should prove a blunder.'

mathilde was looking at him with a singular expression. 'there we have
an instance of the coquetry of the women of these parts, just as
madame de renal described it to me,' julien told himself. 'i was not
agreeable to her this morning, i did not yield to her impulse for
conversation. my value has increased in her eyes. no doubt the devil
loses no opportunity there. later on, her proud scorn will find out a
way of avenging itself. let her do her worst. how different from the
woman i have lost! what natural charm! what simplicity! i knew what
was in her mind before she did; i could see her thoughts take shape; i
had no competitor, in her heart, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ademoiselle de
la mole, who was making love to him, as elisa had done in the past,
that her mistress's mourning was by no means put on to attract
attention. this eccentricity was an intimate part of her nature. she
really loved this la mole, the favoured lover of the most brilliant
queen of her age, who had died for having sought to set his friends at
liberty. and what friends! the first prince of the blood and henri iv.

accustomed to the perfect naturalness that shone through the whole of
madame de renal's conduct, julien saw nothing but affectation in all
the women of paris, and even without feeling disposed to melancholy,
could think of nothing to say to them. mademoiselle de la mole was the
exception.

he began no longer to mistake for hardness of heart the kind of beauty
that goes with nobility of bearing. he had long conversations with
mademoiselle de la mole, who would stroll with him in the garden
sometimes after dinner, past the open windows of the drawing-room. she
told him one day tha
 
 ___________________________
 
is sister's, and if julien
emerged from the alley formed by the pleached branches of the limes,
the count and his friends would be able to follow his every movement.

mademoiselle de la mole appeared behind her closed window; he half
showed her his letter; she bowed her head. at once julien ran up to
his own room, and happened to meet, on the main staircase, the fair
mathilde, who snatched the letter with perfect composure and laughing
eyes.

'what passion there was in the eyes of that poor madame de renal,'
julien said to himself, 'when, even after six months of intimate
relations, she ventured to receive a letter from me! never once, i am
sure, did she look at me with a laugh in her eyes.'

he did not express to himself so clearly the rest of his comment; was
he ashamed of the futility of his motives? 'but also what a
difference,' his thoughts added, 'in the elegance of her morning gown,
in the elegance of her whole appearance! on catching sight of
mademoiselle de la mole thirty yards off, a ma
 
 ___________________________
 
n of taste could tell
the rank that she occupies in society.  that is what one may call an
explicit merit.'

still playing with his theme, julien did not yet confess to himself
the whole of his thoughts; madame de renal had had no marquis de
croisenois to sacrifice to him. he had had as a rival only that
ignoble sub-prefect m. charcot, who had assumed the name of maugiron,
because the maugirons were extinct.

at five o'clock, julien received a third letter; it was flung at him
from the library door. mademoiselle de la mole again fled. 'what a
mania for writing,' he said to himself with a laugh, 'when it is so
easy for us to talk! the enemy wishes to have my letters, that is
clear, and plenty of them!' he was i
 
 ___________________________
 
that i require,' he said to
himself, 'what does it matter how i may be feeling now?' he went to
reconnoitre the position and to try the weight of the ladder.

'it is an instrument,' he said to himself, with a laugh, 'which it is
written in my destiny that i am to use! here as at verrieres. what a
difference! then,' he continued with a sigh, 'i was not obliged to be
suspicious of the person for whose sake i was exposing myself. what a
difference, too, in the danger!

'i might have been killed in m. de renal's gardens without any harm to
my reputation. it would have been easy to make my death unaccountable.
here, what abominable tales will they not bandy about in the
drawing-rooms of the hotel de chaulnes, the hotel de caylus, the hotel
de retz, and in short everywhere? i shall be handed down to posterity
as a monster.

'for two or three years,' he added, laughing at himself. but the
thought of this overwhelmed him. 'and i, who is going to justify me?
supposing that fouque prints my posthumous pamp
 
 ___________________________
 
s use of the _tu_ form, stripped of the tone of
affection, ceased, after a moment, to afford julien any pleasure, he
was astonished at the absence of happiness; finally, in order to feel
it, he had recourse to his reason. he saw himself highly esteemed by
this girl who was so proud, and never bestowed unrestricted praise; by
this line of reasoning he arrived at a gratification of his
self-esteem.

this was not, it is true, that spiritual ecstasy which he had found at
times in the company of madame de renal. there was nothing tender in
his sentiments at this first moment. what he felt was the keenest
gratification of his ambition, and julien was above all things
ambitious. he spoke again of the people he suspected and of the
precautions he had contrived. as he spoke he was thinking of how best
to profit by his victory.

mathilde, who was still greatly embarrassed and had the air of one
appalled by what she had done, seemed enchanted at finding a topic of
conversation.  they discussed how they shou
 
 ___________________________
 
not answer; her mother scolded her, it was all she could
do to look at her. her ecstasy reached a state of exaltation and
passion comparable to the most violent emotions that, during the last
few days, julien had felt for her.  the _cantilena_, divinely
graceful, to which was sung the maxim that seemed to her to bear so
striking an application to her own situation, occupied every moment in
which she was not thinking directly of julien. thanks to her love of
music, she became that evening as madame de renal invariably was when
thinking of him. love born in the brain is more spirited, doubtless,
than true love, but it has only flashes of enthusiasm; it knows itself
too well, it criticises itself incessantly; so far from banishing
thought, it is itself reared only upon a structure of thought.

on her return home, in spite of anything that madame de la mole might
say, mathilde alleged an attack of fever, and spent part of the night
playing over the _cantilena_ on her piano. she sang the words of the

 
 ___________________________
 
o distract
himself with thoughts of martial glory and of devotion to his country.
was he in love, then? he could not say, only he found in his bruised
heart mathilde the absolute mistress of his happiness as of his
imagination. he required all his natural energy to keep himself from
sinking into despair. to think of anything that bore no relation to
mademoiselle de la mole was beyond his power.  ambition, the mere
triumphs of vanity, had i distracted him in the past from the
sentiments that madame de renal inspired in him.  mathilde had
absorbed all; he found her everywhere in his future.

on every hand, in this future, julien foresaw failure. this creature
whom we saw at verrieres so filled with presumption, so arrogant, had
fallen into an absurd extreme of modesty.

three days earlier he would have killed the abbe castanede with
pleasure, and at strasbourg, had a boy picked a quarrel with him, he
would have offered the boy an apology. in thinking over the
adversaries, the enemies whom he had en
 
 ___________________________
 
t in the
vestibule of the opera: 'bear in mind, sir,' she said to him, 'that
people must not love napoleon when they love me; they may, at the
most, accept him as a necessity imposed by providence. anyhow, the man
had not a soul pliant enough to feel great works of art.'

'_when they love me_!' julien repeated to himself; 'either that means
nothing at all, or it means everything. there is one of the secrets of
language that are hidden from us poor provincials.' and he thought
incessantly of madame de renal as he copied an immensely long letter
intended for the marechale.

'how is it,' she asked him the following evening, with an air of
indifference which seemed to him unconvincing, 'that you speak to me
of _london_ and _richmond_ in a letter which you wrote last night, it
appears, after leaving the opera?'

julien was greatly embarrassed; he had copied the letter line for
line, without thinking of what he was writing, and apparently had
forgotten to substitute for the words _london_ and _richmond
 
 ___________________________
 
immense,' he said to himself; 'but what is going
to happen tomorrow? an instant may ruin everything.'

he opened with a passionate impulse the _memoirs dictated at saint
helena by napoleon_, and for two solid hours forced himself to read
them; his eyes alone read the words, no matter, he forced himself to
the task. during this strange occupation, his head and heart, rising
to the level of everything that is most great, were at work without
his knowledge. 'this is a very different heart from madame de renal's,'
he said to himself, but he went no farther.

'make her afraid,' he cried of a sudden, flinging the book from him.
'the enemy will obey me only so long as i make him fear me, then he
will not dare to despise me.'

he paced up and down his little room, wild with joy. to be frank, this
happiness was due to pride rather than love.

'make her afraid!' he repeated proudly to himself, and he had reason
to be proud. 'even in her happiest moments, madame de renal always
doubted whether my love were 
 
 ___________________________
 
h julien.

'i could forgive everything, except the plan of seducing you because
you are rich. that, unhappy girl, is the appalling truth. i give you
my word of honour that i will never consent to a marriage with that
man. i promise him an income of ten thousand livres if he consents to
live abroad, beyond the frontiers of france, or better still in
america. read the letter which i have received in reply to a request
for information. the shameless scoundrel had himself invited me to
write to madame de renal. never will i read a line from you about the
man. i have a horror of paris and of you. i request you to cloak with
the greatest secrecy what must shortly happen. renounce honestly a
vile fellow, and you will regain a father.'

'where is madame de renal's letter?' said julien coldly. 'here it is.
i did not wish to show it to you until you were prepared.'

letter

'what i owe to the sacred cause of religion and morals obliges me,
sir, to the painful step which i take in addressing you; a rule, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
gious principles. i am
bound in conscience to think that one of his avenues to success in a
household is to seek to seduce the woman who has most influence there.
cloaked by a show of disinterestedness and by phrases from novels, his
great and sole object is to contrive to secure control over the master
of the house and over his fortune. he leaves in his wake misery and
undying regret,' etc., etc., etc.

this letter, extremely long and half obliterated by tears, was
certainly in the hand of madame de renal; it was even written with
greater care than usual.

'i cannot blame m. de la mole,' said julien when he had finished
reading it; 'he is just and prudent. what father would give his
beloved daughter to such a man! farewell!'

julien sprang out of the cab, and ran to his post-chaise which had
drawn up at the end of the street. mathilde, whom he seemed to have
forgotten, followed him for a little way; but the sight of the
tradesmen who were coming to the doors of their shops, and to whom she
was k
 
 ___________________________
 
 was the talk of the town.

julien had some difficulty in making him understand that he required a
brace of pistols. the gunsmith, at his request, loaded the pistols.

the _three bells_ sounded; this is a signal well known in french
villages, which, after the various peals of the morning, announces
that mass is just about to begin.

julien entered the new church of verrieres. all the tall windows of
the building were screened by crimson curtains. he found himself
standing a few yards behind madame de renal's bench. he had the
impression that she was praying with fervour. the sight of this woman
who had loved him so dearly made julien's arm tremble so violently
that he could not at first carry out his design. 'i cannot,' he said
to himself; 'i am physically incapable of it.'

at that moment, the young clerk who was serving mass rang the bell for
the elevation. madame de renal bowed her head which for a moment was
almost entirely concealed by the folds of her shawl. her aspect was
less familiar to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ons on his
wrists, and left him by himself; the door was shut on him and
double-locked; all this was carried out quickly, and he remained
unconscious of it.

'faith, all is over,' he said aloud on coming to himself... 'yes, in a
fortnight the guillotine ... or suicide between now and then.'

his reasoning went no farther; he felt a pain in his head as though it
had been gripped with violence. he looked round to see if anyone was
holding it. a few moments later, he fell into a deep slumber.

madame de renal was not mortally wounded. the first bullet had passed
through her hat; as she turned round, the second shot had been fired.
this bullet had struck her in the shoulder, and, what was surprising,
had glanced back from the shoulder-blade, which nevertheless it
shattered, against a gothic pillar, from which it broke off a huge
splinter of stone.

when, after a long and painful examination, the surgeon, a grave man,
said to madame de renal: 'i answer for your life as for my own,' she
was deeply affe
 
 ___________________________
 
 he thought, 'keep him waiting a
long time for the five francs which he wants as the price of his
conscience.'

when the gaoler saw the meal come to an end without any attempt at
corruption:

'the friendship that i feel for you, monsieur julien,' he began, with
a false, winning air, 'obliges me to speak; although they may say that
it is against the interests of justice, because it may help you to
arrange your defence ... monsieur julien, who has a good heart, will
be glad if i tell him that madame de renal is going on well.'

'what! she is not dead?' cried julien, beside himself with amazement.

'what! didn't you know?' said the gaoler with an air of stupidity
which presently turned to one of joyful greed. 'it would only be right
for monsieur to give something to the surgeon who, according to law
and justice, ought not to speak. but, to oblige monsieur, i went to
his house, and he told me everything ...'

'in short, the injury is not mortal,' said julien, losing patience,
'you answer for that wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h your life?'

the gaoler, a giant six feet in stature, took fright and retreated
towards the door. julien saw that he was going the wrong way to reach
the truth, he sat down again and tossed a napoleon to m. noiroud.

as the man's story began to convince julien that madame de renal's
injury was not mortal, he felt himself overcome by tears. 'leave me!'
he said suddenly.

the gaoler obeyed. as soon as the door was shut: 'great god! she is
not dead!' exclaimed julien; and he fell on his knees, weeping hot
tears.

in this supreme moment he was a believer. what matter the hypocrisies
of the priests? can they destroy anything of the truth and sublimity
of the idea of god?

only then did julien begin to repent of the crime that he had
committed. by a coincidence which saved him
 
 ___________________________
 
 rascal here still?' said julien.

'yes, sir,' replied the gaoler, lowering his voice, 'but do not speak
so loud, it may damage you.'

julien laughed heartily.

'at the stage i have reached, my friend, you alone could damage me, if
you ceased to be gentle and human ... you shall be well paid,' julien
broke off, resuming his imperious air. this air was immediately
justified by the gift of a small coin.

m. noiroud told him once more, going into the fullest detail, all that
he had heard about madame de renal, but he did not mention miss
elisa's visit.

this man was as menial and submissive as possible. an idea came into
julien's head: 'this sort of ungainly giant may earn three or four
hundred francs, for his prison is never crowded; i can guarantee him
ten thousand francs, if he cares to escape to switzerland with me ...
the difficulty will be to persuade him of my sincerity.' the thought
of the long colloquy that he would have to hold with so vile a
creature filled julien with disgust, he turned 
 
 ___________________________
 
noyance of appearing in public, the defence, he regarded as so many
trifling embarrassments, tiresome ceremonies of which it would be time
to think when the day came. the prospect of death detained him almost
as little: 'i shall think of that after the sentence.' life was by no
means tedious to him, he looked at everything in a fresh light. he had
no ambition left. he thought rarely of mademoiselle de la mole. his
remorse occupied him a great deal and often called up before him the
image of madame de renal, especially in the silence of the night,
disturbed only, in this lofty dungeon, by the cry of the osprey!

he thanked heaven for not having let him wound her mortally. 'an
astonishing thing!' he said to himself, 'i thought that by her letter
to m. de la mole she had destroyed my future happiness for all time,
and, in less than a fortnight after the date of that letter, i no
longer think of all that was occupying my mind ... two or three
thousand livres a year to live quietly in a mountain villa
 
 ___________________________
 
ge like
vergy ... i was happy then ... i did not recognise my own happiness!'

at other moments, he would rise with a bound from his chair. 'if i had
wounded madame de renal mortally, i should have killed myself ... i
require that certainty to make me feel a horror of myself. ,,,

'kill myself! that is the great question,' he said to himself. those
judges so steeped in formalities, so thirsty for the blood of the
wretched prisoner, who would have the best of citizens hanged in order
to hang a cross from their own buttonholes ... i should remove myself
from their power, from their insults in bad french, which the local
newspaper will proceed to call eloquence.

'i m
 
 ___________________________
 
e to make his meaning clear without
indiscretion, he advised him to distribute the sum in alms, for the
poor prisoners, who, as a matter of fact, were in need of everything.

'this julien is a strange creature, his action is inexplicable,'
thought m. de frilair, 'and nothing ought to be inexplicable to me ...
perhaps it will be possible to make a martyr of him ... in any case, i
shall get to the true _inwardness_ of this business and may perhaps
find an opportunity of inspiring fear in that madame de renal, who has
no respect for us, and detests me in her heart... perhaps i may even
discover in all this some sensational means of reconciliation with m.
de la mole, who has a weakness for this little seminarist.'

the settlement of the lawsuit had been signed some weeks earlier, and
the abbe pirard had left besancon, not without having spoken of the
mystery of julien's birth, on the very day on which the wretched
fellow tried to kill madame de renal in the church of verrieres.

julien saw only one d
 
 ___________________________
 
bly i should have
a majority, more than that, even for a verdict of guilty; you see,
mademoiselle, with what ease i can secure an acquittal ..."

the abbe broke off suddenly, as though startled by the sound of his
words; he was admitting things which are never uttered to the profane.

but mathilde in turn was stupefied when he informed her that what was
most astonishing and interesting to besancon society in julien's
strange adventure, was that in the past he had inspired a grand
passion in madame de renal, which he had long reciprocated. m. de
frilair had no difficulty in perceiving the extreme distress which his
story produced.

'i have my revenge!' he thought. 'here, at last, is a way of
controlling this decided young person; i was trembling lest i should
not succeed in finding one.' her distinguished air, as of one not
easily led, intensified in his eyes the charm of the rare beauty which
he saw almost suppliant before him. he recovered all his
self-possession and had no hesitation in turning
 
 ___________________________
 
.'

m. de frilair went on torturing with voluptuous relish and at his
leisure the heart of this beautiful girl, whose weak spot he had
discovered.

'why,' he said, fixing a pair of burning eyes on mathilde, 'should m.
sorel have chosen the church, if not because at that very moment his
rival was celebrating mass there? everyone agrees in ascribing
boundless intelligence and even more prudence to the man who is so
fortunate as to enjoy your protection. what more simple than to
conceal himself in m. de renal's gardens, which he knows so well?
there, with almost a certainty of not being seen, nor caught, nor
suspected, he could have inflicted death on the woman of whom he was
jealous.'

these arguments, apparently so well founded, reduced mathilde to utter
despair. her spirit, haughty enough but saturated with all that dry
prudence which passes in society as a faithful portrayal of the human
heart, was not made to understand in a moment the joy of defying all
prudence which can be so keen a joy to a
 
 ___________________________
 
s prison, 'that so warm a passion, and one of which i am the
object, leaves me so unmoved! and i worshipped her two months ago! i
have indeed read that at the approach of death we lose interest in
everything; but it is frightful to feel oneself ungrateful and to be
unable to change. can i be an egoist?' he heaped on himself, in this
connection, the most humiliating reproaches.

ambition was dead in his heart, another passion had risen from its
ashes; he called it remorse for having murdered madame de renal.

as a matter of fact, he was hopelessly in love with her. he found a
strange happiness when, left absolutely alone and without any fear of
being disturbed, he could abandon himself entirely to the memory of
the happy days which he had spent in the past at verrieres or at
vergy. the most trifling incidents of that time, too swiftly flown,
had for him a freshness and a charm that were irresistible. he never
gave a thought to his parisian successes; they bored him.

this tendency, which grew rapi
 
 ___________________________
 
dly stronger, was not entirely hidden
from the jealous mathilde. she saw quite plainly that she had to
contend with the love of solitude. now and again, she uttered with
terror in her heart the name of madame de renal. she saw julien
shudder. from that moment, her passion knew no bounds nor measure.

'if he dies, i die after him,' she said to herself with absolute
sincerity.  'what would the drawing-rooms of paris say, to see a girl
of my rank carry to such a point her adoration of a lover condemned to
death? to find such sentiments, we must go back to the days of the
heroes; it was love of this nature that set hearts throbbing in the
age of charles ix and henri iii.'

amid the most impassioned transports, w
 
 ___________________________
 
twenty-four
hours after.'

memories of these moments of heroism and fearful ecstasy seized her in
an ineluctable grip. the thought of suicide, so absorbing in itself,
and hitherto so remote from that proud spirit, penetrated its defences
and soon reigned there with an absolute sway. 'no, the blood of my
ancestors has not grown lukewarm in its descent to me,' mathilde told
herself proudly.

'i have a favour to ask you,' her lover said to her one day: put your
child out to nurse at verrieres, madame de renal will look after the
nurse.'

'that is a very harsh saying . . .' mathilde turned pale.

'true, and i ask a thousand pardons,' cried julien, awakening from his
dream and pressing her to his bosom.

having dried her tears, he returned to the subject of his thoughts,
but with more subtlety. he had given the conversation a turn of
melancholy philosophy. he spoke of that future which was soon to close
for him. 'you must agree, my dear friend, that the passions are an
accident in life, but this accid
 
 ___________________________
 
villes of the fronde ... but by then, my
dear friend, the heavenly fire which animates you at this moment will
have cooled a little.

'allow me to tell you,' he went on, after many other preliminary
phrases, 'in fifteen years from now you will regard as an act of
folly, pardonable but still an act of folly, the love that you have
felt for me ...'

he broke off abruptly and returned to his dreams. he found himself
once again confronted by that idea, so shocking to mathilde: 'in
fifteen years madame de renal will adore my son, and you will have
forgotten him.'




chapter 40
tranquillity


  it is because i was foolish then that i am now wise.
  o philosopher who see nothing save in a flash, how
  short is your vision! your eye is not made to follow
  the underground working of the passions.
    frau von goethe

this conversation was interrupted by a judicial examination, followed
by a conference with the lawyer retained for the defence. these were
the only absolutely disagreeable moments in a heed
 
 ___________________________
 
would indeed be foolish, one must admit, were he
to play a part ...

'it is strange, all the same, that i have learned the art of enjoying
life only now that i see its term draw so near.'

he spent these last days in pacing the narrow terrace on the roof of
his dungeon, smoking some excellent cigars for which mathilde had sent
a courier to holland, and with no suspicion that his appearance was
daily awaited by all the telescopes in the town. his thoughts were at
vergy. never did he speak of madame de renal to fouque, but on two or
three occasions this friend told him that she was recovering rapidly,
and these words echoed in his heart.

while julien's spirit was almost always completely lost in the world
of ideas, mathilde, occupied with realities, as becomes an
aristocratic heart, had contrived to increase the intimacy of the
direct correspondence between madame de fervaques and m. de frilair to
such a point that already the mighty word bishopric had been uttered.

the venerable prelate, in whos
 
 ___________________________
 
ay, among the names drawn
from the urn, m. de frilair found those of five members of the
congregation of besancon, and, among those who were strangers to the
town, the names of mm. valenod, de moirod and de cholin. 'i can
answer at once for these eight jurors,' he told mathilde. 'the first
five are _machines_. valenod is my agent, moirod owes all he has to me,
cholin is an imbecile, who is afraid of everything.'

the newspaper published throughout the department the names of the
jurors, and madame de renal, to the inexpressible terror of her
husband, decided to come to besancon. all that m. de renal could
obtain from her was that she would not leave her bed, so that she
might not be exposed to the nuisance of being summoned to give
evidence. 'you do not understand my position,' said the former mayor
of verrieres. 'i am now a liberal of the defection, as they call it;
no doubt but that rascal valenod and m. de frilair will easily
persuade the attorney general and the judges to anything that can be
 
 ___________________________
 

unpleasant for me.'

madame de renal yielded without protest to her husband's orders, '�f i
were to appear at the assize court,' she told herself, 'i should seem
to be demanding vengeance.'

notwithstanding all the promises of prudence made to her spiritual
director and to her husband, no sooner had she arrived in besancon
than she wrote with her own hand to each of the thirty-six jurors:

'i shall not appear in court upon the day of the trial, sir, because
my presence might prejudice m. sorel's case. i desire but one thing in
t
 
 ___________________________
 
l remember this celebrated trial for a
  long time to come.  interest in the accused reached fever
  pitch; this was because his crime was astonishing and yet
  not atrocious. even if it had been, the young man was so
  handsome! his great destiny abruptly cut short heightened
  the pity felt for him. will he be condemned? the women
  would ask the men of their acquaintance and one could see
  them grow pale as they awaited the reply.
    sainte-beuve

at length the day dawned so dreaded by madame de renal and mathilde.

the strange appearance of the town increased their terror, and did not
leave even fouque's stout heart unmoved. the whole province had
swarmed into besancon to witness the trial of this romantic case.

for some days past there had not been a bed to be had in the inns. the
president of the assize court was assailed with requests for cards of
admission; all the ladies of the town wished to be present at the
trial; julien's portrait was hawked through the streets, etc., etc.

mathil
 
 ___________________________
 
those
six ladies who are on that balcony?' the gendarme pointed to a little
gallery which jutted out above the amphitheatre in which the jury was
placed. 'that is the prefect's lady,' the gendarme continued; 'next to
her, madame la marquise de m ---- ; that one loves you dearly. i heard
her speak to the examining magistrate. next to her is madame
derville.'

'madame derville,' exclaimed julien, and a vivid blush suffused his
brow.  'when she leaves the court,' he thought, 'she will write to
madame de renal.' he knew nothing of madame de renal's arrival at
besancon.

the witnesses were quickly heard. at the first words of the speech for
the prosecution made by the counsel for the prosecution, two of the
ladies seated on the little balcony burst into tears. 'madame derville
is not so easily moved,' thought julien. he noticed, however, that she
was extremely flushed.

the counsel for the prosecution was labouring an emotional point in
bad french about the barbarity of the crime that had been committ
 
 ___________________________
 
f the contempt which i believed that i could endure at the
moment of my death, impels me to speak. gentlemen, i have not the
honour to belong to your class, you see in me a peasant who has risen
in revolt against the lowliness of his station.

'i ask you for no mercy,' julien went on, his voice growing stronger.
'i am under no illusion; death is in store for me; it will be a just
punishment.  i have been guilty of attempting the life of the woman
most worthy of all respect, of all devotion. madame de renal had been
like a mother to me. my crime is atrocious, and it was _premeditated_.
i have, therefore, deserved death, gentlemen of the jury. but, even
were i less guilty, i see before me men who, without pausing to
consider what pity may be due to my youth, will seek to punish in me
and to discourage forever that class of young men who, born in an
inferior station and in a sense burdened with poverty, have the good
fortune to secure a sound education, and the audacity to mingle with
what the pride
 
 ___________________________
 
 that was in his heart; the counsel for the prosecution, who
aspired to the favour of the aristocracy, kept springing from his
seat; but in spite of the somewhat abstract turn which julien had
given the debate, all the women were dissolved in tears. madame
derville herself had her handkerchief pressed to her eyes. before
concluding, julien returned to the question of premeditation, to his
repentance, to the respect, the filial and unbounded adoration which,
in happier times, he had felt for madame de renal ... madame
derville uttered a cry and fainted.

one o'clock struck as the jury retired to their waiting-room. none of
the women had left their seats; several of the men had tears in their
eyes. the general conversation was at first most lively; but
gradually, as the jury delayed their verdict, the feeling of weariness
spread a calm over the assembly. it was a solemn moment; the lamps
burned more dimly. julien, who was dead tired, heard them discussing
round him whether this delay augured well o
 
 ___________________________
 
 repeated, everyone turned back to look at julien,
for whom the gendarmes were trying to clear a passage through the
crowd.

'let us try not to give that rascal valenod any food for laughter,'
thought julien. 'with what a contrite and coaxing air he uttered the
verdict that involved the death penalty! whereas that poor president,
even though he has been a judge for all these years, had tears in his
eyes when he sentenced me. what a joy for valenod to have his revenge
for our old rivalry for madame de renal! and so i shall never see her
any more! it is all finished ... a last farewell is impossible between
us, i feel it ... how happy i should have been to express to her all
the horror i feel for my crime!

'these words only: i feel that i am justly condemned.'




chapter 42
in the prison


when julien was lee back to prison he had been put in a cell reserved
for those under sentence of death. he, who, as a rule, observed the
most trifling details, had never noticed that he was not being taken
up 
 
 ___________________________
 
m lost: he is a tyrant, and, as such, is full
of ideas of vengeance; his bible speaks of nothing but fearful
punishments. i never loved him! i could never even believe that anyone
did love him sincerely.  he is devoid of pity.' (here julien recalled
several passages from the bible.) 'he will punish me in some
abominable manner ...

'but if i meet the god of fenelon! he will say to me perhaps: "much
shall be pardoned thee, because thou hast loved much ..."

'have i loved much? ah! i did love madame de renal, but my conduct has
been atrocious. there, as elsewhere, i abandoned a simple and modest
merit for what was brilliant ...

'but then, what a prospect! colonel of hussars, should we go to war;
secretary of legation in time of peace; after that, ambassador ... for
i should soon have learned the business ... and had i been a mere
fool, need the son-in-law of the marquis de la mole fear any rival?
all my foolish actions would have been forgiven me, or rather counted
to me as merits. a man of distin
 
 ___________________________
 
of truth, may soften my voice and even make my tears begin
to flow. how often have not the sere hearts despised me for this
defect! they believed that i was begging for mercy: that is what i
cannot endure.

'they say that the thought of his wife overcame danton at the foot of
the scaffold; but danton had given strength to a nation of coxcombs,
and prevented the enemy from reaching paris . . i alone know what i
might have managed to do ... to others, i am at best only a
might-have-been.

'if madame de renal had been here, in my cell, instead of mathilde,
should i have been able to control myself? the intensity of my despair
and of my repentance would have appeared in the eyes of the valenods,
and of all the patricians of the neighbourhood, a craven fear of
death; they are so proud, those feeble hearts, whom their financial
position places out of reach of temptation!  "you see what it is," m.
de moirod and m. de cholin, who have just sentenced me to death, would
have said, "to be born the son of a 
 
 ___________________________
 
 tomorrow, i shall be fighting a duel in the morning with a man
well known for his coolness and for his remarkable skill ... very
remarkable,' whispered mephistopheles, 'he never misses his stroke.

'very well, so be it, all's well that ends well.' (mathilde's
eloquence continued to flow.) 'begad, no,' he said to himself, 'i
shall not appeal.'

having made this decision, he relapsed into his dreams ... 'the
postman on his rounds will bring the newspaper at six o'clock, as
usual; at eight, after m. de renal has read it, elisa, entering the
room on tiptoe, will lay it down on her bed. later, she will awake:
suddenly, as she reads, she will grow troubled; her lovely hand will
tremble; she will come to the words: _at five minutes past ten he had
ceased to live_.

'she will shed hot tears, i know her; in vain did i seek to murder
her, all will be forgotten, and the person whose life i sought to take
will be the only one who will weep sincerely for my death.

'ah, this is a paradox!' he thought, and, f
 
 ___________________________
 
or the next quarter of an
hour, while mathilde continued to make a scene, he thought only of
madame de renal. in spite of himself, and albeit frequently replying
to what mathilde said to him, he could not free his mind from the
memory of that bedroom at verrieres. he saw the _gazette de besancon_
lying on the counterpane of orange taffeta. he saw that snowy hand
clutching it with a convulsive movement; he saw madame de renal weep
... he followed the course of each tear over that charming face.
mademoiselle de la mole, having failed to get anything out of julien,
made the lawyer come in. he was fortunately an old captain of the army
of italy, of 1796, when he had served with manuel.

for the sake of form, he opposed the condemned man's decision. julien,
wishing to treat him with respect, explained all his reasons to him.

'faith, one may think as you do,' m. felix vaneau (this was the
lawyer's name) said to him at l
 
 ___________________________
 

chapter 43
last adieux


an hour later, when he was fast asleep, he was awakened by the tears
which he felt trickling over his hand. 'ah! mathilde again,' he
thought to himself, half awake. 'she has come, faithful to her theory,
to attack my resolve by force of tender sentiments.' irritated by the
prospect of this fresh scene in the pathetic manner, he did not open
his eyes. the lines of belphegor flying from his wife came into his
mind.

he heard a strange sigh; he opened his eyes; it was madame de renal.

'ah! do i see you again before my death? is it a phantom?' he cried,
as he flung himself at her feet.

'but forgive me, madame, i am nothing but a murderer in your eyes,' he
at once added, regaining his composure.

'sir, ... i have come to implore you to appeal, i know that you do not
wish to ...' she was choked by her sobs; she was unable to speak.

'deign to forgive me.'

'if you wish me to forgive you,' she said to him, rising and throwing
herself into his arms, 'appeal at once from the se
 
 ___________________________
 
e was mad. she uttered a faint cry.

'it is nothing,' she told him, 'you hurt me.'

'in your shoulder,' cried julien, bursting into tears. he stepped back
from her, and covered her hand with burning kisses. 'who would ever
have said, last time i saw you, in your bedroom, at verrieres ... ?'

'who would ever have said then that i should write m. de la mole that
infamous letter ... ?'

'know that i have always loved you, that i have never loved anyone but
you.'

'is it really possible?' cried madame de renal, equally enraptured.
she bowed herself over julien, who was kneeling at her feet, and for a
long time they wept in silence.

at no time in his life had julien experienced such a moment.

after a long interval, when they were able to speak:

'and that young madame michele!' said madame de renal, 'or rather
that mademoiselle de la mole; for i am beginning really to believe
this strange tale!'

'it is true only in appearance,' replied julien. 'she is my wife, but
she is not my mistress ...'

and, 
 
 ___________________________
 
each interrupting the other a hundred times, they managed with
difficulty, each of them, to tell what the other did not know. the
letter sent to m. de la mole had been written by the young priest who
directed madame de renal's conscience, and then copied out by her.
'what a terrible crime religion has made me commit!' she said to him;
'though i did modify the worst passages in the letter....'

julien's transports of joy proved to her how completely he forgave
her.  never had he been so madly in love.

'and yet i regard myself as pious,' madame de renal told him in the
course of their conversation. 'i believe sincerely in god; i believe
equally, indeed it has been proved to me, that the crime i am
committing is fear
 
 ___________________________
 
o your
gaoler, the crime would be committed before i had had time to think.
explain this to me in simple terms before i leave you, i wish to see
clearly into my own heart; for in two months we must part ... for that
matter, need we part?' she said, with a smile.

'i take back my word,' cried julien, springing to his feet; 'i shall
not appeal from the sentence of death, if by poison, knife, pistol,
charcoal or any other means whatsoever, you seek to put an end to, or
to endanger your life.'

madame de renal's expression altered suddenly; the warmest affection
gave place to a profound abstraction.

'if we were to die at once?' she said to him at length.

'who knows what we shall find in our next life?' replied julien;
'torments perhaps, perhaps nothing at all. can we not spend two months
together in a delicious manner? two months, that is ever so many days.
never shall i have been so happy.'

'you will never have been so happy?'

'never,' replied julien with rapture, 'and i am speaking to you as i

 
 ___________________________
 
anecdotes,'
she said with an air of profound distress. 'i have gone beyond the
last limits of modesty ... i am a woman who has forfeited her honour;
it is true that it was for your sake ...'

her tone was so melancholy that julien embraced her with a happiness
that was quite new to him. it was no longer the intoxication of love,
it was extreme gratitude. he had just realised, for the first time,
the full extent of the sacrifice that she had made for him.

some charitable soul doubtless informed m. de renal of the long visits
which his wife was paying to julien's prison; for, after three days,
he sent his carriage for her, with express orders that she was to
return immediately to verrieres.

this cruel parting had begun the day ill for julien. he was informed,
two or three hours later, that a certain intriguing priest, who for
all that had not succeeded in making any headway among the jesuits of
besancon, had taken his stand that morning outside the gate of the
prison, in the street.  it was raini
 
 ___________________________
 
 after his execution, etc., etc.

he was on the point of betraying himself by some sign of weakness, or
of flinging himself upon the priest and strangling him with his chain,
when it occurred to him to beg the holy man to go and say a good
forty-franc mass for him, that very day.

as it was almost midday, the priest decamped.




chapter 44
the shadow of the guillotine

as soon as he had gone, julien began to weep copiously, at the thought
of dying. after a while he said to himself that, if madame de renal
had been at besancon, he would have confessed his weakness to her. ...

at the moment when he most regretted the absence of that beloved
woman, he heard mathilde's step.

'the worst drawback of a prison,' he thought, 'is that one can never
close one's door.' all that mathilde had to say served only to
irritate him.

she informed him that, on the day of the trial, m. de valenod, having
in his pocket his appointment as prefect, had ventured to defy m. de
frilair and indulge himself in the pleasur
 
 ___________________________
 
y an
appeal to clemency, his death will be a sort of suicide ..."'

mathilde did not, of course, mention to julien a thing which she
herself did not yet suspect; namely, that the abbe de frilair, seeing
julien irremediably lost, thought that it would serve his own ambition
to aspire to become his successor.

almost out of his mind with helpless rage and vexation: 'go and hear a
mass for me,' he said to mathilde, 'and leave me a moment's peace.'
mathilde, who was extremely jealous already at madame de renal's
visits and had just heard of her departure, realised the cause of
julien's ill humour and burst into tears.

her grief was genuine, julien saw this and was all the more irritated.
he felt a compelling need of solitude, and how was he to secure it?

finally mathilde, having tried every argument to soften him, left him
to himself, but almost at that moment fouque appeared.

'i want to be alone,' he said to this faithful friend. and, as he saw
him hesitate: 'i am composing a memorial for my appe
 
 ___________________________
 
ous
neighbours in verrieres. "to this tune," his glance will say to them,
"which of you would not be charmed to have a son guillotined?"'

this philosophy might be true, but it was of a nature to make a man
long for death. in this way passed five endless days. he was polite
and gentle to mathilde, whom he saw to be exasperated by the most
violent jealousy.  one evening julien thought seriously of taking his
life. his spirit was exhausted by the profound dejection into which
the departure of madame de renal had cast him. nothing pleased him any
more, either in real life or in imagination. want of exercise was
beginning to affect his health and to give him the weak and excitable
character of a young german student. he was losing that manly pride
which repels with a forcible oath certain degrading ideas by which the
miserable are assailed.

'i have loved the truth ... where is it to be found? ... everywhere
hypocrisy, or at least charlatanism, even among the most virtuous,
even among the greatest'; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 ...

'so it is with death, life, eternity, things that would be quite
simple to anyone who had organs vast enough to conceive them ...

'an ephemeral fly is born at nine o'clock in the morning, on one of
the long days of summer, to die at five o'clock in the afternoon; how
should it understand the word _night_?

'grant it five hours more of existence, it sees and understands what
night is.

'and so with myself, i am to die at three and twenty. grant me five
years more of life, to live with madame de renal.'

here he gave a satanic laugh. what folly to discuss these great
problems!

'_imprimis_: i am a hypocrite just as much as if there was someone in
the cell to hear me.

'_item_: i am forgetting to live and love, when i have so few days
left of life ... alas! madame de renal is absent; perhaps her husband
will not allow her to come to besancon again, and disgrace herself
further.

'that is what is isolating me, that and not the absence of a just,
good, all-powerful god, who is not wicked, not h
 
 ___________________________
 
is development with impatience. julien
acquitted himself in a decent fashion of everything that is due to
public opinion in the provinces. thanks to m. l'abbe de frilair, and
in spite of his unfortunate choice of a confessor, julien, in his
cell, was under the protection of the congregation; with a little more
of the spirit of action, he might have made his escape. but, as the
bad air of the cell produced its effect, his mental powers dwindled.
this made him all the happier on the return of madame de renal.

'my first duty is towards you,' she said to him as she embraced him;
'i have fled from verrieres ...'

julien had no petty vanity in his relations with her, he told her of
all his weak moments. she was kind and charming to him.

that evening, immediately upon leaving the prison, she summoned to her
aunt's house the priest who had attached himself to julien as to a
prey; as he wished only to acquire a reputation among the young women
belonging to the best society of besancon, madame de renal e
 
 ___________________________
 
asily
persuaded him to go and offer a novena at the abbey of bray-le-haut.

no words could express the intensity and recklessness of julien's
love.

by spending money freely, and by using and abusing the reputation of
her aunt, well known for her piety and riches, madame de renal
obtained permission to see him twice daily.

on hearing this, mathilde's jealousy rose to the pitch of insanity. m.
de frilair had assured her that in spite of his position he dared not
flout all the conventions so far as to permit her to see her friend
more than once daily. mathilde had madame de renal followed, so as to
be kept informed of her most trivial actions. m. de frilair exhausted
every resource of a most cunning mind, in trying to prove to her that
julien was unworthy of her.

in the
 
 ___________________________
 
z. 'he is a shy man, not too
much of a jesuit,' he told her, 'and a man who no doubt intends to
climb. with a more sober and persistent ambition than poor croisenois,
and with no dukedom in his family, he will make no difficulty about
marrying julien sorel's widow.'

'and a widow who scorns grand passions,' replied mathilde coldly; 'for
she has lived long enough to see, after six months, her lover prefer
another woman, and a woman who was the origin of all their troubles.'

'you are unjust; madame de renal's visits will furnish the barrister
from paris, who has been engaged to conduct my appeal, with some
striking phrases; he will describe the murderer honoured by the
attentions of his victim. that may create an effect, and perhaps one
day you will see me the hero of some melodrama,' etc., etc.

a furious jealousy and one that was incapable of wreaking vengeance,
the prolongation of a hopeless misery (for, even supposing julien to
be saved, how was she to recapture his heart?), the shame and grie
 
 ___________________________
 
f of
loving more than ever this faithless lover, had plunged mademoiselle
de la mole in a grim silence from which the zealous attentions of m.
de frilair were no more capable than the rude frankness of fouque, of
making her emerge.

as for julien, except during the moments usurped by the presence of
mathilde, he was living upon love and with hardly a thought of the
future.  a curious effect of this passion, in its extreme form and
free from all pretence, was that madame de renal almost shared his
indifference and mild gaiety.

'in the past,' julien said to her, 'when i might have been so happy
during our walks in the woods of vergy, a burning ambition led my soul
into imaginary tracts. instead of my pressing to my heart this lovely
arm which was so near to my lips, the thought of my future tore me
away from you; i was occupied with the countless battles which i
should have to fight in order to build up a colossal fortune ... no, i
should have died without knowing what 
 
 ___________________________
 
 will annul the corrosive
effect of ten editions of the impious works of voltaire.'

'and what shall i have left,' replied julien coldly, 'if i despise
myself?  i have been ambitious, i have no wish to reproach myself; i
acted then according to the expediency of the moment. now, i am living
from day to day. but, generally speaking, i should be making myself
extremely unhappy, if i gave way to any cowardly temptation ...'

the other incident, which affected julien far more keenly, arose from
madame de renal. some intriguing friend or other had managed to
persuade this simple, timid soul that it was her duty to go to
saint-cloud, and to throw herself at the feet of king charles x.

she had made the sacrifice of parting from julien, and after such an
effort, the unpleasantness of making a public spectacle of herself,
which at any other time would have seemed to her worse than death, was
no longer anything in her eyes.

'i shall go to the king, i shall confess proudly that you are my
lover: the life 
 
 ___________________________
 
nts that he had known in the past in
the woods of vergy came crowding into his mind with an extreme
vividness.

everything passed simply, decorously, and without affectation on his
part.

two days earlier, he had said to fouque: 'for my emotions i cannot
answer; this damp and hideous cell gives me moments of fever in which
i am not myself; but fear, no; no one shall see me blench.'

he had made arrangements in advance that on the morning of the last
day, fouque should carry off mathilde and madame de renal.

'take them in the same carriage,' he had told him. 'arrange that the
post-horses shall gallop all the time. they will fall into one
another's arms, or else will show a deadly hatred for one another. in
either case, the poor women will have some slight distraction from
their terrible grief.'

julien had made madame de renal swear that she would live to look
after mathilde's child.

'who knows? perhaps we continue to have sensation after our death,' he
said one day to fouque. 'i should dearly l
 
 ___________________________
 
es, through which the procession passed, had followed it, drawn
by the singularity of this strange ceremony.

mathilde appeared in their midst in a flowing garb of mourning, and,
at the end of the service, had several thousands of five franc pieces
scattered among them.

left alone with fouque, she insisted upon burying her lover's head
with her own hands. fouque almost went mad with grief.

by mathilde's orders, this savage grot was adorned with marbles
sculptured at great cost, in italy.

madame de renal was faithful to her promise. she did not seek in any
way to take her own life; but, three days after julien, died while
embracing her children.
