ated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays have such a
peculiar history. written in french in 1892 it was in full
rehearsal by madame bernhardt at the palace theatre when it was
prohibited by the censor. oscar wilde immediately announced his
intention of changing his nationality, a
 
 ___________________________
 
    *       *       *       *




cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for
the first time.

new stage club.

"salomé,"

by oscar wilde.

may 10th and 13th 1905.

     a young syrian captain -- mr. herbert alexander.
     page of herodias       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier          -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
     herodias               -- miss louise salom.
     tigellinus             -- mr. c.l. delph.
     slave                  -- miss stansfeld.
     first jew              -- mr. f. stanley smith.
     second jew             -- mr. bernhard smith.
     third jew              -- mr. john bate.
     
 
 ___________________________
 
rn._]

what a strange prison!

second soldier

it is an old cistern.

the cappadocian

an old cistern! it must be very unhealthy.

second soldier

oh no! for instance, the tetrarch's brother, his elder brother,
the first husband of herodias the queen, was imprisoned there for
twelve years. it did not kill him. at the end of the twelve years
he had to be strangled.

the cappadocian

strangled? who dared to do that?

second soldier

[_pointing to the executioner, a huge negro._]

that man yonder, naaman.

the cappadocian

he was not afraid?

second soldier

oh no! the tetrarch sent him the ring.

the cappadocian

what ring?

[illustration: the black cape]

second soldier

the death-ring. so he was not afraid.

the cappadocian

yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

first soldier

why? kings have but one neck, like other folk.

the cappadocian

i think it terrible.

the young syrian

the princess rises! she is leaving the table! she looks very
troubled. ah, she is coming this way. yes,
 
 ___________________________
 
own into the cistern._] ah! wherefore did i give my oath?
kings ought never to pledge their word. if they keep it not, it
is terrible, and if they keep it, it is terrible also.

herodias

my daughter has done well.

herod

i am sure that some misfortune will happen.

salomé

[_she leans over the cistern and listens._]

there is no sound. i hear nothing. why does he not cry out, this
man? ah! if any man sought to kill me, i would cry out, i would
struggle, i would not suffer.... strike, strike, naaman, strike,
i tell you.... no, i hear nothing. there is a silence, a terrible
silence. ah! something has fallen upon the ground. i heard
something fall. it is the sword of the headsman. he is afraid,
this slave. he has let his sword fall. he dare not kill him. he
is a coward, this slave! let soldiers be sent. [_she sees the
page of herodias and addresses him._] come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? well, i tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. go to the soldiers a