salomé

a tragedy in one act:

translated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d. 15. the climax. 16. cul de lampe.


       *       *       *       *       *




cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for
the first time.

new stage club.

"salomé,"

by oscar wilde.

may 10th and 13th 1905.

     a young syrian captain -- mr. herbert alexander.
     page of herodias       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier          -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
     herodias               -- miss louise salom.
     tigellinus             -- mr. c.l. delph.
     slave                  -- miss stansfeld.
     first jew              -- mr. f. stanley smith.
     second jew             -- mr. bernhard smith.
   
 
 ___________________________
 
at they have hidden themselves in
the mountains, but i do not believe it. three nights i have been
on the mountains seeking them everywhere. i did not find them.
and at last i called them by their names, and they did not come.
i think they are dead.

first soldier

the jews worship a god that you cannot see.

the cappadocian

i cannot understand that.

first soldier

in fact, they only believe in things that you cannot see.

the cappadocian

that seems to me altogether ridiculous.

the voice of jokanaan

after me shall come another mightier than i. i am not worthy so
much as to unloose the latchet of his shoes. when he cometh, the
solitary places shall be glad. they shall blossom like the lily.
the eyes of the blind shall see the day, and the ears of the deaf
shall be opened. the new-born child shall put his hand upon the
dragon's lair, he shall lead the lions by their manes.

second soldier

make him be silent. he is always saying ridiculous things.

first soldier

no, no. he is a holy man. h
 
 ___________________________
 
e is very gentle, too. every day, when
i give him to eat he thanks me.

the cappadocian

who is he?

first soldier

a prophet.

the cappadocian

what is his name?

first soldier

jokanaan.

the cappadocian

whence comes he?

first soldier

from the desert, where he fed on locusts and wild honey. he was
clothed in camel's hair, and round his loins he had a leathern
belt. he was very terrible to look upon. a great multitude used
to follow him. he even had disciples.

the cappadocian

what is he talking of?

first soldier

we can never tell. sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

the cappadocian

may one see him?

first soldier

no. the
 
 ___________________________
 
ords.

the young syrian

will you be seated, princess?

the page of herodias

why do you speak to her? why do you look at her? oh! something
terrible will happen.

salomé

how good to see the moon! she is like a little piece of money,
you would think she was a little silver flower. the moon is cold
and chaste. i am sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty.
yes, she is a virgin. she has never defiled herself. she has
never abandoned herself to men, like the other goddesses.

the voice of jokanaan

the lord hath come. the son of man hath come. the centaurs have
hidden themselves in the rivers, and the sirens have left the
rivers, and are lying beneath the leaves of the forest.

salomé

who was that who cried out?

second soldier

the prophet, princess.

salomé

ah, the prophet! he of whom the tetrarch is afraid?

second soldier

we know nothing of that, princess. it was the prophet jokanaan
who cried out.

the young syrian

is it your pleasure that i bid them bring your litter, princes
 
 ___________________________
 
rn some misfortune may
happen.

salomé

is he an old man, this prophet?

the young syrian

princess, it were better to return. suffer me to lead you in.

salomé

this prophet ... is he an old man?

first soldier

no, princess, he is quite a young man.

second soldier

you cannot be sure. there are those who say he is elias.

salomé

who is elias?

second soldier

a very ancient prophet of this country, princess.

the slave

what answer may i give the tetrarch from the princess?

the voice of jokanaan

rejoice not thou, land of palestine, because the rod of him who
smote thee is broken. for from the seed of the serpent shall come
forth a basilisk, and that which is born of it shall devour the
birds.

salomé

what a strange voice! i would speak with him.

first soldier

i fear it is impossible, princess. the tetrarch does not wish any
one to speak with him. he has even forbidden the high priest to
speak with him.

salomé

i desire to speak with him.

first soldier

it is impossible, princes
 
 ___________________________
 
the princess salomé desires to see
him.

salomé

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! how strange the moon looks. you would think it was the hand
of a dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.

the young syrian

she has a strange look! she is like a little princess, whose eyes
are eyes of amber. through the clouds of muslin she is smiling
like a little princess.

[_the prophet comes out of the cistern. salomé looks at him and
steps slowly back._]

[illustration: a platonic lament]

jokanaan

where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? where is he,
who in a robe of silver shall one day die in the face of all the
people? bid him come forth, that he may hear the voice of him who
hath cried in the waste places and in the houses of kings.

salomé

of whom is he speaking?

the young syrian

you can never tell, princess.

jokanaan

where is she who having seen the images of men painted on the
walls, the images of the chaldeans limned in colours, gave
herself up unto the lust of h
 
 ___________________________
 
er eyes, and sent ambassadors into
chaldea?

salomé

it is of my mother that he speaks.

the young syrian

oh, no, princess.

salomé

yes; it is of my mother that he speaks.

jokanaan

where is she who gave herself unto the captains of assyria, who
have baldricks on their loins, and tiaras of divers colours on
their heads? where is she who hath given herself to the young men
of egypt, who are clothed in fine linen and purple, whose shields
are of gold, whose helmets are of silver, whose bodies are
mighty? bid her rise up from the bed of her abominations, from
the bed of her incestuousness, that she may hear the words of him
who prepareth the way of the lord, that she may rep
 
 ___________________________
 
kes troubled by fantastic moons.... do you think he will speak
again?

the young syrian

do not stay here, princess. i pray you do not stay here.

salomé

how wasted he is! he is like a thin ivory statue. he is like an
image of silver. i am sure he is chaste as the moon is. he is
like a moonbeam, like a shaft of silver. his flesh must be cool
like ivory. i would look closer at him.

the young syrian

no, no, princess.

salomé

i must look at him closer.

the young syrian

princess! princess!

jokanaan

who is this woman who is looking at me? i will not have her look
at me. wherefore doth she look at me with her golden eyes, under
her gilded eyelids? i know not who she is. i do not wish to know
who she is. bid her begone. it is not to her that i would speak.

salomé

i am salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa.

jokanaan

back! daughter of babylon! come not near the chosen of the lord.
thy mother hath filled the earth with the wine of her iniquities,
and the cry of her sins hath c
 
 ___________________________
 
ome up to the ears of god.

salomé

speak again, jokanaan. thy voice is wine to me.

the young syrian

princess! princess! princess!

salomé

speak again! speak again, jokanaan, and tell me what i must do.

jokanaan

daughter of sodom, come not near me! but cover thy face with a
veil, and scatter ashes upon thine head, and get thee to the
desert and seek out the son of man.

salomé

who is he, the son of man? is he as beautiful as thou art,
jokanaan?

jokanaan

get thee behind me! i hear in the palace the beating of the wings
of the angel of death.

the young syrian

princess, i beseech thee to go within.

jokanaan

angel of the lord god, what dost thou here with thy sword? whom
seekest thou in this foul palace? the day of him who shall die in
a robe of silver has not yet come.

[illustration: john and salomé]

salomé

jokanaan!

jokanaan

who speaketh?

salomé

jokanaan, i am amorous of thy body! thy body is white like the
lilies of a field that 
 
 ___________________________
 
that lie on the mountains, like the snows
that lie on the mountains of judæa, and come down into the
valleys. the roses in the garden of the queen of arabia are not
so white as thy body. neither the roses in the garden of the
queen of arabia, the perfumed garden of spices of the queen of
arabia, nor the feet of the dawn when they light on the leaves,
nor the breast of the moon when she lies on the breast of the
sea.... there is nothing in the world so white as thy body. let
me touch thy body.

jokanaan

back! daughter of babylon! by woman came evil into the world.
speak not to me. i will not listen to thee. i listen but to the
voice of the lord god.

salomé

thy body is hideous. it is like the body of a leper. it is like a
plastered wall where vipers have crawled; like a plastered wall
where the scorpions have made their nest. it is like a whitened
sepulchre full of loathsome things. it is horrible, thy body is
horrible. it is of thy hair that i am enamoured, jokanaan. thy
hair is like clust
 
 ___________________________
 
apes, like the clusters of black
grapes that hang from the vine-trees of edom in the land of the
edomites. thy hair is like the cedars of lebanon, like the great
cedars of lebanon that give their shade to the lions and to the
robbers who would hide themselves by day. the long black nights,
when the moon hides her face, when the stars are afraid, are not
so black. the silence that dwells in the forest is not so black.
there is nothing in the world so black as thy hair.... let me
touch thy hair.

jokanaan

back, daughter of sodom! touch me not. profane not the temple of
the lord god.

salomé

thy hair is horrible. it is covered with mire and dust. it is
like a crown of thorns which they have placed on thy forehead. it
is like a knot of black serpents writhing round thy neck. i love
not thy hair.... it is thy mouth that i desire, jokanaan. thy
mouth is like a band of scarlet on a tower of ivory. it is like a
pomegranate cut with a knife of ivory. the pomegranate-flowers
that blossom in the garde
 
 ___________________________
 
eth from a forest where he hath slain
a lion, and seen gilded tigers. thy mouth is like a branch of
coral that fishers have found in the twilight of the sea, the
coral that they keep for the kings!... it is like the vermilion
that the moabites find in the mines of moab, the vermilion that
the kings take from them. it is like the bow of the king of the
persians, that is painted with vermilion, and is tipped with
coral. there is nothing in the world so red as thy mouth.... let
me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

never! daughter of babylon! daughter of sodom! never.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i will kiss thy mouth.

the young syrian

princess, princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who
art the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him!
do not speak such words to him. i cannot suffer them....
princess, princess, do not speak these things.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

the young syrian

ah! [_he kills himself and falls between salomé and jokanaan
 
 ___________________________
 
e him a
little box of perfumes and ear-rings wrought in silver, and now
he has killed himself! ah, did he not foretell that some
misfortune would happen? i, too, foretold it, and it has
happened. well i knew that the moon was seeking a dead thing, but
i knew not that it was he whom she sought. ah! why did i not hide
him from the moon? if i had hidden him in a cavern she would not
have seen him.

first soldier

princess, the young captain has just killed himself.

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

jokanaan

art thou not afraid, daughter of herodias? did i not tell thee
that i had heard in the palace the beatings of the wings of the
angel of death, and hath he not come, the angel of death?

[illustration: enter herodias]

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

daughter of adultery, there is but one who can save thee, it is
he of whom i spake. go seek him. he is in a boat on the sea of
galilee, and he talketh with his disciples. kneel down on the
shore of the sea, and call unto him b
 
 ___________________________
 
y his name. when he cometh
to thee (and to all who call on him he cometh), bow thyself at
his feet and ask of him the remission of thy sins.

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

cursed be thou! daughter of an incestuous mother, be thou
accursed!

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

jokanaan

i do no wish to look at thee. i will not look at thee, thou art
accursed, salomé, thou art accursed. [_he goes down into the
cistern._]

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan; i will kiss thy mouth.

first soldier

we must bear away the body to another place. the tetrarch does
not care to see dead bodies, save the bodies of those whom he
himself has slain.

the page of herodias

he was my brother, and nearer to me than a brother. i gave him a
little box full of perfumes, and a ring of agate that he wore
always on his hand. in the evening we used to walk by the river,
among the almond trees, and he would tell me of the things of his
country. he spake ever very low. t
 
 ___________________________
 
ht up this daughter of
yours.

herodias

my daughter and i come of a royal race. as for thee, thy father
was a camel driver! he was also a robber!

herod

thou liest!

herodias

thou knowest well that it is true.

herod

salomé, come and sit next to me. i will give thee the throne of
thy mother.

salomé

i am not tired, tetrarch.

herodias

you see what she thinks of you.

herod

bring me--what is it that i desire? i forget. ah! ah! i remember.

[illustration: the eyes of herod]

the voice of jokanaan

lo! the time is come! that which i foretold has come to pass,
saith the lord god. lo! the day of which i spoke.

herodias

bid him be silent. i will not listen to his voice. this man is
for ever vomiting insults against me.

herod

he has said nothing against you. besides, he is a very great
prophet.

herodias

i do not believe in prophets. can a man tell what will come to
pass? no man knows it. moreover, he is for ever insulting me. but
i think you are afraid of him.... i know well that you a
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs which we call good are evil. there is no knowledge of any
thing. we must needs submit to everything, for god is very
strong. he breaketh in pieces the strong together with the weak,
for he regardeth not any man.

first jew

thou speaketh truly. god is terrible; he breaketh the strong and
the weak as a man brays corn in a mortar. but this man hath never
seen god. no man hath seen god since the prophet elias.

herodias

make them be silent. they weary me.

herod

but i have heard it said that jokanaan himself is your prophet
elias.

the jew

that cannot be. it is more than three hundred years since the
days of the prophet elias.

herod

there be some who say that this man is the prophet elias..

a nazarene

i am sure that he is the prophet elias.

the jew

nay, but he is not the prophet elias.

the voice of jokanaan

so the day is come, the day of the lord, and i hear upon the
mountains the feet of him who shall be the saviour of the world.

herod

what does that mean? the saviour of the wor
 
 ___________________________
 
 i have just come from jerusalem. for two
months they have had no tidings of him.

herod

no matter! but let them find him, and tell him from me, i will
not allow him to raise the dead! to change water into wine, to
heal the lepers and the blind.... he may do these things if he
will. i say nothing against these things. in truth i hold it a
good deed to heal a leper. but i allow no man to raise the dead.
it would be terrible if the dead came back.

[illustration: the stomach dance]

the voice of jokanaan

ah! the wanton! the harlot! ah! the daughter of babylon with her
golden eyes and her gilded eyelids!--thus saith the lord god, let
there come up against her a multitude of men. let the people take
stones and stone her....

herodias

command him to be silent.

the voice of jokanaan

let the war captains pierce her with their swords, let them crush
her beneath their shields.

herodias

nay, but it is infamous.

the voice of jokanaan

it is thus that i will wipe out all wickedness from the earth,
 
 ___________________________
 
une will come. let us not speak of this matter. noble
herodias, we are not mindful of our guests. fill thou my cup, my
well-beloved. fill with wine the great goblets of silver, and the
great goblets of glass. i will drink to cæsar. there are romans
here, we must drink to cæsar.

all

cæsar! cæsar!

herod

do you not see your daughter, how pale she is?

herodias

what is it to you if she be pale or not?

herod

never have i seen her so pale.

herodias

you must not look at her.

the voice of jokanaan

in that day the sun shall become black like sackcloth of hair,
and the moon shall become like blood, and the stars of the
heavens shall fall upon the earth like ripe figs that fall from
the fig-tree, and the kings of the earth shall be afraid.

herodias

ah! ah! i should like to see that day of which he speaks, when
the moon shall become like blood, and when the stars shall fall
upon the earth like ripe figs. this prophet talks like a drunken
man ... but i cannot suffer the sound of his voice.
 
 ___________________________
 
 should i not be happy? cæsar, who is lord of the world,
who is lord of all things, loves me well. he has just sent me
most precious gifts. also he has promised me to summon to rome
the king of cappadocia, who is my enemy. it may be that at rome
he will crucify him, for he is able to do all things that he
wishes. verily, cæsar is lord. thus you see i have a right to be
happy. indeed, i am happy. i have never been so happy. there is
nothing in the world that can mar my happiness.

the voice of jokanaan

he shall be seated on this throne. he shall be clothed in scarlet
and purple. in his hand he shall bear a golden cup full of his
blasphemies. and the angel of the lord shall smite him. he shall
be eaten of worms.

herodias

you hear what he says about you. he says that you will be eaten
of worms.

herod

it is not of me that he speaks. he speaks never against me. it is
of the king of cappadocia that he speaks; the king of cappadocia,
who is mine enemy. it is he who shall be eaten of worms. it 
 
 ___________________________
 
sy it? all of you heard him. and now the moon has become
red as blood. do ye not see it?

herodias

oh, yes, i see it well, and the stars are falling like ripe figs,
are they not? and the sun is becoming black like sackcloth of
hair, and the kings of the earth are afraid. that at least one
can see. the prophet, for once in his life, was right, the kings
of the earth are afraid.... let us go within. you are sick. they
will say at rome that you are mad. let us go within, i tell you.

the voice of jokanaan

who is this who cometh from edom, who is this who cometh from
bozra, whose raiment is dyed with purple, who shineth in the
beauty of his garments, who walketh mighty in his greatness?
wherefore is thy raiment stained with scarlet?

herodias

let us go within. the voice of that man maddens me. i will not
have my daughter dance while he is continually crying out. i will
not have her dance while you look at her in this fashion. in a
word, i will not have her dance.

herod

do not rise, my wife, m
 
 ___________________________
 
neeling_].

i would that they presently bring me in a silver charger....

herod

[laughing.]

in a silver charger? surely yes, in a silver charger. she is
charming, is she not? what is it you would have in a silver
charger, o sweet and fair salomé, you who are fairer than all the
daughters of judæa? what would you have them bring thee in a
silver charger? tell me. whatsoever it may be, they shall give it
you. my treasures belong to thee. what is it, salomé?

salomé

[_rising_].

the head of jokanaan.

herodias

ah! that is well said, my daughter.

herod

no, no!

herodias

that is well said, my daughter.

herod

no, no, salomé. you do not ask me that. do not listen to your
mother's voice. she is ever giving you evil counsel. do not heed
her.

salomé

i do not heed my mother. it is for mine own pleasure that i ask
the head of jokanaan in a silver charger. you hath sworn, herod.
forget not that you have sworn an oath.

herod

i know it. i have sworn by my gods. i know it well. but i pray
y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou, salomé, ask of me something else. ask of me the half of my
kingdom, and i will give it you. but ask not of me what you have
asked.

salomé

i ask of you the head of jokanaan.

herod

no, no, i do not wish it.

salomé

you have sworn, herod.

herodias

yes, you have sworn. everybody heard you. you swore it before
everybody.

herod

be silent! it is not to you i speak.

herodias

my daughter has done well to ask the head of jokanaan. he has
covered me with insults. he has said monstrous things against me.
one can see that she loves her mother well. do not yield, my
daughter. he has sworn, he has sworn.

herod

be silent, speak not to me!... come, salomé, be reasonable. i
have never been hard to you. i have ever loved you.... it may be
that i have loved you too much. therefore ask not this thing of
me. this is a terrible thing, an awful thing to ask of me.
surely, i think thou art jesting. the head of a man that is cut
fro
 
 ___________________________
 
at you
desire. hearken to me. i have an emerald, a great round emerald,
which cæsar's minion sent me. if you look through this emerald
you can see things which happen at a great distance. cæsar
himself carries such an emerald when he goes to the circus. but
my emerald is larger. i know well that it is larger. it is the
largest emerald in the whole world. you would like that, would
you not? ask it of me and i will give it you.

[illustration: the dancer's reward]

salomé

i demand the head of jokanaan.

herod

you are not listening. you are not listening. suffer me to speak,
salomé.

salomé

the head of jokanaan.

herod

no, no, you would not have that. you say that to trouble me,
because i have looked at you all this evening. it is true, i have
looked at you all this evening. your beauty troubled me. your
beauty has grievously troubled me, and i have looked at you too
much. but i will look at you no more. neither at things, nor at
people should one look. only in mirrors should one look, f
 
 ___________________________
 
fifty of my
peacocks. they will follow you whithersoever you go, and in the
midst of them you will be like the moon in the midst of a great
white cloud.... i will give them all to you. i have but a
hundred, and in the whole world there is no king who has peacocks
like unto my peacocks. but i will give them all to you. only you
must loose me from my oath, and must not ask of me that which you
have asked of me.

                        [_he empties the cup of wine._]

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herodias

well said, my daughter! as for you, you are ridiculous with your
peacocks.

herod

be silent! you cry out always; you cry out like a beast of prey.
you must not. your voice wearies me. be silent, i say salomé,
think of what you are doing. this man comes perchance from god.
he is a holy man. the finger of god has touched him. god has put
into his mouth terrible words. in the palace as in the desert god
is always with him.... at least it is possible. one does not
know. it is possible
 
 ___________________________
 
ed some misfortune might happen to me. in
any case, he said that the day he dies a misfortune will happen
to some one. that could only be to me. remember, i slipped in
blood when i entered. also, i heard a beating of wings in the
air, a beating of mighty wings. these are very evil omens, and
there were others. i am sure there were others though i did not
see them. well, salomé, you do not wish a misfortune to happen to
me? you do not wish that. listen to me, then.

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herod

ah! you are not listening to me. be calm. i--i am calm. i am
quite calm. listen. i have jewels hidden in this place--jewels
that your mother even has never seen; jewels that are marvellous.
i have a collar of pearls, set in four rows. they are like unto
moons chained with rays of silver. they are like fifty moons
caught in a golden net. on the ivory of her breast a queen has
worn it. thou shalt be as fair as a queen when thou wearest it. i
have amethysts of two kinds, one that is black
 
 ___________________________
 
at have been brought from the land
of the seres, and bracelets decked about with carbuncles and with
jade that come from the city of euphrates.... what desirest thou
more than this, salomé? tell me the thing that thou desirest, and
i will give it thee. all that thou askest i will give thee, save
one thing. i will give thee all that is mine, save one life. i
will give thee the mantle of the high priest. i will give thee
the veil of the sanctuary.

the jews

oh! oh!

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herod

[_sinking back in his seat_]. let her be given what she asks! of
a truth she is her mother's child! [_the first soldier
approaches. herodias draws from the hand of the tetrarch the ring
of death and gives it to the soldier, who straightway bears it to
the executioner. the executioner looks scared._] who has taken my
ring? there was a ring on my right hand. who has drunk my wine?
there was wine in my cup. it was full of wine. someone has drunk
it! oh! surely some evil will befall some o
 
 ___________________________
 
dresses him._] come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? well, i tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing i ask, the thing the tetrarch has promised
me, the thing that is mine. [_the page recoils. she turns to the
soldiers._] hither, ye soldiers. get ye down into this cistern
and bring me the head of this man. [_the soldiers recoil._]
tetrarch, tetrarch, command your soldiers that they bring me the
head of jokanaan.

[_a huge black arm, the arm of the executioner, comes forth from
the cistern, bearing on a silver shield the head of jokanaan.
salomé seizes it. herod hides his face with his cloak. herodias
smiles and fans herself. the nazarenes fall on their knees and
begin to pray._]

ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. well!
i will kiss it now. i will bite it with my teeth as one bites a
ripe fruit. yes, i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i said it; did
i not say it? i said it. ah! 
 
 ___________________________
 
i will kiss it now.... but,
wherefore dost thou not look at me, jokanaan? thine eyes that
were so terrible, so full of rage and scorn, are shut now.
wherefore are they shut? open thine eyes! lift up thine eyelids,
jokanaan! wherefore dost thou not look at me? art thou afraid of
me, jokanaan, that thou wilt not look at me?... and thy tongue,
that was like a red snake darting poison, it moves no more, it
says nothing now, jokanaan, that scarlet viper that spat its
venom upon me. it is strange, is it not? how is it that the red
viper stirs no longer?... thou wouldst have none of me, jokanaan.
thou didst reject me. thou didst speak evil words against me.
thou didst treat me as a harlot, as a wanton, me, salomé,
daughter of herodias, princess of judæa! well, jokanaan, i still
live, but thou, thou art dead, and thy head belongs to me. i can
do with it what i will. i can throw it to the dogs and to the
birds of the air. tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t which the dogs leave, the birds of the air
shall devour.... ah, jokanaan, jokanaan, thou wert the only man
that i have loved. all other men are hateful to me. but thou,
thou wert beautiful! thy body was a column of ivory set on a
silver socket. it was a garden full of doves and of silver
lilies. it was a tower of silver decked with shields of ivory.
there was nothing in the world so white as thy body. there was
nothing in the world so black as thy hair. in the whole world
there was nothing so red as thy mouth. thy voice was a censer
that scattered strange perfumes, and when i
 
 ___________________________
 
 looked on thee i
heard a strange music. ah! wherefore didst thou not look at me,
jokanaan? behind thine hands and thy curses thou didst hide thy
face. thou didst put upon thine eyes the covering of him who
would see his god. well, thou hast seen thy god, jokanaan, but
me, me, thou didst never see. if thou hadst seen me thou wouldst
have loved me. i, i saw thee, jokanaan, and i loved thee. oh, how
i loved thee! i love thee yet, jokanaan, i love thee only.... i
am athirst for thy beauty; i am hungry for thy body; and neither
wine nor fruits can appease my desire. what shall i do now,
jokanaan? neither the floods nor the great waters can quench my
passion. i was a princess, and thou didst scorn me. i was a
virgin, and thou didst take my virginity from me. i was chaste,
and thou didst fill my veins with fire.... ah! ah! wherefore
didst thou not look at me, jokanaan? if thou hadst looked at me
thou hadst loved me. well i know that
 
 ___________________________
 
ng will befall.
manasseh, issachar, ozias, put out the torches. i will not look
at things, i will not suffer things to look at me. put out the
torches! hide the moon! hide the stars! let us hide ourselves in
our palace, herodias. i begin to be afraid.

[_the slaves put out the torches. the stars disappear. a great
black cloud crosses the moon and conceals it completely. the
stage becomes very dark. the tetrarch begins to climb the
staircase._]

the voice of salomé

ah! i have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan, i have kissed thy mouth.
there was a bitter taste on thy lips. was it the taste of
blood?... but perchance it is the taste of love.... they say that
love hath a bitter taste.... but what of that? what of that? i
have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan.

[_a moonbeam falls on salomé covering her with light._]

herod

[_turning round and seeing salomé_.]

kill that woman!

[_the soldiers rush forward and crush beneath their shields
salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa._]

curtain.


[illu