salomé

a tragedy in one act:

translated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays have such a
peculiar history. written in french in 1892 it was in full
rehearsal by madame bernhardt at the palace theatre when it was
prohibited by the censor. oscar wilde imm
 
 ___________________________
 
are anxious to parade their ignorance of the
continental stage. the production was remarkable on account of
the beautiful dresses and mounting, for which mr. charles
ricketts was responsible, and the marvellous impersonation of
herod by mr. robert farquharson. wilde used to say that "salomé"
was a mirror in which everyone could see himself. the artist,
art; the dull, dulness; the vulgar, vulgarity.



[illustration]

list of the pictures by aubrey beardsley.

1. the woman in the moon. 2. title page. 3. cover design. 4. list
of the pictures. 5. the peacock skirt. 6. the black cape. 7. a
platonic lament. 8. john and salomé. 9. enter herodias. 10. the
eyes of herod. 11. the stomach dance. 12. the toilette of
salomé--i. 13. the toilette of salomé--ii. 14. the dancer's
reward. 15. the climax. 16. cul de lampe.


       *       *       *       *       *




cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for
the first time.

new stage club.

"salomé,"

by oscar wilde.

may 10th
 
 ___________________________
 
 and 13th 1905.

     a young syrian captain -- mr. herbert alexander.
     page of herodias       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier          -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
     herodias               -- miss louise 
 
 ___________________________
 
      -- stephen bagehot
     fifth jew              -- frederick lawrence.

scene--the great terrace outside the palace.




       *       *       *       *       *


scene.--_a great terrace in the palace of herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. to
the right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the
back, an old cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze.
moonlight._

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

look at the moon! how strange the moon seems! she is like a woman
rising from a tomb. she is like a dead woman. you would fancy she
was looking for dead things.

the young syrian

she has a strange look. she is like a little princess who wears a
yellow veil, and whose feet are of silver. she is like a princess
who has little white doves for feet. you would fancy she was
dancing.

the page of herodias

she is like a woman who is dead. she moves very slowly.

[_noise in the banquetin
 
 ___________________________
 
r! who are those wild beasts howling?

second soldier

the jews. they are always like that. they are disputing about
their religion.

first soldier

why do they dispute about their religion?

second soldier

i cannot tell. they are always doing it. the pharisees, for
instance, say that there are angels, and the sadducees declare
that angels do not exist.

first soldier

i think it is ridiculous to dispute about such things.

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

you are always looking at her. you look at her too much. it is
dangerous to look at people in such fashion. something terrible
may happen.


[illustration: the peacock skirt]


the young syrian

she is very beautiful to-night.

first soldier

the tetrarch has a sombre look.

second soldier

yes; he has a sombre look.

first soldier

he is looking at something.

second soldier

he is looking at some one.

first soldier

at whom is he looking?

second soldier

i cannot tell.

the you
 
 ___________________________
 
ng syrian

how pale the princess is! never have i seen her so pale. she is
like the shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver.

the page of herodias

you must not look at her. you look too much at her.

first soldier

herodias has filled the cup of the tetrarch.

the cappadocian

is that the queen herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?

first soldier

yes; that is herodias, the tetrarch's wife.

second soldier

the tetrarch is very fond of wine. he has wine of three sorts.
one which is brought from the island of samothrace, and is purple
like the cloak of cæsar.

the c
 
 ___________________________
 
low him. he even had disciples.

the cappadocian

what is he talking of?

first soldier

we can never tell. sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

the cappadocian

may one see him?

first soldier

no. the tetrarch has forbidden it.

the young syrian

the princess has hidden her face behind her fan! her little white
hands are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. they
are like white butterflies. they are just like white butterflies.

the page of herodias

what is that to you? why do you look at her? you must not look at
her.... something terrible may happen.

the cappadocian

[_pointing to the cistern._]

what a strange prison!

second soldier

it is an old cistern.

the cappadocian

an old cistern! it must be very unhealthy.

second soldier

oh no! for instance, the tetrarch's brother, his elder brother,
the first husband of herodias the queen, was imprisoned there for
twelve years. it did not kill him. at the end of the twelve yea
 
 ___________________________
 
 him the ring.

the cappadocian

what ring?

[illustration: the black cape]

second soldier

the death-ring. so he was not afraid.

the cappadocian

yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

first soldier

why? kings have but one neck, like other folk.

the cappadocian

i think it terrible.

the young syrian

the princess rises! she is leaving the table! she looks very
troubled. ah, she is coming this way. yes, she is coming towards
us. how pale she is! never have i seen her so pale.

the page of herodias

do not look at her. i pray you not to look at her.

the young syrian

she is like a dove that has strayed.... she is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... she is like a silver flower.

[_enter salomé_.]

salomé

i will not stay. i cannot stay. why does the tetrarch look at me
all the while with his mole's eyes under his shaking eyelids? it
is strange that the husband of my mother looks at me like that.
i know not what it means. in truth, yes, i know it.

the young syrian

yo
 
 ___________________________
 
 over
their foolish ceremonies, and barbarians who drink and drink, and
spill their wine on the pavement, and greeks from smyrna with
painted eyes and painted cheeks, and frizzed hair curled in
twisted coils, and silent, subtle egyptians, with long nails of
jade and russett cloaks, and romans brutal and coarse, with their
uncouth jargon. ah! how i loathe the romans! they are rough and
common, and they give themselves the airs of noble lords.

the young syrian

will you be seated, princess?

the page of herodias

why do you speak to her? why do you look at her? oh! something
terrible will happen.

salomé

how good to see the moon! she is like a little piece of money,
you would think she was a little silver flower. the moon is cold
and chaste. i am sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty.
yes, she is a virgin. she has never defiled herself. she has
never abandoned herself to men, like the other goddesses.

the voice of jokanaan

the lord hath come. the son of man hath come. the cent
 
 ___________________________
 
down into it._]

how black it is, down there! it must be terrible to be in so
black a pit! it is like a tomb.... [_to the soldiers._] did you
not hear me? bring out the prophet. i wish to see him.

second soldier

princess, i beg you do not require this of us.

salomé

you keep me waiting!

first soldier

princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. and indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this
thing.

salomé

[_looking at the young syrian._]

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! what is going to happen? i am sure that some misfortune will
happen.

salomé

[_going up to the young syrian._]

you will do this tiling for me, will you not, narraboth? you will
do this thing for me. i have always been kind to you. you will do
it for me. i would but look at this strange prophet. men have
talked so much of him. often have i heard the tetrarch talk of
him. i think the tetrarch is afraid of him. are you, even you,
also afraid of him, narraboth?

the young syrian
 
 ___________________________
 
at you will
do this thing for me. and to-morrow when i pass in my litter by
the bridge of the idol-buyers, i will look at you through the
muslin veils, i will look at you, narraboth, it may be i will
smile at you. look at me, narraboth, look at me. ah! you know
that you will do what i ask of you. you know it well.... i know
that you will do this thing.

the young syrian

[_signing to the third soldier._]

let the prophet come forth.... the princess salomé desires to see
him.

salomé

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! how strange the moon looks. you would think it was the hand
of a dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.

the young syrian

she has a strange look! she is like a little princess, whose eyes
are eyes of amber. through the clouds of muslin she is smiling
like a little princess.

[_the prophet comes out of the cistern. salomé looks at him and
steps slowly back._]

[illustration: a platonic lament]

jokanaan

where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? whe
 
 ___________________________
 
daughter of babylon! daughter of sodom! never.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i will kiss thy mouth.

the young syrian

princess, princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who
art the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him!
do not speak such words to him. i cannot suffer them....
princess, princess, do not speak these things.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

the young syrian

ah! [_he kills himself and falls between salomé and jokanaan._]

the page of herodias

the young syrian has slain himself! the young captain has slain
himself! he has slain himself who was my friend! i gave him a
little box of perfumes and ear-rings wrought in silver, and now
he has killed himself! ah, did he not foretell that some
misfortune would happen? i, too, foretold it, and it has
happened. well i knew that the moon was seeking a dead thing, but
i knew not that it was he whom she sought. ah! why did i not hide
him from the moon? if i had hidden him in a cavern
 
 ___________________________
 
jokanaan

cursed be thou! daughter of an incestuous mother, be thou
accursed!

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

jokanaan

i do no wish to look at thee. i will not look at thee, thou art
accursed, salomé, thou art accursed. [_he goes down into the
cistern._]

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan; i will kiss thy mouth.

first soldier

we must bear away the body to another place. the tetrarch does
not care to see dead bodies, save the bodies of those whom he
himself has slain.

the page of herodias

he was my brother, and nearer to me than a brother. i gave him a
little box full of perfumes, and a ring of agate that he wore
always on his hand. in the evening we used to walk by the river,
among the almond trees, and he would tell me of the things of his
country. he spake ever very low. the sound of his voice was like
the sound of the flute, of a flute player. also he much loved to
gaze at himself in the river. i used to reproach him for that.

second soldier

you are right; we 
 
 ___________________________
 
ar is lord, he will come if he wishes. nevertheless, i do not
think he will come.

first nazarene

it was not concerning cæsar that the prophet spake these words,
sire.

herod

not of cæsar?

first nazarene

no, sire.

herod

concerning whom then did he speak?

first nazarene

concerning messias who has come.

a jew

messiah hath not come.

first nazarene

he hath come, and everywhere he worketh miracles.

herodias ho! ho! miracles! i do not believe in miracles. i have
seen too many. [_to the page._] my fan!

first nazarene

this man worketh true miracles. thus, at a marriage which took
place in a little town of galilee, a town of some importance, he
changed water into wine. certain persons who were present related
it to me. also he healed two lepers that were seated before the
gate of capernaum simply by touching them.

second nazarene

nay, it was blind men that he healed at capernaum.

first nazarene

nay; they were lepers. but he hath healed blind people also, and
he was seen on a mo
 
 ___________________________
 
untain talking with angels.

a sadducee

angels do not exist.

a pharisee

angels exist, but i do not believe that this man has talked with
them.

first nazarene

he was seen by a great multitude of people talking with angels.

a sadducee

not with angels.

herodias

how these men weary me! they are ridiculous! [_to the page._]
well! my fan! [_the page gives her the fan._] you have a
dreamer's look; you must not dream. it is only sick people who
dream. [_she strikes the page with her fan._]

second nazarene

there is also the miracle of the daughter of jairus.

first nazarene

yes, that is sure. no man can gainsay it.

herodias

these men are mad. they have looked too long on the moon. command
them to be silent.

herod

what is this miracle of the daughter of jairus?

first nazarene

the daughter of jairus was dead. he raised her from the dead.

herod

he raises the dead?

first nazarene

yea, sire, he raiseth the dead.

herod

i do not wish him to do that. i forbi
 
 ___________________________
 
 no sound. i hear nothing. why does he not cry out, this
man? ah! if any man sought to kill me, i would cry out, i would
struggle, i would not suffer.... strike, strike, naaman, strike,
i tell you.... no, i hear nothing. there is a silence, a terrible
silence. ah! something has fallen upon the ground. i heard
something fall. it is the sword of the headsman. he is afraid,
this slave. he has let his sword fall. he dare not kill him. he
is a coward, this slave! let soldiers be sent. [_she sees the
page of herodias and addresses him._] come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? well, i tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing i ask, the thing the tetrarch has promised
me, the thing that is mine. [_the page recoils. she turns to the
soldiers._] hither, ye soldiers. get ye down into this cistern
and bring me the head of this man. [_the soldiers recoil._]
tetrarch, tetrarch, command your soldiers that they br