salomé

a tragedy in one act:

translated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays have such a
peculiar history. written
 
 ___________________________
 
st
of the pictures. 5. the peacock skirt. 6. the black cape. 7. a
platonic lament. 8. john and salomé. 9. enter herodias. 10. the
eyes of herod. 11. the stomach dance. 12. the toilette of
salomé--i. 13. the toilette of salomé--ii. 14. the dancer's
reward. 15. the climax. 16. cul de lampe.


       *       *       *       *       *




cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for
the first time.

new stage club.

"salomé,"

by oscar wilde.

may 10th and 13th 1905.

     a young syrian captain -- mr. herbert alexander.
     page of herodias       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier          -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
 
 ___________________________
 
    third jew              -- mr. john bate.
     fourth jew             -- stephen bagehot
     fifth jew              -- frederick lawrence.

scene--the great terrace outside the palace.




       *       *       *       *       *


scene.--_a great terrace in the palace of herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. to
the right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the
back, an old cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze.
moonlight._

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

look at the moon! how strange the moon seems! she is like a woman
rising from a tomb. she is like a dead woman. you would fancy she
was looking for dead things.

the young syrian

she has a strange look. she is like a little princess who wears a
yellow veil, and whose feet are of silver. she is like a princess
who has little white doves for feet. you would fancy she was
dancing.

the page of herodias

she is like a woman wh
 
 ___________________________
 
y.

[_noise in the banqueting-hall._]

first soldier

what an uproar! who are those wild beasts howling?

second soldier

the jews. they are always like that. they are disputing about
their religion.

first soldier

why do they dispute about their religion?

second soldier

i cannot tell. they are always doing it. the pharisees, for
instance, say that there are angels, and the sadducees declare
that angels do not exist.

first soldier

i think it is ridiculous to dispute about such things.

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

you are always looking at her. you look at her too much. it is
dangerous to look at people in such fashion. something terrible
may happen.


[illustration: the peacock skirt]


the young syrian

she is very beautiful to-night.

first soldier

the tetrarch has a sombre look.

second soldier

yes; he has a sombre look.

first soldier

he is looking at something.

second soldier

he is looking at some one.

first soldier

at w
 
 ___________________________
 
hom is he looking?

second soldier

i cannot tell.

the young syrian

how pale the princess is! never have i seen her so pale. she is
like the shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver.

the page of herodias

you must not look at her. you look too much at her.

first soldier

herodias has filled the cup of the tetrarch.

the cappadocian

is that the queen herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?

first soldier

yes; that is herodias, the tetrarch's wife.

second soldier

the tetrarch is very fond of wi
 
 ___________________________
 
he?

first soldier

from the desert, where he fed on locusts and wild honey. he was
clothed in camel's hair, and round his loins he had a leathern
belt. he was very terrible to look upon. a great multitude used
to follow him. he even had disciples.

the cappadocian

what is he talking of?

first soldier

we can never tell. sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

the cappadocian

may one see him?

first soldier

no. the tetrarch has forbidden it.

the young syrian

the princess has hidden her face behind her fan! her little white
hands are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. they
are like white butterflies. they are just like white butterflies.

the page of herodias

what is that to you? why do you look at her? you must not look at
her.... something terrible may happen.

the cappadocian

[_pointing to the cistern._]

what a strange prison!

second soldier

it is an old cistern.

the cappadocian

an old cistern! it must be very unhealthy.


 
 ___________________________
 
ngled? who dared to do that?

second soldier

[_pointing to the executioner, a huge negro._]

that man yonder, naaman.

the cappadocian

he was not afraid?

second soldier

oh no! the tetrarch sent him the ring.

the cappadocian

what ring?

[illustration: the black cape]

second soldier

the death-ring. so he was not afraid.

the cappadocian

yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

first soldier

why? kings have but one neck, like other folk.

the cappadocian

i think it terrible.

the young syrian

the princess rises! she is leaving the table! she looks very
troubled. ah, she is coming this way. yes, she is coming towards
us. how pale she is! never have i seen her so pale.

the page of herodias

do not look at her. i pray you not to look at her.

the young syrian

she is like a dove that has strayed.... she is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... she is like a silver flower.

[_enter salomé_.]

salomé

i will not stay. i cannot stay. why does the tetrarch look at me
all the while
 
 ___________________________
 
 with his mole's eyes under his shaking eyelids? it
is strange that the husband of my mother looks at me like that.
i know not what it means. in truth, yes, i know it.

the young syrian

you have just left the feast, princess?

salomé

how sweet the air is here! i can breathe here! within there are
jews from jerusalem who are tearing each other in pieces over
their foolish ceremonies, and barbarians who drink and drink, and
spill their wine on the pavement, and greeks from smyrna with
painted eyes and painted cheeks, and frizzed hair curled in
twisted coils, and silent, subtle egyptians, with long nails of
jade and russett cloaks, and romans brutal and coarse, with their
unco
 
 ___________________________
 
uth jargon. ah! how i loathe the romans! they are rough and
common, and they give themselves the airs of noble lords.

the young syrian

will you be seated, princess?

the page of herodias

why do you speak to her? why do you look at her? oh! something
terrible will happen.

salomé

how good to see the moon! she is like a little piece of money,
you would think she was a little silver flower. the moon is cold
and chaste. i am sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty.
yes, she is a virgin. she has never defiled herself. she has
never abandoned herself to men, like the other goddesses.

the voice of jokanaan

the lord hath
 
 ___________________________
 
 come. the son of man hath come. the centaurs have
hidden themselves in the rivers, and the sirens have left the
rivers, and are lying beneath the leaves of the forest.

salomé

who was that who cried out?

second soldier

the prophet, princess.

salomé

ah, the prophet! he of whom the tetrarch is afraid?

second soldier

we know nothing of that, princess. it was the prophet jokanaan
who cried out.

the young syrian

is it your pleasure that i bid them bring your litter, princess?
the night is fair in the garden.

salomé

he says terrible things about my mother, does he not?

second soldier

we never understand what he says, princess.

salomé

yes; he says terrible things about her.

[_enter a slave_.]

the slave

princess, the tetrarch prays you to return to the feast.

salomé

i will not go back.

the young syrian

pardon me, princess, but if you do not return some misfortune may
happen.

salomé

is 
 
 ___________________________
 
he an old man, this prophet?

the young syrian

princess, it were better to return. suffer me to lead you in.

salomé

this prophet ... is he an old man?

first soldier

no, princess, he is quite a young man.

second soldier

you cannot be sure. there are those who say he is elias.

salomé

who is elias?

second soldier

a very ancient prophet of this country, princess.

the slave

what answer may i give the tetrarch from the princess?

the voice of jokanaan

rejoice not thou, land of palestine, because the rod of him who
smote thee is br
 
 ___________________________
 
oken. for from the seed of the serpent shall come
forth a basilisk, and that which is born of it shall devour the
birds.

salomé

what a strange voice! i would speak with him.

first soldier

i fear it is impossible, princess. the tetrarch does not wish any
one to speak with him. he has even forbidden the high priest to
speak with him.

salomé

i desire to speak with him.

first soldier

it is impossible, princess.

salomé

i will speak with him.

the young syrian

would it not be better to return to the banquet?

salomé

bring forth this prophet.

                             [_exit the slave._]

first soldier

we dare not, princess.

salomé

[_approaching the cistern and looking down into it._]

how black it is, down there! it must be terrible to be in so
black a pit! it is like a tomb.... [_to the soldiers._] did you
not hear me? bring out the prophet. i wish to see him.

second soldier

princess, i beg you do not require this of us.

salomé

you k
 
 ___________________________
 
eep me waiting!

first soldier

princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. and indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this
thing.

salomé

[_looking at the young syrian._]

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! what is going to happen? i am sure that some misfortune will
happen.

salomé

[_going up to the young syrian._]

you will do this tiling for me, will you not, narraboth? you will
do this thing for me. i have always been kind to you. you will do
it for me. i would but look at this strange prophet. men have
talked so much of him. often have i heard the tetrarch talk of
him. i think the tetrarch is afraid of him. are you, even you,
also afraid of him, narraboth?

the young syrian

i fear him not, princess; there is no man i fear. but the
tetrarch has formally forbidden that any man should raise the
cover
 
 ___________________________
 
 of this well.

salomé

you will do this thing for me, narraboth, and to-morrow when i
pass in my litter beneath the gateway of the idol-sellers i will
let fall for you a little flower, a little green flower.

the young syrian

princess, i cannot, i cannot.

salomé

[_smiling_.]

you will do this thing for me, narraboth. you know that you will
do this thing for me. and to-morrow when i pass in my litter by
the bridge of the idol-buyers, i will look at you through the
muslin veils, i will look at you, narraboth, it may be i will
smile at you. look at me, narraboth, look at me. ah! you know
that you will do what i ask of you. you know it well.... i know
that you will do this thing.

the young syrian

[_signing to the 
 
 ___________________________
 
third soldier._]

let the prophet come forth.... the princess salomé desires to see
him.

salomé

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! how strange the moon looks. you would think it was the hand
of a dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.

the young syrian

she has a strange look! she is like a little princess, whose eyes
are eyes of amber. through the clouds of muslin she is smiling
like a little princess.

[_the prophet comes out of the cistern. salomé looks at him and
steps slowly back._]

[illustration: a platonic lament]

jokanaan

where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? where is he,
who in a robe of silver shall one day die in the face of all the
people? bid him come forth, that he may hear the voice of him who
hath cried in the
 
 ___________________________
 
 waste places and in the houses of kings.

salomé

of whom is he speaking?

the young syrian

you can never tell, princess.

jokanaan

where is she who having seen the images of men painted on the
walls, the images of the chaldeans limned in colours, gave
herself up unto the lust of her eyes, and sent ambassadors into
chaldea?

salomé

it is of my mother that he speaks.

the young syrian

oh, no, princess.

salomé

yes; it is of my mother that he speaks.

jokanaan

where is she who gave herself unto the captains of assyria, who
have baldricks on their loins, and tiaras of divers colours on
their heads? where is she who hath given herself to the young men
of egypt, who are clothed in fine linen and purple, whose shields
are of gold, whose helmets are of silver, whose bodies are
mighty? bid her rise up from the bed of her abominations, from
the bed of her incestuousness, that sh
 
 ___________________________
 
e may hear the words of him
who prepareth the way of the lord, that she may repent her of her
iniquities. though she will never repent, but will stick fast in
her abominations; bid her come, for the fan of the lord is in his
hand.

salomé

but he is terrible, he is terrible!

the young syrian

do not stay here, princess, i beseech you.

salomé

it is his eyes above all that are terrible. they are like black
holes burned by torches in a tyrian tapestry. they are like black
caverns where dragons dwell. they are like the black caverns of
egypt in which the dragons make their lairs. they are like black
lakes troubled by fantastic moons.... do you think he will speak
again?

the young syrian

do not stay here, princess. i pray you do not stay here.

salomé

how wasted he is! he is like
 
 ___________________________
 
 a thin ivory statue. he is like an
image of silver. i am sure he is chaste as the moon is. he is
like a moonbeam, like a shaft of silver. his flesh must be cool
like ivory. i would look closer at him.

the young syrian

no, no, princess.

salomé

i must look at him closer.

the young syrian

princess! princess!

jokanaan

who is this woman who is looking at me? i will not have her look
at me. wherefore doth she look at me with her golden eyes, under
her gilded eyelids? i know not who she is. i do not wish to know
who she is. bid her begone. it is not to her that i would speak.

salomé

i am salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa.

jokanaan

back! daughter of babylon! come not near the chosen of the lord.
thy mother hath filled the earth with the wine of her iniquities,
 
 ___________________________
 

and the cry of her sins hath come up to the ears of god.

salomé

speak again, jokanaan. thy voice is wine to me.

the young syrian

princess! princess! princess!

salomé

speak again! speak again, jokanaan, and tell me what i must do.

jokanaan

daughter of sodom, come not near me! but cover thy face with a
veil, and scatter ashes upon thine head, and get thee to the
desert and seek out the son of man.

salomé

who is he, the son of man? is he as beautiful as thou art,
jokanaan?

jokanaan

get thee behind me! i hear in the palace the beating of the wings
of the angel of death.

the young syrian

princess, i beseech thee 
 
 ___________________________
 
e twilight of the sea, the
coral that they keep for the kings!... it is like the vermilion
that the moabites find in the mines of moab, the vermilion that
the kings take from them. it is like the bow of the king of the
persians, that is painted with vermilion, and is tipped with
coral. there is nothing in the world so red as thy mouth.... let
me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

never! daughter of babylon! daughter of sodom! never.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i will kiss thy mouth.

the young syrian

princess, princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who
art the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him!
do not speak such words to him. i cannot suffer them....
princess, princess, do not speak these things.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

the young syrian

ah! [_he kills himself and falls between salomé and jokanaan._]

the page of herodias

the young syrian has slain himself! the young captain has slain
himself! he has slain himself who was my friend!
 
 ___________________________
 
ssadors of cæsar.

herodias

it is not because of them that you remain.

herod

yes; the air is delicious. come, herodias, our guests await us.
ah! i have slipped! i have slipped in blood! it is an ill omen.
it is a very evil omen. wherefore is there blood here?... and
this body, what does this body here? think you i am like the king
of egypt, who gives no feast to his guests but that he shows them
a corpse? whose is it? i will not look on it.

first soldier

it is our captain, sire. he is the young syrian whom you made
captain only three days ago.

herod

i gave no order that he should be slain.

second soldier

he killed himself, sire.

herod

for what reason? i had made him captain.

second soldier

we do not know, sire. but he killed himself.

herod

that seems strange to me. i thought it was only the roman
philosophers who killed themselves. is it not true, tigellinus,
that the philosophers at rome kill themselves?

tigellinus

there are some who kill themselves, sire. they are the stoics.
t
 
 ___________________________
 
he stoics are coarse people. they are ridiculous people. i
myself regard them as being perfectly ridiculous.

herod

i also. it is ridiculous to kill oneself.

tigellinus

everybody at rome laughs at them. the emperor has written a
satire against them. it is recited everywhere.

herod

ah! he has written a satire against them? cæsar is wonderful. he
can do everything.... it is strange that the young syrian has
killed himself. i am sorry he has killed himself. i am very
sorry; for he was fair to look upon. he was even very fair. he
had very languorous eyes. i remember that i saw that he looked
languorously at salomé. truly, i thought he looked too much at
her.

herodias

there are others who look at her too much.

herod

his father was a king. i drove him from his kingdom. and you made
a slave of his mother, who was a queen, herodias. so he was here
as my guest, as it were, and for that reason i 