salomé

a tragedy in one act:

translated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays have such a
peculiar history. written in french in 1892 it was in full
rehearsal by madame bernhardt at the p
 
 ___________________________
 
the toilette of salomé--ii. 14. the dancer's
reward. 15. the climax. 16. cul de lampe.


       *       *       *       *       *




cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for
the first time.

new stage club.

"salomé,"

by oscar wilde.

may 10th and 13th 1905.

     a young syrian captain -- mr. herbert alexander.
     page of herodias       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier          -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
     herodias               -- miss louise salom.
     tigellinus             -- mr. c.l. delph.
     slave                  -- miss stansfeld.
     first jew              -- mr. f. stanley smith.
     s
 
 ___________________________
 
as a sombre look.

second soldier

yes; he has a sombre look.

first soldier

he is looking at something.

second soldier

he is looking at some one.

first soldier

at whom is he looking?

second soldier

i cannot tell.

the young syrian

how pale the princess is! never have i seen her so pale. she is
like the shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver.

the page of herodias

you must not look at her. you look too much at her.

first soldier

herodias has filled the cup of the tetrarch.

the cappadocian

is that the queen herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?

first soldier

yes; that is herodias, the tetrarch's wife.

second soldier

the tetrarch is very fond of wine. he has wine of three sorts.
one which is brought from the island of samothrace, and is purple
like the cloak of cæsar.

the cappadocian

i have never seen cæsar.

second soldier

another that comes from a town called cyprus, and is yellow like
gold.

the cappadocian

 
 ___________________________
 

i love gold.

second soldier

and the third is a wine of sicily. that wine is red like blood.

the nubian

the gods of my country are very fond of blood. twice in the year
we sacrifice to them young men and maidens; fifty young men and
a hundred maidens. but it seems we never give them quite enough,
for they are very harsh to us.

the cappadocian

in my country there are no gods left. the romans have driven them
out. there are some who say that they have hidden themselves in
the mountains, but i do not believe it. three nights i have been
on the mountains seeking them everywhere. i did not find them.
and at last i called them by their names, and they did not come.
i think they are dead.

first soldier

the jews worship a god that you cannot see.

the cappadocian

i cannot understand that.

first soldier

in fact, they only believe in th
 
 ___________________________
 
ings that you cannot see.

the cappadocian

that seems to me altogether ridiculous.

the voice of jokanaan

after me shall come another mightier than i. i am not worthy so
much as to unloose the latchet of his shoes. when he cometh, the
solitary places shall be glad. they shall blossom like the lily.
the eyes of the blind shall see the day, and the ears of the deaf
shall be opened. the new-born child shall put his hand upon the
dragon's lair, he shall lead the lions by their manes.

second soldier

make him be silent. he is always sayin
 
 ___________________________
 
g ridiculous things.

first soldier

no, no. he is a holy man. he is very gentle, too. every day, when
i give him to eat he thanks me.

the cappadocian

who is he?

first soldier

a prophet.

the cappadocian

what is his name?

first soldier

jokanaan.

the cappadocian

whence comes he?

first soldier

from the desert, where he fed on locusts and wild honey. he was
clothed in camel's hair, and round his loins he had a leathern
belt. he was very terrible to look upon. a great multitude used
to follow him. he even had disciples.

the cappadocian

what is he talking of?

first soldier

we can never tell. sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

the cappadocian

may one see him?

first soldier

no. the tetrarch has forb
 
 ___________________________
 
idden it.

the young syrian

the princess has hidden her face behind her fan! her little white
hands are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. they
are like white butterflies. they are just like white butterflies.

the page of herodias

what is that to you? why do you look at her? you must not look at
her.... something terrible may happen.

the cappadocian

[_pointing to the cistern._]

what a strange prison!

second soldier

it is an old cistern.

the cappadocian

an old cistern! it must be very unhealthy.

second soldier

oh no! for instance, the tetrarch's brother, his elder brother,
the first husband of herodias the queen, was imprisoned there for
twelve years. it did not kill him. at the end of the twelve years
he had to be strangled.

the cappadocian

strangled? who dared to do that?

second soldier

[_pointing to the executioner, a huge negro._]

that man yonder, naaman.

the cappadocian

he was not afraid?

second soldier

oh no! the tetrarch sen
 
 ___________________________
 
t him the ring.

the cappadocian

what ring?

[illustration: the black cape]

second soldier

the death-ring. so he was not afraid.

the cappadocian

yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

first soldier

why? kings have but one neck, like other folk.

the cappadocian

i think it terrible.

the young syrian

the princess rises! she is leaving the table! she looks very
troubled. ah, she is coming this way. yes, she is coming towards
us. how pale she is! never have i seen her so pale.

the page of herodias

do not look at her. i pray you not to look at her.

the young syrian

she is like a dove that has strayed.... she is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... she is like a silver flower.

[_enter salomé_.]

salomé

i will not stay. i cannot stay. why do