        -- mr. c.l. delph.
     slave                  -- miss stansfeld.
     first jew              -- mr. f. stanley smith.
     second jew             -- mr. bernhard smith.
     third jew              -- mr. john bate.
     fourth jew             -- stephen bagehot
     fifth jew              -- frederick lawrence.

scene--the great terrace outside the palace.




       *       *       *       *       *


scene.--_a great terrace in the palace of herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. to
the right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the
back, an old cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze.
moonlight._

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

look at the moon! how strange the moon seems! she is like a woman
rising from a tomb. she is like a dead woman. you would fancy she
was looking for dead things.

the young syrian

she has a strange look. she is like a little princess who wears 
 
 ___________________________
 
st to
speak with him.

salomé

i desire to speak with him.

first soldier

it is impossible, princess.

salomé

i will speak with him.

the young syrian

would it not be better to return to the banquet?

salomé

bring forth this prophet.

                             [_exit the slave._]

first soldier

we dare not, princess.

salomé

[_approaching the cistern and looking down into it._]

how black it is, down there! it must be terrible to be in so
black a pit! it is like a tomb.... [_to the soldiers._] did you
not hear me? bring out the prophet. i wish to see him.

second soldier

princess, i beg you do not require this of us.

salomé

you keep me waiting!

first soldier

princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. and indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this
thing.

salomé

[_looking at the young syrian._]

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! what is going to happen? i am sure that some misfortune will
happen.

salomé

[_going up to the young syria
 
 ___________________________
 
 cistern and listens._]

there is no sound. i hear nothing. why does he not cry out, this
man? ah! if any man sought to kill me, i would cry out, i would
struggle, i would not suffer.... strike, strike, naaman, strike,
i tell you.... no, i hear nothing. there is a silence, a terrible
silence. ah! something has fallen upon the ground. i heard
something fall. it is the sword of the headsman. he is afraid,
this slave. he has let his sword fall. he dare not kill him. he
is a coward, this slave! let soldiers be sent. [_she sees the
page of herodias and addresses him._] come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? well, i tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing i ask, the thing the tetrarch has promised
me, the thing that is mine. [_the page recoils. she turns to the
soldiers._] hither, ye soldiers. get ye down into this cistern
and bring me the head of this man. [_the soldiers recoil._]
tetrarch, tetrarch, comma
 
 ___________________________
 
nd your soldiers that they bring me the
head of jokanaan.

[_a huge black arm, the arm of the executioner, comes forth from
the cistern, bearing on a silver shield the head of jokanaan.
salomé seizes it. herod hides his face with his cloak. herodias
smiles and fans herself. the nazarenes fall on their knees and
begin to pray._]

ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. well!
i will kiss it now. i will bite it with my teeth as one bites a
ripe fruit. yes, i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ecomes very dark. the tetrarch begins to climb the
staircase._]

the voice of salomé

ah! i have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan, i have kissed thy mouth.
there was a bitter taste on thy lips. was it the taste of
blood?... but perchance it is the taste of love.... they say that
love hath a bitter taste.... but what of that? what of that? i
have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan.

[_a moonbeam falls on salomé covering her with light._]

herod

[_turning round and seeing salomé_.]

kill that woman!

[_the soldiers rush forward and crush beneath their shields
salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa._]

curtain.


[illustration: cul de lampe]