salomé

a tragedy in one act:

translated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays have such a
peculiar history. written in french in 1892 it was in full
rehe
 
 ___________________________
 
       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier          -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
     herodias               -- miss louise salom.
     tigellinus             -- mr. c.l. delph.
     slave                  -- miss stansfeld.
     first jew              -- mr. f. stanley smith.
     second jew             -- mr. bernhard smith.
     third jew              -- mr. john bate.
     fourth jew             -- stephen bagehot
     fifth jew              -- frederick lawrence.

scene--the great terrace outside the palace.




       *       *       *       *       *


scene.--_a great terrace in the palace of herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. 
 
 ___________________________
 
sts but that he shows them
a corpse? whose is it? i will not look on it.

first soldier

it is our captain, sire. he is the young syrian whom you made
captain only three days ago.

herod

i gave no order that he should be slain.

second soldier

he killed himself, sire.

herod

for what reason? i had made him captain.

second soldier

we do not know, sire. but he killed himself.

herod

that seems strange to me. i thought it was only the roman
philosophers who killed themselves. is it not true, tigellinus,
that the philosophers at rome kill themselves?

tigellinus

there are some who kill themselves, sire. they are the stoics.
the stoics are coarse people. they are ridiculous people. i
myself regard them as being perfectly ridiculous.

herod

i also. it is ridiculous to kill oneself.

tigellinus

everybody at rome laughs at them. the emperor has written a
satire against them. it is recited everywhere.

herod

ah! he has written a satire against them? cæsar is wonderful. he
can do everything....
 
 ___________________________
 
elf is your prophet
elias.

the jew

that cannot be. it is more than three hundred years since the
days of the prophet elias.

herod

there be some who say that this man is the prophet elias..

a nazarene

i am sure that he is the prophet elias.

the jew

nay, but he is not the prophet elias.

the voice of jokanaan

so the day is come, the day of the lord, and i hear upon the
mountains the feet of him who shall be the saviour of the world.

herod

what does that mean? the saviour of the world.

tigellinus

it is a title that cæsar takes.

herod

but cæsar is not coming into judæa. only yesterday i received
letters from rome. they contained nothing concerning this matter.
and you, tigellinus, who were at rome during the winter, you
heard nothing concerning this matter, did you?

tigellinus

sire, i heard nothing concerning the matter. i was explaining the
title. it is one of cæsar's titles.

herod

but cæsar cannot come. he is too gouty. they say that his feet
are like the feet of an elephan
 
 ___________________________
 
e a drunken
man ... but i cannot suffer the sound of his voice. i hate his
voice. command him to be silent.

herod

i will not. i cannot understand what it is that he saith, but it
may be an omen.

herodias

i do not believe in omens. he speaks like a drunken man.

herod

it may be he is drunk with the wine of god.

herodias

what wine is that, the wine of god? from what vineyards is it
gathered? in what wine-press may one find it?

herod

[_from this point he looks all the while at salomé._]

tigellinus, when you were at rome of late, did the emperor speak
with you: on the subject of...?

tigellinus

on what subject, sire?

herod

on what subject? ah! i asked you a question, did i not? i have
forgotten what i would have asked you.

herodias

you are looking again at my daughter. you must not look at her. i
have already said so.

herod

you say nothing else.

herodias

i say it again.

herod

and that restoration of the temple about which they have talked
so much, will anything be done? they sa