salomé

a tragedy in one act:

translated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays have such a
peculiar history. written in french in 1892 it was in full
rehearsal by madame bernhardt at the palace theatre when it was
prohibited by the censor. oscar wilde immediately ann
 
 ___________________________
 
 translated into english by lord alfred douglas,
the illustrator, aubrey beardsley, shared some of the obloquy
heaped on wilde. it is interesting that he should have found
inspiration for his finest work in a play he never admired and by
a writer he cordially disliked. the motives are, of course, made
to his hand, and never was there a more suitable material for
that odd tangent art in which there are no tactile values. the
amusing caricatures of wilde which appear in the _frontispiece_,
"enter herodias" and "the eyes of herod," are the only pieces of
vraisemblance in these exquisite designs. the colophon is a real
masterpiece and a witty criticism of the play as well.

on the production of "salomé" by the new stage club in may,
1905,[1] the dramatic critics again expressed themselves
vehemently, vociferating their regrets that the play had been
dragged from its obscurity. the obscure drama, however, had
become for five years past part of the literature of europe. it
is performed regularly or
 
 ___________________________
 
g, for which mr. charles
ricketts was responsible, and the marvellous impersonation of
herod by mr. robert farquharson. wilde used to say that "salomé"
was a mirror in which everyone could see himself. the artist,
art; the dull, dulness; the vulgar, vulgarity.



[illustration]

list of the pictures by aubrey beardsley.

1. the woman in the moon. 2. title page. 3. cover design. 4. list
of the pictures. 5. the peacock skirt. 6. the black cape. 7. a
platonic lament. 8. john and salomé. 9. enter herodias. 10. the
eyes of herod. 11. the stomach dance. 12. the toilette of
salomé--i. 13. the toilette of salomé--ii. 14. the dancer's
reward. 15. the climax. 16. cul de lampe.


       *       *       *       *       *




cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for
the first time.

new stage club.

"salomé,"

by oscar wilde.

may 10th and 13th 1905.

     a young syrian captain -- mr. herbert alexander.
     page of herodias       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier  
 
 ___________________________
 
        -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
     herodias               -- miss louise salom.
     tigellinus             -- mr. c.l. delph.
     slave                  -- miss stansfeld.
     first jew              -- mr. f. stanley smith.
     second jew             -- mr. bernhard smith.
     third jew              -- mr. john bate.
     fourth jew             -- stephen bagehot
     fifth jew              -- frederick lawrence.

scene--the great terrace outside the palace.




       *       *       *       *       *


scene.--_a great terrace in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the palace of herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. to
the right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the
back, an old cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze.
moonlight._

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

look at the moon! how strange the moon seems! she is like a woman
rising from a tomb. she is like a dead woman. you would fancy she
was looking for dead things.

the young syrian

she has a strange look. she is like a little princess who wears a
yellow veil, and whose feet are of silver. she is like a princess
who has little white doves for feet. you would fancy she was
dancing.

the page of herodias

she is like a woman who is dead. she moves very slowly.

[_noise in the banqueting-hall._]

f
 
 ___________________________
 
re those wild beasts howling?

second soldier

the jews. they are always like that. they are disputing about
their religion.

first soldier

why do they dispute about their religion?

second soldier

i cannot tell. they are always doing it. the pharisees, for
instance, say that there are angels, and the sadducees declare
that angels do not exist.

first soldier

i think it is ridiculous to dispute about such things.

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

you are always looking at her. you look at her too much. it is
dangerous to look at people in such fashion. something terrible
may happen.


[illustration: the peacock skirt]


the young syrian

she is very beautiful to-night.

first soldier

the tetrarch has a sombre look.

second soldier

yes; he has a sombre look.

first soldier

he is looking at something.

second soldier

he is looking at some one.

first soldier

at whom is he looking?

second soldier

i cannot tell.

the young syrian

h
 
 ___________________________
 
ow pale the princess is! never have i seen her so pale. she is
like the shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver.

the page of herodias

you must not look at her. you look too much at her.

first soldier

herodias has filled the cup of the tetrarch.

the cappadocian

is that the queen herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?

first soldier

yes; that is herodias, the tetrarch's wife.

second soldier

the tetrarch is very fond of wine. he has wine of three sorts.
one which is brought from the island of samothrace, and is purple
like the cloak of cæsar.

the cappadocian

i have never seen cæsar.

second soldier

another that comes from a town called cyprus, and is yellow like
gold.

the cappadocian

i love gold.

second soldier

and the third is a wine of sicily. that wine is red like blood.

the nubian

the gods of my country are very fond of blood. t
 
 ___________________________
 
 he even had disciples.

the cappadocian

what is he talking of?

first soldier

we can never tell. sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

the cappadocian

may one see him?

first soldier

no. the tetrarch has forbidden it.

the young syrian

the princess has hidden her face behind her fan! her little white
hands are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. they
are like white butterflies. they are just like white butterflies.

the page of herodias

what is that to you? why do you look at her? you must not look at
her.... something terrible may happen.

the cappadocian

[_pointing to the cistern._]

what a strange prison!

second soldier

it is an old cistern.

the cappadocian

an old cistern! it must be very unhealthy.

second soldier

oh no! for instance, the tetrarch's brother, his elder brother,
the first husband of herodias the queen, was imprisoned there for
twelve years. it did not kill him. at the end of the twelve years
he had to
 
 ___________________________
 
 ring.

the cappadocian

what ring?

[illustration: the black cape]

second soldier

the death-ring. so he was not afraid.

the cappadocian

yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

first soldier

why? kings have but one neck, like other folk.

the cappadocian

i think it terrible.

the young syrian

the princess rises! she is leaving the table! she looks very
troubled. ah, she is coming this way. yes, she is coming towards
us. how pale she is! never have i seen her so pale.

the page of herodias

do not look at her. i pray you not to look at her.

the young syrian

she is like a dove that has strayed.... she is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... she is like a silver flower.

[_enter salomé_.]

salomé

i will not stay. i cannot stay. why does the tetrarch look at me
all the while with his mole's eyes under his shaking eyelids? it
is strange that the husband of my mother looks at me like that.
i know not what it means. in truth, yes, i know it.

the young syrian

you have just 
 
 ___________________________
 
eir foolish ceremonies, and barbarians who drink and drink, and
spill their wine on the pavement, and greeks from smyrna with
painted eyes and painted cheeks, and frizzed hair curled in
twisted coils, and silent, subtle egyptians, with long nails of
jade and russett cloaks, and romans brutal and coarse, with their
uncouth jargon. ah! how i loathe the romans! they are rough and
common, and they give themselves the airs of noble lords.

the young syrian

will you be seated, princess?

the page of herodias

why do you speak to her? why do you look at her? oh! something
terrible will happen.

salomé

how good to see the moon! she is like a little piece of money,
you would think she was a little silver flower. the moon is cold
and chaste. i am sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty.
yes, she is a virgin. she has never defiled herself. she has
never abandoned herself to men, like the other goddesses.

the voice of jokanaan

the lord hath come. the son of man hath come. the centaurs have
hi
 
 ___________________________
 
o it._]

how black it is, down there! it must be terrible to be in so
black a pit! it is like a tomb.... [_to the soldiers._] did you
not hear me? bring out the prophet. i wish to see him.

second soldier

princess, i beg you do not require this of us.

salomé

you keep me waiting!

first soldier

princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. and indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this
thing.

salomé

[_looking at the young syrian._]

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! what is going to happen? i am sure that some misfortune will
happen.

salomé

[_going up to the young syrian._]

you will do this tiling for me, will you not, narraboth? you will
do this thing for me. i have always been kind to you. you will do
it for me. i would but look at this strange prophet. men have
talked so much of him. often have i heard the tetrarch talk of
him. i think the tetrarch is afraid of him. are you, even you,
also afraid of him, narraboth?

the young syrian

i fear him
 
 ___________________________
 
ill
do this thing for me. and to-morrow when i pass in my litter by
the bridge of the idol-buyers, i will look at you through the
muslin veils, i will look at you, narraboth, it may be i will
smile at you. look at me, narraboth, look at me. ah! you know
that you will do what i ask of you. you know it well.... i know
that you will do this thing.

the young syrian

[_signing to the third soldier._]

let the prophet come forth.... the princess salomé desires to see
him.

salomé

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! how strange the moon looks. you would think it was the hand
of a dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.

the young syrian

she has a strange look! she is like a little princess, whose eyes
are eyes of amber. through the clouds of muslin she is smiling
like a little princess.

[_the prophet comes out of the cistern. salomé looks at him and
steps slowly back._]

[illustration: a platonic lament]

jokanaan

where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? where is he,
wh
 
 ___________________________
 
shaft of silver. his flesh must be cool
like ivory. i would look closer at him.

the young syrian

no, no, princess.

salomé

i must look at him closer.

the young syrian

princess! princess!

jokanaan

who is this woman who is looking at me? i will not have her look
at me. wherefore doth she look at me with her golden eyes, under
her gilded eyelids? i know not who she is. i do not wish to know
who she is. bid her begone. it is not to her that i would speak.

salomé

i am salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa.

jokanaan

back! daughter of babylon! come not near the chosen of the lord.
thy mother hath filled the earth with the wine of her iniquities,
and the cry of her sins hath come up to the ears of god.

salomé

speak again, jokanaan. thy voice is wine to me.

the young syrian

princess! princess! princess!

salomé

speak again! speak again, jokanaan, and tell me what i must do.

jokanaan

daughter of sodom, come not near me! but cover thy face with a
veil, and scatter ashes 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of babylon! daughter of sodom! never.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i will kiss thy mouth.

the young syrian

princess, princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who
art the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him!
do not speak such words to him. i cannot suffer them....
princess, princess, do not speak these things.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

the young syrian

ah! [_he kills himself and falls between salomé and jokanaan._]

the page of herodias

the young syrian has slain himself! the young captain has slain
himself! he has slain himself who was my friend! i gave him a
little box of perfumes and ear-rings wrought in silver, and now
he has killed himself! ah, did he not foretell that some
misfortune would happen? i, too, foretold it, and it has
happened. well i knew that the moon was seeking a dead thing, but
i knew not that it was he whom she sought. ah! why did i not hide
him from the moon? if i had hidden him in a cavern she would n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot
have seen him.

first soldier

princess, the young captain has just killed himself.

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

jokanaan

art thou not afraid, daughter of herodias? did i not tell thee
that i had heard in the palace the beatings of the wings of the
angel of death, and hath he not come, the angel of death?

[illustration: enter herodias]

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

daughter of adultery, there is but one who can save thee, it is
he of whom i spake. go seek him. he is in a boat on the sea of
galilee, and he talketh with his disciples. kneel down on the
shore of the sea, and call unto him by his name. when he cometh
to thee (and to all who call on him he cometh), bow thyself at
his feet and ask of him the remission of thy sins.

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

cursed be thou! daughter of an incestuous m
 
 ___________________________
 
other, be thou
accursed!

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

jokanaan

i do no wish to look at thee. i will not look at thee, thou art
accursed, salomé, thou art accursed. [_he goes down into the
cistern._]

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan; i will kiss thy mouth.

first soldier

we must bear away the body to another place. the tetrarch does
not care to see dead bodies, save the bodies of those whom he
himself has slain.

the page of herodias

he was my brother, and nearer to me than a brother. i gave him a
little box full of perfumes, and a ring of agate that he wore
always on his hand. in the evening we used to walk by the river,
among the almond trees, and he would tell me of the things of his
country. he spake ever very low. the sound of his voice was like
the sound of the flute, of a flute player. also he much loved to
gaze at himself in the river. i used to reproach him for that.

second soldier

you are right; we must hide th
 
 ___________________________
 
e body. the tetrarch must not see
it.

first soldier

the tetrarch will not come to this place. he never comes on the
terrace. he is too much afraid of the prophet.

[_enter herod, herodias, and all the court._]

herod

where is salomé? where is the princess? why did she not return to
the banquet as i commanded her? ah! there she is!

herodias

you must not look at her! you are always looking at her!

herod

the moon has a strange look to-night. has she not a strange look?
she is like a mad woman, a mad woman who is seeking everywhere
for lovers. she is naked too. she is quite naked. the clouds are
seeking to clothe her nakedness, but she will not let them. she
shows herself naked in the sky. she reels through the clouds like
a drunken woman.... i am sure she is looking for lovers. does she
not reel like a drunken woman? she is like 
 
 ___________________________
 
a mad woman, is she
not?

herodias

no; the moon is like the moon, that is all. let us go within....
you have nothing to do here.

herod

i will stay here! manesseh, lay carpets there. light torches,
bring forth the ivory tables, and the tables of jasper. the air
here is delicious. i will drink more wine with my guests. we must
show all honours to the ambassadors of cæsar.

herodias

it is not because of them that you remain.

herod

yes; the air is delicious. come, herodias, our guests await us.
ah! i have slipped! i have slipped in blood! it is an ill omen.
it is a very evil omen. wherefore is there blood here?... and
this body, what does this body here? think you i am like the king
of egypt, who gives no feast to his guests but that he shows them
a corpse? whose is it? i will not look on it.

first soldier

it is our captain, sire. he is the young syrian whom you made
captain only three days ago.

herod

i gave no order that he should be slain.

second soldier


 
 ___________________________
 

everybody at rome laughs at them. the emperor has written a
satire against them. it is recited everywhere.

herod

ah! he has written a satire against them? cæsar is wonderful. he
can do everything.... it is strange that the young syrian has
killed himself. i am sorry he has killed himself. i am very
sorry; for he was fair to look upon. he was even very fair. he
had very languorous eyes. i remember that i saw that he looked
languorously at salomé. truly, i thought he looked too much at
her.

herodias

there are others who look at her too much.

herod

his father was a king. i drove him from his kingdom. and you made
a slave of his mother, who was a queen, herodias. so he was here
as my guest, as it were, and for that reason i made him my
captain. i am sorry he is dead. ho! why have you left the body
here? i will not look at it--away with it! [_they take away the
body._] it is cold here. there is a wind blowing. is there not a
wind blowing?

herodias

no; there is no wind.

herod

i tell you
 
 ___________________________
 
 there is a wind that blows.... and i hear in the air
something that is like the beating of wings, like the beating of
vast wings. do you not hear it?

herodias

i hear nothing.

herod

i hear it no longer. but i heard it. it was the blowing of the
wind, no doubt. it has passed away. but no, i hear it again. do
you not hear it? it is just like the beating of wings.

herodias

i tell you there is nothing. you are ill. let us go within.

herod

i am not ill. it is your daughter who is sick. she has the mien
of a sick person. never have i seen her so pale.

herodias

i have told you not to look at her.

herod

pour me forth wine [_wine is brought_]. salomé, come drink a
little wine with me. i have here a wine that is exquisite. cæsar
himself sent it me. dip into it thy little red lips, that i may
drain the cup.

salomé

i am not thirsty, tetrarch.

herod

you hear 
 
 ___________________________
 
how she answers me, this daughter of yours?

herodias

she does right. why are you always gazing at her?

herod

bring me ripe fruits [_fruits are brought_]. salomé, come and eat
fruit with me. i love to see in a fruit the mark of thy little
teeth. bite but a little of this fruit and then i will eat what
is left.

salomé

i am not hungry, tetrarch.

herod

[_to herodias._] you see how you have brought up this daughter of
yours.

herodias

my daughter and i come of a royal race. as for thee, thy father
was a camel driver! he was also a robber!

herod

thou liest!

herodias

thou knowest well that it is true.

herod

salomé, come and sit next to me. i will give thee the throne of
thy mother.

salomé

i am not tired, tetrarch.

herodias

you see what she thinks of you.

herod

bring me--what is it that i desire? i forget. ah! ah! i remember.

[illustration: the eyes of herod]

the voice of jokanaan

lo! the time is come! that wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ich i foretold has come to pass,
saith the lord god. lo! the day of which i spoke.

herodias

bid him be silent. i will not listen to his voice. this man is
for ever vomiting insults against me.

herod

he has said nothing against you. besides, he is a very great
prophet.

herodias

i do not believe in prophets. can a man tell what will come to
pass? no man knows it. moreover, he is for ever insulting me. but
i think you are afraid of him.... i know well that you are afraid
of him.

herod

i am not afraid of him. i am afraid of no man.

herodias

i tell you, you are afraid of him. if you are not afraid of him
why do you not deliver him to the jews, who for these six months
past have been clamouring for him?

a jew

truly, my lord, it were better to deliver him into our ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 mysterious. it
may be that the things which we call evil are good, and that the
things which we call good are evil. there is no knowledge of any
thing. we must needs submit to everything, for god is very
strong. he breaketh in pieces the strong together with the weak,
for he regardeth not any man.

first jew

thou speaketh truly. god is terrible; he breaketh the strong and
the weak as a man brays corn in a mortar. but this man hath never
seen god. no man hath seen god since the prophet elias.

herodias

make them be silent. they weary me.

herod

but i have heard it said that jokanaan himself is your prophet
elias.

the jew

that cannot be. it is more than three hundred years since the
days of the prophet elias.

herod

there be some who say that this man is the prophet elias..

a nazarene

i am sure that he is the prophet elias.

the jew

nay, but he is not the prophet elias.

the voice of jokanaan

so the day is come, the day of the lord, and i hear upon the
mountains the feet of him who sh
 
 ___________________________
 
ere are reasons of
state. he who leaves rome loses rome. he will not come. howbeit,
cæsar is lord, he will come if he wishes. nevertheless, i do not
think he will come.

first nazarene

it was not concerning cæsar that the prophet spake these words,
sire.

herod

not of cæsar?

first nazarene

no, sire.

herod

concerning whom then did he speak?

first nazarene

concerning messias who has come.

a jew

messiah hath not come.

first nazarene

he hath come, and everywhere he worketh miracles.

herodias ho! ho! miracles! i do not believe in miracles. i have
seen too many. [_to the page._] my fan!

first nazarene

this man worketh true miracles. thus, at a marriage which took
place in a little town of galilee, a town of some importance, he
changed water into wine. certain persons who were present related
it to me. also he healed two lepers that were seated before the
gate of capernaum simply by touching them.

second nazarene

nay, it was blind men that he healed at capernaum.

first nazarene


 
 ___________________________
 
nay; they were lepers. but he hath healed blind people also, and
he was seen on a mountain talking with angels.

a sadducee

angels do not exist.

a pharisee

angels exist, but i do not believe that this man has talked with
them.

first nazarene

he was seen by a great multitude of people talking with angels.

a sadducee

not with angels.

herodias

how these men weary me! they are ridiculous! [_to the page._]
well! my fan! [_the page gives her the fan._] you have a
dreamer's look; you must not dream. it is only sick people who
dream. [_she strikes the page with her fan._]

second nazarene

there is also the miracle of the daughter of jairus.

first nazarene

yes, that is sure. no man can gainsay it.

herodias

these men are mad. they have looked too long on the moon. command
them to be silent.

herod

what is this miracle of the daughter
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the blind.... he may do these things if he
will. i say nothing against these things. in truth i hold it a
good deed to heal a leper. but i allow no man to raise the dead.
it would be terrible if the dead came back.

[illustration: the stomach dance]

the voice of jokanaan

ah! the wanton! the harlot! ah! the daughter of babylon with her
golden eyes and her gilded eyelids!--thus saith the lord god, let
there come up against her a multitude of men. let the people take
stones and stone her....

herodias

command him to be silent.

the voice of jokanaan

let the war captains pierce her with their swords, let them crush
her beneath their shields.

herodias

nay, but it is infamous.

the voice of jokanaan

it is thus that i will wipe out all wickedness from the earth,
and that all women shall learn not to imitate her abominations.

herodias

you hear what he says against me? you allow him to revile your
wife?

herod

he did not speak your name.

herodias

what does that matter? you know well that
 
 ___________________________
 
 it is i whom he seeks
to revile. and i am your wife, am i not?

herod

of a truth, dear and noble herodias, you are my wife, and before
that you were the wife of my brother.

herodias

it was you who tore me from his arms.

herod

of a truth i was stronger.... but let us not talk of that matter.
i do not desire to talk of it. it is the cause of the terrible
words that the prophet has spoken. peradventure on account of it
a misfortune will come. let us not speak of this matter. noble
herodias, we are not mindful of our guests. fill thou my cup, my
well-beloved. fill with wine the great goblets of silver, and the
great goblets of glass. i will drink to cæsar. there are romans
here, we must drink to cæsar.

all

cæsar! cæsar!

herod

do you not see your daughter, how pale she is?

herodias

what is it to you if she be pale or not?

herod

never have i seen her so pale.

herodias

you must not look at her.

the voice of jokanaan

in that day the sun shall become black like sackclot
 
 ___________________________
 
h of hair,
and the moon shall become like blood, and the stars of the
heavens shall fall upon the earth like ripe figs that fall from
the fig-tree, and the kings of the earth shall be afraid.

herodias

ah! ah! i should like to see that day of which he speaks, when
the moon shall become like blood, and when the stars shall fall
upon the earth like ripe figs. this prophet talks like a drunken
man ... but i cannot suffer the sound of his voice. i hate his
voice. command him to be silent.

herod

i will not. i cannot understand what it is that he saith, but it
may be an omen.

herodias

i do not believe in omens. he speaks like a drunken man.

herod

it may be he is drunk with the wine of god.


 
 ___________________________
 
herodias

what wine is that, the wine of god? from what vineyards is it
gathered? in what wine-press may one find it?

herod

[_from this point he looks all the while at salomé._]

tigellinus, when you were at rome of late, did the emperor speak
with you: on the subject of...?

tigellinus

on what subject, sire?

herod

on what subject? ah! i asked you a question, did i not? i have
forgotten what i would have asked you.

herodias

you are looking again at my daughter. you must not look at her. i
have already said so.

herod

you say nothing else.

herodias

i say it again.

herod

and that restoration of the temple about which they have talked
so much, will anything be done? they say the veil of the
sanctuary has disappeared, do they not?

herodias

it was thyself didst steal it. thou speakest at random. i will
not stay here. let us go within.

herod

dance for me, salomé.

herodias

i will not have her dance.

salomé
 
 ___________________________
 


i have no desire to dance, tetrarch.

herod

salomé, daughter of herodias, dance for me.

herodias

let her alone.

herod

i command thee to dance, salomé.

salomé

i will not dance, tetrarch.

herodias

[_laughing_].

you see how she obeys you.

herod

what is it to me whether she dance or not? it is naught to me.
to-night i am happy, i am exceeding happy. never have i been so
happy.

first soldier

the tetrarch has a sombre look. has he not a sombre look?

second soldier

yes, he has a sombre look.

herod

wherefore should i not be happy? cæsar, who is lord of the world,
who is lord of all things, loves me well. he has just sent me
most precious gifts. also he has promised me to summon to r
 
 ___________________________
 
it may be that at rome
he will crucify him, for he is able to do all things that he
wishes. verily, cæsar is lord. thus you see i have a right to be
happy. indeed, i am happy. i have never been so happy. there is
nothing in the world that can mar my happiness.

the voice of jokanaan

he shall be seated on this throne. he shall be clothed in scarlet
and purple. in his hand he shall bear a golden cup full of his
blasphemies. and the angel of the lord shall smite him. he shall
be eaten of worms.

herodias

you hear what he says about you. he says that you will be eaten
of worms.

herod

it is not of me that he speaks. he speaks never against me. it is
of the king of cappadocia that he speaks; the king of cappadocia,
who is mine enemy. it is he who shall be eaten of worms. it is
not i. never has he spoken word against me, this prophet, save
that i sinned in taking to wife the wife of my brother. it may be
he is right. for, of a truth, you are sterile.

herodias

i am sterile, i? you say that, you
 
 ___________________________
 
you have gotten no
child, no, not even from one of your slaves. it is you who are
sterile, not i.

herod

peace, woman! i say that you are sterile. you have borne me no
child, and the prophet says that our marriage is not a true
marriage. he says that it is an incestuous marriage, a marriage
that will bring evils.... i fear he is right; i am sure that he
is right. but it is not the moment to speak of such things. i
would be happy at this moment. of a truth, i am happy. there is
nothing i lack.

herodias

i am glad you are of so fair a humour to-night. it is not your
custom. but it is late. let us go within. do not forget that we
hunt at sunrise. all honours must be shown to cæsar's
ambassadors, must they not?

second soldier

what a sombre look the tetrarch wears.

first soldier

yes, he wears a sombre look.

herod

salomé, salomé, dance for me. i pray thee dance for me. i am sad
to-night. yes; i am passing sad to-night. when i came hither i
slipped in blood, which is an evil omen; and i he
 
 ___________________________
 
ard, i am sure i
heard in the air a beating of wings, a beating of giant wings. i
cannot tell what they mean ... i am sad to-night. therefore dance
for me. dance for me, salomé, i beseech you. if you dance for me
you may ask of me what you will, and i will give it you, even
unto the half of my kingdom.

[illustration: the toilette of salomé--i]

salomé

[_rising._] will you indeed give me whatsoever i shall ask,
tetrarch?

herodias

do not dance, my daughter.

herod

everything, even the half of my kingdom.

salomé

you swear it, tetrarch?

herod

i swear it, salomé.

herodias

do not dance, my daughter.

salomé

by what will you swear, tetrarch?

herod

by my life, by my crown, by my gods. whatsoever you desire i will
give it you, even to the half of my kingdom, if you will but
dance for me. o, salomé, salomé, dance for me!

salomé

you have sworn, tetrarch.

herod

i have sworn, salomé.

salomé

all this i ask, 
 
 ___________________________
 
even the half of your kingdom.

herodias

my daughter, do not dance.

herod

even to the half of my kingdom. thou wilt be passing fair as a
queen, salomé, if it please thee to ask for the half of my
kingdom. will she not be fair as a queen? ah! it is cold here!
there is an icy wind, and i hear ... wherefore do i hear in the
air this beating of wings? ah! one might fancy a bird, a huge
black bird that hovers over the terrace. why can i not see it,
this bird? the beat of its wings is terrible. the breath of the
wind of its wings is ter
 
 ___________________________
 
e like
stains of blood on the cloth. that does not matter. you must not
find symbols in everything you see. it makes life impossible. it
were better to say that stains of blood are as lovely as rose
petals. it were better far to say that.... but we will not speak
of this. now i am happy, i am passing happy. have i not the
right to be happy? your daughter is going to dance for me. will
you not dance for me, salomé? you have promised to dance for me.

[illustration: the toilette of salomé--ii]

herodias

i will not have her dance.

salomé

i will dance for you, tetrarch.

herod

you hear what your daughter says. she is going to dance for me.
you do well to dance for me, salomé. and when you have danced for
me, forget not to ask of me whatsoever you wish. whatsoever you
wish i will give it you, even to the half of my kingdom. i have
sworn it, have i not?

salomé

you have sworn it, tetrarch.

herod

and i have never broken my word. i am not of those who break
their oaths. i know not how to l
 
 ___________________________
 
é

i am awaiting until my slaves bring perfumes to me and the seven
veils, and take off my sandals. [_slaves bring perfumes and the
seven veils, and take off the sandals of salomé._]

herod

ah, you are going to dance with naked feet. 'tis well!--'tis
well. your little feet will be like white doves. they will be
like little white flowers that dance upon the trees.... no, no,
she is going to dance on blood. there is blood spilt on the
ground. she must not dance on blood. it were an evil omen.

herodias

what is it to you if she dance on blood? thou hast waded deep
enough therein....

herod

what is it to me? ah! look at the moon! she has become red. she
has become red as blood. ah! the prophet prophesied truly. he
prophesied that the moon would become red as blood. did he not
prophesy it? all of you heard him. and now the moon has become
red as blood. do ye not see it?

herodias

oh, yes, i see it well, and the stars are falling like ripe figs,
are they not? and the sun is becoming black like
 
 ___________________________
 
kings of the earth are afraid. that at least one
can see. the prophet, for once in his life, was right, the kings
of the earth are afraid.... let us go within. you are sick. they
will say at rome that you are mad. let us go within, i tell you.

the voice of jokanaan

who is this who cometh from edom, who is this who cometh from
bozra, whose raiment is dyed with purple, who shineth in the
beauty of his garments, who walketh mighty in his greatness?
wherefore is thy raiment stained with scarlet?

herodias

let us go within. the voice of that man maddens me. i will not
have my daughter dance while he is continually crying out. i will
not have her dance while you look at her in this fashion. in a
word, i will not have her dance.

herod

do not rise, my wife, my queen, it will avail thee nothing. i
will not go within till she hath danced. dance, salomé, dance for
me.

herodias

do not dance, my daughter.

salomé

i am ready, tetrarch.

[_salomé dances the dance of the seven veils._]

herod

ah! 
 
 ___________________________
 

i would that they presently bring me in a silver charger....

herod

[laughing.]

in a silver charger? surely yes, in a silver charger. she is
charming, is she not? what is it you would have in a silver
charger, o sweet and fair salomé, you who are fairer than all the
daughters of judæa? what would you have them bring thee in a
silver charger? tell me. whatsoever it may be, they shall give it
you. my treasures belong to thee. what is it, salomé?

salomé

[_rising_].

the head of jokanaan.

herodias

ah! that is well said, my daughter.

herod

no, no!

herodias

that is well said, my daughter.

herod

no, no, salomé. you do not ask me that. do not listen to your
mother's voice. she is ever giving you evil counsel. do not heed
her.

salomé

i do not heed my mother. it is for mine own pleasure that i ask
the head of jokanaan in a silver charger. you hath sworn, herod.
forget not that you have sworn an oath.

herod

i know it. i have sworn by my gods. i know it well. but i pray
you, salomé
 
 ___________________________
 
, ask of me something else. ask of me the half of my
kingdom, and i will give it you. but ask not of me what you have
asked.

salomé

i ask of you the head of jokanaan.

herod

no, no, i do not wish it.

salomé

you have sworn, herod.

herodias

yes, you have sworn. everybody heard you. you swore it before
everybody.

herod

be silent! it is not to you i speak.

herodias

my daughter has done well to ask the head of jokanaan. he has
covered me with insults. he has said monstrous things against me.
one can see that she loves her mother well. do not yield, my
daughter. he has sworn, he has sworn.

herod

be silent, speak not to me!... come, salomé, be reasonable. i
have never been hard to you. i have ever loved you.... it may be
that i have loved you too much. therefore ask not this thing of
me. this is a terrible thing, an awful thing to ask of me.
surely, i th
 
 ___________________________
 

peacocks. they will follow you whithersoever you go, and in the
midst of them you will be like the moon in the midst of a great
white cloud.... i will give them all to you. i have but a
hundred, and in the whole world there is no king who has peacocks
like unto my peacocks. but i will give them all to you. only you
must loose me from my oath, and must not ask of me that which you
have asked of me.

                        [_he empties the cup of wine._]

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herodias

well said, my daughter! as for you, you are ridiculous with your
peacocks.

herod

be silent! you cry out always; you cry out like a beast of prey.
you must not. your voice wearies me. be silent, i say salomé,
think of what you are doing. this man comes perchance from god.
he is a holy man. the finger of god has touched him. god has put
into his mouth terrible words. in the palace as in the desert god
is always with him.... at least it is possible. one does not
know. it is possible that god i
 
 ___________________________
 
t desirest thou
more than this, salomé? tell me the thing that thou desirest, and
i will give it thee. all that thou askest i will give thee, save
one thing. i will give thee all that is mine, save one life. i
will give thee the mantle of the high priest. i will give thee
the veil of the sanctuary.

the jews

oh! oh!

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herod

[_sinking back in his seat_]. let her be given what she asks! of
a truth she is her mother's child! [_the first soldier
approaches. herodias draws from the hand of the tetrarch the ring
of death and gives it to the soldier, who straightway bears it to
the executioner. the executioner looks scared._] who has taken my
ring? there was a ring on my right hand. who has drunk my wine?
there was wine in my cup. it was full of wine. someone has drunk
it! oh! surely some evil will befall some one. [_the executioner
goes down into the cistern._] ah! wherefore did i give my oath?
kings ought never to pledge their word. if they keep it not, it

 
 ___________________________
 
is terrible, and if they keep it, it is terrible also.

herodias

my daughter has done well.

herod

i am sure that some misfortune will happen.

salomé

[_she leans over the cistern and listens._]

there is no sound. i hear nothing. why does he not cry out, this
man? ah! if any man sought to kill me, i would cry out, i would
struggle, i would not suffer.... strike, strike, naaman, strike,
i tell you.... no, i hear nothing. there is a silence, a terrible
silence. ah! something has fallen upon the ground. i heard
something fall. it is the sword of the headsm
 
 ___________________________
 
an. he is afraid,
this slave. he has let his sword fall. he dare not kill him. he
is a coward, this slave! let soldiers be sent. [_she sees the
page of herodias and addresses him._] come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? well, i tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing i ask, the thing the tetrarch has promised
me, the thing that is mine. [_the page recoils. she turns to the
soldiers._] hither, ye soldiers. get ye down into this cistern
and bring me the head of this man. [_the soldiers recoil._]
tetrarch, tetrarch, command your soldiers that they bring me the
h
 
 ___________________________
 
ead of jokanaan.

[_a huge black arm, the arm of the executioner, comes forth from
the cistern, bearing on a silver shield the head of jokanaan.
salomé seizes it. herod hides his face with his cloak. herodias
smiles and fans herself. the nazarenes fall on their knees and
begin to pray._]

ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. well!
i will kiss it now. i will bite it with my teeth as one bites a
ripe fruit. yes, i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i said it; did
i not say it? i said it. ah! i will kiss it now.... but,
wherefore dost thou not look at me, jokanaan? thine eyes that
were so terrible, so full of rage and scorn, are shut now.
wherefore are they shut? open thine eyes! lif
 
 ___________________________
 
ore dost thou not look at me? art thou afraid of
me, jokanaan, that thou wilt not look at me?... and thy tongue,
that was like a red snake darting poison, it moves no more, it
says nothing now, jokanaan, that scarlet viper that spat its
venom upon me. it is strange, is it not? how is it that the red
viper stirs no longer?... thou wouldst have none of me, jokanaan.
thou didst reject me. thou didst speak evil words against me.
thou didst treat me as a harlot, as a wanton, me, salomé,
daughter of herodias, princess of judæa! well, jokanaan, i still
live, but thou, thou art dead, and thy head belongs to me. i can
do with it what i will. i can throw it to the dogs and to the
birds of the air. that which the dogs leave, the birds of the air
shall devour.... ah, jokanaan, jokanaan, thou wert the only man
that i have loved. all other men are hateful to me. but thou,
thou wert beautiful! thy body was a column of ivory set on a
silver socket. it was a garden full of doves and of silver
lilies. it was 
 
 ___________________________
 
me. i was chaste,
and thou didst fill my veins with fire.... ah! ah! wherefore
didst thou not look at me, jokanaan? if thou hadst looked at me
thou hadst loved me. well i know that thou wouldst have loved me,
and the mystery of love is greater than the mystery of death.
love only should one consider.

[illustration: the climax]

herod

she is monstrous, thy daughter, she is altogether monstrous. in
truth, what she has done is a great crime. i am sure that it was
a crime against an unknown god.

herodias

i approve of what my daughter has done. and i will stay here now.

herod

[_rising_].

ah! there speaks the incestuous wife! come! i will not stay here.
come, i tell thee. surely some terrible thing will befall.
manasseh, issachar, ozias, put out the torches. i will not look
at things, i will not suffer things to look at me. put out the
torches! hide the moon! hide the stars! let us hide ourselves in
our palace, herodias. i begin to be afraid.

[_the slaves put out the torches. the stars disap
 
 ___________________________
 
of salomé

ah! i have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan, i have kissed thy mouth.
there was a bitter taste on thy lips. was it the taste of
blood?... but perchance it is the taste of love.... they say that
love hath a bitter taste.... but what of that? what of that? i
have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan.

[_a moonbeam falls on salomé covering her with light._]

herod

[_turning round and seeing salomé_.]

kill that woman!

[_the soldiers rush forward and crush beneath their shields
salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa._]

curtain.


[illustration: cul de lampe]