
conviction and constant clearness to deal with; it had been a frank
proposition, the whole bunch of data, installed on my premises like a
monotony of fine weather.  (the order of composition, in these things,
i may mention, was reversed by the order of publication; the earlier
written of the two books having appeared as the later.) even under the
weight of my hero's years i could feel my postulate firm; even under
the strain of the difference between those of madame de vionnet and
those of chad newsome, a difference liable to be denounced as shocking,
i could still feel it serene.  nothing resisted, nothing betrayed, i
seem to make out, in this full and sound sense of the matter; it shed
from any side i could turn it to the same golden glow.  i rejoiced in
the promise of a hero so mature, who would give me thereby the more to
bite into--since it's only into thickened motive and accumulated
character, i think, that the painter of life bites more than a little.
my poor friend should have accumu
 
 ___________________________
 
ding scene itself a minor
matter, a mere symbol for more things than had been dreamt of in the
philosophy of woollett.  another surrounding scene would have done as
well for our show could it have represented a place in which strether's
errand was likely to lie and his crisis to await him.  the likely place
had the great merit of sparing me preparations; there would have been
too many involved--not at all impossibilities, only rather worrying and
delaying difficulties--in positing elsewhere chad newsome's interesting
relation, his so interesting complexity of relations. strether's
appointed stage, in fine, could be but chad's most luckily selected
one.  the young man had gone in, as they say, for circumjacent charm;
and where he would have found it, by the turn of his mind, most
"authentic," was where his earnest friend's analysis would most find
him; as well as where, for that matter, the former's whole analytic
faculty would be led such a wonderful dance.

"the ambassadors" had been, all con
 
 ___________________________
 
g of the process from
point to point brings back the old illusion.  the old intentions bloom
again and flower--in spite of all the blossoms they were to have
dropped by the way.  this is the charm, as i say, of adventure
transposed--the thrilling ups and downs, the intricate ins and outs of
the compositional problem, made after such a fashion admirably
objective, becoming the question at issue and keeping the author's
heart in his mouth.  such an element, for instance, as his intention
that mrs. newsome, away off with her finger on the pulse of
massachusetts, should yet be no less intensely than circuitously
present through the whole thing, should be no less felt as to be
reckoned with than the most direct exhibition, the finest portrayal at
first hand could make her, such a sign of artistic good faith, i say,
once it's unmistakeably there, takes on again an actuality not too much
impaired by the comparative dimness of the particular success.
cherished intention too inevitably acts and operate
 
 ___________________________
 
gue
pity, to be brief, while his companion challenged him out of the
bedclothes.  "is she really after you?  is that what's behind?"

strether felt an uneasiness at the direction taken by his companion's
insight, but he played a little at uncertainty.  "behind my coming out?"

"behind your prostration or whatever.  it's generally felt, you know,
that she follows you up pretty close."

strether's candour was never very far off.  "oh it has occurred to you
that i'm literally running away from mrs. newsome?"

"well, i haven't known but what you are.  you're a very attractive man,
strether.  you've seen for yourself," said waymarsh "what that lady
downstairs makes of it.  unless indeed," he rambled on with an effect
between the ironic and the anxious, "it's you who are after her.  is
mrs. newsome over here?"  he spoke as with a droll dread of her.

it made his friend--though rather dimly--smile.  "dear no she's safe,
thank goodness--as i think i more and more feel--at home.  she thought
of coming,
 
 ___________________________
 
 the way--?"

our friend had again so lost himself, both for amusement and for
contrition, in the wonder of whether he had made, in his own challenge
that afternoon, such another figure, that he for an instant missed the
thread.  "tell you--?"

"why what you've got on hand."

strether hesitated.  "why it's such a matter as that even if i
positively wanted i shouldn't be able to keep it from you."

waymarsh gloomily gazed.  "what does that mean then but that your trip
is just for her?"

"for mrs. newsome?  oh it certainly is, as i say.  very much."

"then why do you also say it's for me?"

strether, in impatience, violently played with his latch.  "it's simple
enough.  it's for both of you."

waymarsh at last turned over with a groan.  "well, i won't marry you!"

"neither, when it comes to that--!" but the visitor had already laughed
and escaped.



iii

he had told miss gostrey he should probably take, for departure with
waymarsh, some afternoon train, and it thereupon in the morning
appeared 
 
 ___________________________
 
ld it be done, strether asked of their
constant counsellor, without discriminating the latter?

miss gostrey had dined with him at his hotel, face to face over a small
table on which the lighted candles had rose-coloured shades; and the
rose-coloured shades and the small table and the soft fragrance of the
lady--had anything to his mere sense ever been so soft?--were so many
touches in he scarce knew what positive high picture.  he had been to
the theatre, even to the opera, in boston, with mrs. newsome, more than
once acting as her only escort; but there had been no little confronted
dinner, no pink lights, no whiff of vague sweetness, as a preliminary:
one of the results of which was that at present, mildly rueful, though
with a sharpish accent, he actually asked himself why there hadn't.
there was much the same difference in his impression of the noticed
state of his companion, whose dress was "cut down," as he believed the
term to be, in respect to shoulders and bosom, in a manner quite ot
 
 ___________________________
 
her
than mrs. newsome's, and who wore round her throat a broad red velvet
band with an antique jewel--he was rather complacently sure it was
antique--attached to it in front.  mrs. newsome's dress was never in
any degree "cut down," and she never wore round her throat a broad red
velvet band:  if she had, moreover, would it ever have served so to
carry on and complicate, as he now almost felt, his vision?

it would have been absurd of him to trace into ramifications the effect
of the ribbon from which miss gostrey's trinket depended, had he not
for the hour, at the best, been so given over to uncontrolled
perceptions.  what was it but an uncontrolled perception that his
friend's 
 
 ___________________________
 
of her lips, her teeth, her eyes, her
hair?  what, certainly, had a man conscious of a man's work in the
world to do with red velvet bands? he wouldn't for anything have so
exposed himself as to tell miss gostrey how much he liked hers, yet he
had none the less not only caught himself in the act--frivolous, no
doubt, idiotic, and above all unexpected--of liking it:  he had in
addition taken it as a starting-point for fresh backward, fresh
forward, fresh lateral flights.  the manner in which mrs. newsome's
throat was encircled suddenly represented for him, in an alien order,
almost as many things as the manner in which miss gostrey's was.  mrs.
newsome wore, at operatic hours, a black silk dress--very handsome, he
knew it was "handsome"--and an ornament that his memory was able
further to identify as a ruche.  he had his association indeed with the
ruche, but it was rather imperfectly romantic.  he had once said to the
wearer--and it was as "free" a remark as he had ever made to her--that
she l
 
 ___________________________
 
d
from medal to medal and from copper to gold.  it befell that in the
drama precisely there was a bad woman in a yellow frock who made a
pleasant weak good-looking young man in perpetual evening dress do the
most dreadful things.  strether felt himself on the whole not afraid of
the yellow frock, but he was vaguely anxious over a certain kindness
into which he found himself drifting for its victim.  he hadn't come
out, he reminded himself, to be too kind, or indeed to be kind at all,
to chadwick newsome.  would chad also be in perpetual evening dress?
he somehow rather hoped it--it seemed so to add to this young man's
general amenability; though he wondered too if, to fight him with his
own weapons, he himself (a thought almost startling) would have
likewise to be.  this young man furthermore would have been much more
easy to handle--at least for him--than appeared probable in respect to
chad.

it came up for him with miss gostrey that there were things of which
she would really perhaps after 
 
 ___________________________
 
ad to devote another
pause to the appreciation of it.  "and has he only her?  i don't mean
the bad woman in paris," she quickly added--"for i assure you i
shouldn't even at the best be disposed to allow him more than one.  but
has he only his mother?"

"he has also a sister, older than himself and married; and they're both
remarkably fine women."

"very handsome, you mean?"

this promptitude--almost, as he might have thought, this precipitation,
gave him a brief drop; but he came up again. "mrs. newsome, i think, is
handsome, though she's not of course, with a son of twenty-eight and a
daughter of thirty, in her very first youth.  she married, however,
extremely young."

"and is wonderful," miss gostrey asked, "for her age?"

strether seemed to feel with a certain disquiet the pressure of it. "i
don't say she's wonderful.  or rather," he went on the next moment, "i
do say it.  it's exactly what she is--wonderful.  but i wasn't thinking
of her appearance," he explained--"striking as that doubtl
 
 ___________________________
 
ily?"

"quite all.  his father has been dead ten years, and there's no
brother, nor any other sister.  they'd do," said strether, "anything in
the world for him."

"and you'd do anything in the world for them?"

he shifted again; she had made it perhaps just a shade too affirmative
for his nerves.  "oh i don't know!"

"you'd do at any rate this, and the 'anything' they'd do is represented
by their making you do it."

"ah they couldn't have come--either of them.  they're very busy people
and mrs. newsome in particular has a large full life.  she's moreover
highly nervous--and not at all strong."

"you mean she's an american invalid?"

he carefully distinguished.  "there's nothing she likes less than to be
called one, but she would consent to be one of those things, i think,"
he laughed, "if it were the only way to be the other."

"consent to be an american in order to be an invalid?"

"no," said strether, "the other way round.  she's at any rate delicate
sensitive high-strung.  she puts so much
 
 ___________________________
 
at she has nothing left for anything
else?  of course she hasn't.  to whom do you say it?  high-strung?
don't i spend my life, for them, jamming down the pedal?  i see
moreover how it has told on you."

strether took this more lightly.  "oh i jam down the pedal too!"

"well," she lucidly returned, "we must from this moment bear on it
together with all our might."  and she forged ahead.  "have they money?"

but it was as if, while her energetic image still held him, her enquiry
fell short.  "mrs. newsome," he wished further to explain, "hasn't
moreover your courage on the question of contact.  if she had come it
would have been to see the person herself."

"the woman?  ah but that's courage."

"no--it's exaltation, which is a very different thing.  courage," he,
however, accommodatingly threw out, "is what you have."

she shook her head.  "you say that only to patch me up--to cover the
nudity of my want of exaltation.  i've neither the one nor the other.
i've mere battered indifference.  i see 
 
 ___________________________
 
ah then such a service as this of yours--"

"is more for her than anything else?  yes--far more.  but so long as it
isn't too much for me--!"

"her condition doesn't matter?  surely not; we leave her condition out;
we take it, that is, for granted.  i see it, her condition, as behind
and beneath you; yet at the same time i see it as bearing you up."

"oh it does bear me up!" strether laughed.

"well then as yours bears me nothing more's needed."  with which she
put again her question.  "has mrs. newsome money?"

this time he heeded.  "oh plenty.  that's the root of the evil. there's
money, to very large amounts, in the concern.  chad has had the free
use of a great deal.  but if he'll pull himself together and come home,
all the same, he'll find his account in it."

she had listened with all her interest.  "and i hope to goodness you'll
find yours!"

"he'll take up his definite material reward," said strether without
acknowledgement of this.  "he's at the parting of the ways.  he can
come into
 
 ___________________________
 
 the business now--he can't come later."

"is there a business?"

"lord, yes--a big brave bouncing business.  a roaring trade."

"a great shop?"

"yes--a workshop; a great production, a great industry.  the concern's
a manufacture--and a manufacture that, if it's only properly looked
after, may well be on the way to become a monopoly. it's a little thing
they make--make better, it appears, than other people can, or than
other people, at any rate, do.  mr. newsome, being a man of ideas, at
least in that particular line," strether explained, "put them on it
with great effect, and gave the place altogether, in his time, an
immense lift."

"it's a place in itself?"

"well, quite a number of buildings; almost a little industrial colony.
but above all it's a thing.  the article produced."

"and what is the article produced?"

strether looked about him as in slight reluctance to say; then the
curtain, which he saw about to rise, came to his aid.  "i'll tell yo
 
 ___________________________
 

about the source--the apparent and public source--of his income?"

strether was able quite good-humouredly to entertain the proposition.
"the source of his grandfather's wealth--and thereby of his own share
in it--was not particularly noble."

"and what source was it?"

strether cast about.  "well--practices."

"in business?  infamies?  he was an old swindler?"

"oh," he said with more emphasis than spirit, "i shan't describe him
nor narrate his exploits."

"lord, what abysses! and the late mr. newsome then?"

"well, what about him?"

"was he like the grandfather?"

"no--he was on the other side of the house.  and he was different."

miss gostrey kept it up.  "better?"

her friend for a moment hung fire.  "no."

her comment on his hesitation was scarce the less marked for being
mute.  "thank you.  now don't you see," she went on, "why the boy
doesn't come home?  he's drowning his shame."

"his shame?  what shame?"

"what shame?  comment donc?  the shame."

"but where and when," strether asked
 
 ___________________________
 
, "is 'the shame'--where is any
shame--to-day?  the men i speak of--they did as every one does; and
(besides being ancient history) it was all a matter of appreciation."

she showed how she understood.  "mrs. newsome has appreciated?"

"ah i can't speak for her!"

"in the midst of such doings--and, as i understand you, profiting by
them, she at least has remained exquisite?"

"oh i can't talk of her!" strether said.

"i thought she was just what you could talk of.  you don't trust me,"
miss gostrey after a moment declared.

it had its effect.  "well, her money is spent, her life conceived and
carried on with a large beneficence--"

"that's a kind of expiation of wrongs?  gracious," she added before he
could
 
 ___________________________
 
rfully able, but it's not her affair,
and her life's a good deal overcharged.  she has many, many things."

"and you also?"

"oh yes--i've many too, if you will."

"i see.  but what i mean is," miss gostrey amended, "do you also look
after the business?"

"oh no, i don't touch the business."

"only everything else?"

"well, yes--some things."

"as for instance--?"

strether obligingly thought.  "well, the review."

"the review?--you have a review?"

"certainly.  woollett has a review--which mrs. newsome, for the most
part, magnificently pays for and which i, not at all magnificently,
edit.  my name's on the cover," strether pursued, "and i'm really
rather disappointed and hurt that you seem never to have heard of it."

she neglected for a moment this grievance.  "and what kind of a review
is it?"

his serenity was now completely restored.  "well, it's green."

"do you mean in political colour as they say here--in thought?"

"no; i mean the cover's green--of the most lovely shade."

"and with m
 
 ___________________________
 
rs. newsome's name on it too?"

he waited a little.  "oh as for that you must judge if she peeps out.
she's behind the whole thing; but she's of a delicacy and a
discretion--!"

miss gostrey took it all.  "i'm sure.  she would be.  i don't underrate
her.  she must be rather a swell."

"oh yes, she's rather a swell!"

"a woollett swell--bon! i like the idea of a woollett swell.  and you
must be rather one too, to be so mixed up with her."

"ah no," said strether, "that's not the way it works."

but she had 
 
 ___________________________
 
ious.  "you get
everything out."

for a moment again their eyes met.  "you put everything in!"

he acknowledged the tribute by telling her.  "to mamie pocock."

she wondered; then gravely, even exquisitely, as if to make the oddity
also fit:  "his own niece?"

"oh you must yourself find a name for the relation.  his
brother-in-law's sister.  mrs. jim's sister-in-law."

it seemed to have on miss gostrey a certain hardening effect.  "and who
in the world's mrs. jim?"

"chad's sister--who was sarah newsome.  she's married--didn't i mention
it?--to jim pocock."

"ah yes," she tacitly replied; but he had mentioned things--! then,
however, with all the sound it could have, "who in the world's jim
pocock?" she asked.

"why sally's husband.  that's the only way we distinguish people at
woollett," he good-humoredly explained.

"and is it a great distinction--being sally's husband?"

he considered.  "i think there can be scarcely a greater--unless it may
become one, in the future, to be chad's wife."

"
 
 ___________________________
 
e quitted the ship, and there were more things in his mind than
so few days could account for.  more than once, during the time, he had
regarded himself as admonished; but the admonition this morning was
formidably sharp.  it took as it hadn't done yet the form of a
question--the question of what he was doing with such an extraordinary
sense of escape.  this sense was sharpest after he had read his
letters, but that was also precisely why the question pressed.  four of
the letters were from mrs. newsome and none of them short; she had lost
no time, had followed on his heels while he moved, so expressing
herself that he now could measure the probable frequency with which he
should hear.  they would arrive, it would seem, her communications, at
the rate of several a week; he should be able to count, it might even
prove, on more than one by each mail.  if he had begun yesterday with a
small grievance he had therefore an opportunity to begin to-day with
its opposite.  he read the letters successiv
 
 ___________________________
 
 his
finding himself so free.  he felt it in a manner his duty to think out
his state, to approve the process, and when he came in fact to trace
the steps and add up the items they sufficiently accounted for the sum.
he had never expected--that was the truth of it--again to find himself
young, and all the years and other things it had taken to make him so
were exactly his present arithmetic.  he had to make sure of them to
put his scruple to rest.

it all sprang at bottom from the beauty of mrs. newsome's desire that
he should be worried with nothing that was not of the essence of his
task; by insisting that he should thoroughly intermit and break she had
so provided for his freedom that she would, as it were, have only
herself to thank.  strether could not at this point indeed have
completed his thought by the image of what she might have to thank
herself for:  the image, at best, of his own likeness-poor lambert
strether washed up on the sunny strand by the waves of a single day,
poor lamber
 
 ___________________________
 
crowded past.  it had not been, so much achievement
missed, a light yoke nor a short load.  it was at present as if
the backward picture had hung there, the long crooked course, grey in
the shadow of his solitude.  it had been a dreadful cheerful sociable
solitude, a solitude of life or choice, of community; but though there
had been people enough all round it there had been but three or four
persons in it.  waymarsh was one of these, and the fact struck him just
now as marking the record.  mrs. newsome was another, and miss gostrey
had of a sudden shown signs of becoming a third.  beyond, behind them
was the pale figure of his real youth, which held against its breast
the two presences paler than itself--the young wife he had early lost
and the young son he had stupidly sacrificed.  he had again and again
made out for himself that he might have kept his little boy, his little
dull boy who had died at school of rapid diphtheria, if he had not in
those years so insanely given himself to merely 
 
 ___________________________
 
lowly given
way to time; yet there remained an ache sharp enough to make the
spirit, at the sight now and again of some fair young man just growing
up, wince with the thought of an opportunity lost.  had ever a man, he
had finally fallen into the way of asking himself, lost so much and
even done so much for so little?  there had been particular reasons why
all yesterday, beyond other days, he should have had in one ear this
cold enquiry.  his name on the green cover, where he had put it for
mrs. newsome, expressed him doubtless just enough to make the
world--the world as distinguished, both for more and for less, from
woollett--ask who he was.  he had incurred the ridicule of having to
have his explanation explained.  he was lambert strether because he was
on the cover, whereas it should have been, for anything like glory,
that he was on the cover because he was lambert strether.  he would
have done anything for mrs. newsome, have been still more
ridiculous--as he might, for that matter, have 
 
 ___________________________
 
ything; from the moment he didn't
yet call on chad he wouldn't for the world have taken any other step.
on this evidence, however, of the way they actually affected him he
glared at the lemon-coloured covers in confession of the
subconsciousness that, all the same, in the great desert of the years,
he must have had of them.  the green covers at home comprised, by the
law of their purpose, no tribute to letters; it was of a mere rich
kernel of economics, politics, ethics that, glazed and, as mrs. newsome
maintained rather against his view, pre-eminently pleasant to touch,
they formed the specious shell.  without therefore any needed
instinctive knowledge of what was coming out, in paris, on the bright
highway, he struck himself at present as having more than once flushed
with a suspicion:  he couldn't otherwise at present be feeling so many
fears confirmed.  there were "movements" he was too late for: weren't
they, with the fun of them, already spent?  there were sequences he had
missed and gre
 
 ___________________________
 
would become of
either of them?  it all depended of course--which was a gleam of
light--on how the "too much" was measured; though indeed our friend
fairly felt, while he prolonged the meditation i describe, that for
himself even already a certain measure had been reached. it will have
been sufficiently seen that he was not a man to neglect any good chance
for reflexion.  was it at all possible for instance to like paris
enough without liking it too much?  he luckily however hadn't promised
mrs. newsome not to like it at all.  he was ready to recognise at this
stage that such an engagement would have tied his hands.  the
luxembourg gardens were incontestably just so adorable at this hour by
reason--in addition to their intrinsic charm--of his not having taken
it.  the only engagement he had taken, when he looked the thing in the
face, was to do what he reasonably could.

it upset him a little none the less and after a while to find himself
at last remembering on what current of association he 
 
 ___________________________
 

under one of the great artists had taken him right in, making him dine
every night, almost for nothing, at their place, and even pressing him
not to neglect the hypothesis of there being as much "in him" as in any
of them.  there had been literally a moment at which it appeared there
might be something in him; there had been at any rate a moment at which
he had written that he didn't know but what a month or two more might
see him enrolled in some atelier.  the season had been one at which
mrs. newsome was moved to gratitude for small mercies; it had broken on
them all as a blessing that their absentee had perhaps a
conscience--that he was sated in fine with idleness, was ambitious of
variety.  the exhibition was doubtless as yet not brilliant, but
strether himself, even by that time much enlisted and immersed, had
determined, on the part of the two ladies, a temperate approval and in
fact, as he now recollected, a certain austere enthusiasm.

but the very next thing that happened had been a 
 
 ___________________________
 
 now looked at his watch and
wondered.  he had announced himself--six months before; had written out
at least that chad wasn't to be surprised should he see him some day
turn up.  chad had thereupon, in a few words of rather carefully
colourless answer, offered him a general welcome; and strether,
ruefully reflecting that he might have understood the warning as a hint
to hospitality, a bid for an invitation, had fallen back upon silence
as the corrective most to his own taste.  he had asked mrs. newsome
moreover not to announce him again; he had so distinct an opinion on
his attacking his job, should he attack it at all, in his own way.  not
the least of this lady's high merits for him was that he could
absolutely rest on her word.  she was the only woman he had known, even
at woollett, as to whom his conviction was positive that to lie was
beyond her art. sarah pocock, for instance, her own daughter, though
with social ideals, as they said, in some respects different--sarah who
was, in her wa
 
 ___________________________
 
y, aesthetic, had never refused to human commerce that
mitigation of rigour; there were occasions when he had distinctly seen
her apply it.  since, accordingly, at all events, he had had it from
mrs. newsome that she had, at whatever cost to her more strenuous view,
conformed, in the matter of preparing chad, wholly to his restrictions,
he now looked up at the fine continuous balcony with a safe sense that
if the case had been bungled the mistake was at least his property. was
there perhaps just a suspicion of that in his present pause on the edge
of the boulevard and well in the pleasant light?

many things came over him here, and one of them was that he should
doubtless presently know whether he 
 
 ___________________________
 
like them, my friends at home, waymarsh," he declared;
"you'd really particularly like them.  and i know"--it was slightly
irrelevant, but he gave it sudden and singular force--"i know they'd
like you!"

"oh don't work them off on me!" waymarsh groaned.

yet strether still lingered with his hands in his pockets.  "it's
really quite as indispensable as i say that chad should be got back."

"indispensable to whom? to you?"

"yes," strether presently said.

"because if you get him you also get mrs. newsome?"

strether faced it.  "yes."

"and if you don't get him you don't get her?"

it might be merciless, but he continued not to flinch.  "i think it
might have some effect on our personal understanding.  chad's of real
importance--or can easily become so if he will--to the business."

"and the business is of real importance to his mother's husband?"

"well, i naturally want what my future wife wants.  and the thing will
be much better if we have our own man in it."

"if you have your own man in it
 
 ___________________________
 
down."

"i haven't laid them down," strether promptly returned.  "mr.
newsome--who knew extraordinarily well what he was about--laid them
down ten years ago."

oh well, waymarsh seemed to indicate with a shake of his mane, that
didn't matter! "you're fierce for the boom anyway."

his friend weighed a moment in silence the justice of the charge. "i
can scarcely be called fierce, i think, when i so freely take my chance
of the possibility, the danger, of being influenced in a sense counter
to mrs. newsome's own feelings."

waymarsh gave this proposition a long hard look.  "i see.  you're
afraid yourself of being squared.  but you're a humbug," he added, "all
the same."

"oh!" strether quickly protested.

"yes, you ask me for protection--which makes you very interesting; and
then you won't take it.  you say you want to be squashed--"

"ah but not so easily! don't you see," strether demanded "where my
interest, as already shown you, lies? it lies in my not being squared.
if i'm squared where's my 
 
 ___________________________
 
o pull himself up; and he was to remember the moment duly as the first
step in a process.  the central fact of the place was neither more nor
less, when analysed--and a pressure superficial sufficed--than the
fundamental impropriety of chad's situation, round about which they
thus seemed cynically clustered. accordingly, since they took it for
granted, they took for granted all that was in connexion with it taken
for granted at woollett--matters as to which, verily, he had been
reduced with mrs. newsome to the last intensity of silence.  that was
the consequence of their being too bad to be talked about, and was the
accompaniment, by the same token, of a deep conception of their
badness.  it befell therefore that when poor strether put it to himself
that their badness was ultimately, or perhaps even insolently, what
such a scene as the one before him was, so to speak, built upon, he
could scarce shirk the dilemma of reading a roundabout echo of them
into almost anything that came up.  this, he
 
 ___________________________
 
h!"--and miss gostrey turned them over.  she
seemed, however, satisfied.  "well, what more do you want?"

he glanced once more at a bibelot or two, and everything sent him back.
"but it is all the same as if they wished to let me have it between the
eyes."

she wondered.  "quoi donc?"

"why what i speak of.  the amenity.  they can stun you with that as
well as with anything else."

"oh," she answered, "you'll come round! i must see them each," she went
on, "for myself.  i mean mr. bilham and mr. newsome--mr. bilham
naturally first.  once only--once for each; that will do. but face to
face--for half an hour.  what's mr. chad," she immediately pursued,
"doing at cannes?  decent men don't go to cannes with the--well, with
the kind of ladies you mean."

"don't they?"  strether asked with an interest in decent men that
amused her.

"no, elsewhere, but not to cannes.  cannes is different.  cannes is
better.  cannes is best.  i mean it's all people you know--when you do
know them.  and if he does, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
h's wish to extend to her an
independent protection homeward; but strether nevertheless found how,
after he had chad opposite to him at a small table in the brilliant
halls that his companion straightway selected, sharply and easily
discriminated from others, it was quite, to his mind, as if she heard
him speak; as if, sitting up, a mile away, in the little apartment he
knew, she would listen hard enough to catch.  he found too that he
liked that idea, and he wished that, by the same token, mrs. newsome
might have caught as well.  for what had above all been determined in
him as a necessity of the first order was not to lose another hour, nor
a fraction of one; was to advance, to overwhelm, with a rush.  this was
how he would anticipate--by a night-attack, as might be--any forced
maturity that a crammed consciousness of paris was likely to take upon
itself to assert on behalf of the boy.  he knew to the full, on what he
had just extracted from miss gostrey, chad's marks of alertness; but
they 
 
 ___________________________
 
 last was in truth what chad quite gracefully did.  but he
did it as with a simple thought that met the whole of the case.  "oh
i'm all right!"  it was what strether had rather bewilderedly to go to
bed on.



ii


it really looked true moreover from the way chad was to behave after
this.  he was full of attentions to his mother's ambassador; in spite
of which, all the while, the latter's other relations rather remarkably
contrived to assert themselves.  strether's sittings pen in hand with
mrs. newsome up in his own room were broken, yet they were richer; and
they were more than ever interspersed with the hours in which he
reported himself, in a different fashion, but with scarce less
earnestness and fulness, to maria gostrey.  now that, as he would have
expressed it, he had really something to talk about he found himself,
in respect to any oddity that might reside for him in the double
connexion, at once more aware and more indifferent.  he had been fine
to mrs. newsome about his useful frie
 
 ___________________________
 
ng a sacrifice of it just in
these handsome forms to his visitor; which was mainly the reason the
visitor was privately, for the time, a little out of countenance.
strether was at this period again and again thrown back on a felt need
to remodel somehow his plan.  he fairly caught himself shooting rueful
glances, shy looks of pursuit, toward the embodied influence, the
definite adversary, who had by a stroke of her own failed him and on a
fond theory of whose palpable presence he had, under mrs. newsome's
inspiration, altogether proceeded.  he had once or twice, in secret,
literally expressed the irritated wish that she would come out and find
her.

he couldn't quite yet force it upon woollett that such a career, such a
perverted young life, showed after all a certain plausible side, did in
the case before them flaunt something like an impunity for the social
man; but he could at least treat himself to the statement that would
prepare him for the sharpest echo. this echo--as distinct over ther
 
 ___________________________
 
e in
the dry thin air as some shrill "heading" above a column of
print--seemed to reach him even as he wrote.  "he says there's no
woman," he could hear mrs. newsome report, in capitals almost of
newspaper size, to mrs. pocock; and he could focus in mrs. pocock the
response of the reader of the journal.  he could see in the younger
lady's face the earnestness of her attention and catch the full
scepticism of her but slightly delayed "what is there then?"  just so
he could again as little miss the mother's clear decision:  "there's
plenty of disposition, no doubt, to pretend there isn't."  strether
had, after posting his letter, the whole scene out; and it w
 
 ___________________________
 
un with flutters and dignities on the score of a single accepted
meal.  what sort of a brute had he expected chad to be,
anyway?--strether had occasion to make the enquiry but was careful to
make it in private.  he could himself, comparatively recent as it
was--it was truly but the fact of a few days since--focus his primal
crudity; but he would on the approach of an observer, as if handling an
illicit possession, have slipped the reminiscence out of sight.  there
were echoes of it still in mrs. newsome's letters, and there were
moments when these echoes made him exclaim on her want of tact.  he
blushed of course, at once, still more for the explanation than for the
ground of it:  it came to him in time to save his manners that she
couldn't at the best become tactful as quickly as he.  her tact had to
reckon with the atlantic ocean, the general post-office and the
extravagant curve of the globe.  chad had one day offered tea at the
boulevard malesherbes to a chosen few, a group again including
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
unobscured miss barrace; and strether had on coming out walked away
with the acquaintance whom in his letters to mrs. newsome he always
spoke of as the little artist-man.  he had had full occasion to mention
him as the other party, so oddly, to the only close personal alliance
observation had as yet detected in chad's existence.  little bilham's
way this afternoon was not strether's, but he had none the less kindly
come with him, and it was somehow a part of his kindness that as it had
sadly begun to rain they suddenly found themselves seated for
conversation at a cafe in which they had taken refuge.  he had passed
no
 
 ___________________________
 
ing for his comrade's mind even in a
world of irrelevance the possibility of a relation?  what was it but a
relation to be regarded as so decorative and, in especial, on the
strength of it, to be whirled away, amid flounces and feathers, in a
coupe lined, by what strether could make out, with dark blue brocade?
he himself had never been whirled away--never at least in a coupe and
behind a footman; he had driven with miss gostrey in cabs, with mrs.
pocock, a few times, in an open buggy, with mrs. newsome in a
four-seated cart and, occasionally up at the mountains, on a buckboard;
but his friend's actual adventure transcended his personal experience.
he now showed his companion soon enough indeed how inadequate, as a
general monitor, this last queer quantity could once more feel itself.

"what game under the sun is he playing?"  he signified the next moment
that his allusion was not to the fat gentleman immersed in dominoes on
whom his eyes had begun by resting, but to their host of the previous
 
 ___________________________
 
 old enough."

"old enough for what?"

"why to marry chad.  that may be, you know, what they want.  and if
chad wants it too, and little bilham wants it, and even we, at a pinch,
could do with it--that is if she doesn't prevent repatriation--why it
may be plain sailing yet."

it was always the case for him in these counsels that each of his
remarks, as it came, seemed to drop into a deeper well.  he had at all
events to wait a moment to hear the slight splash of this one. "i don't
see why if mr. newsome wants to marry the young lady he hasn't already
done it or hasn't been prepared with some statement to you about it.
and if he both wants to marry her and is on good terms with them why
isn't he 'free'?"

strether, responsively, wondered indeed.  "perhaps the girl herself
doesn't like him."

"then why does he speak of them to you as he does?"

strether's mind echoed the question, but also again met it.  "perhaps
it's with the mother he's on good terms."

"as against the daughter?"

"well, if sh
 
 ___________________________
 
virtuous."

but she looked as if she scarce followed.  "why is it virtuous
if--since she's free--there's nothing to impose on it any condition?"

he laughed at her question.  "oh i perhaps don't mean as virtuous as
that! your idea is that it can be virtuous--in any sense worthy of the
name--only if she's not free?  but what does it become then," he asked,
"for her?"

"ah that's another matter."  he said nothing for a moment, and she soon
went on.  "i dare say you're right, at any rate, about mr. newsome's
little plan.  he has been trying you--has been reporting on you to
these friends."

strether meanwhile had had time to think more.  "then where's his
straightness?"

"well, as we say, it's struggling up, breaking out, asserting itself as
it can.  we can be on the side, you see, of his straightness. we can
help him.  but he has made out," said miss gostrey, "that you'll do."

"do for what?"

"why, for them--for ces dames.  he has watched you, studied you, liked
you--and recognised that they mu
 
 ___________________________
 
w anything about it.
everything's possible.  we must see."

"see?" he echoed with a groan.  "haven't we seen enough?"

"i haven't," she smiled.

"but do you suppose then little bilham has lied?"

"you must find out."

it made him almost turn pale.  "find out any more?"

he had dropped on a sofa for dismay; but she seemed, as she stood over
him, to have the last word.  "wasn't what you came out for to find out
all?"





book fifth




i


the sunday of the next week was a wonderful day, and chad newsome had
let his friend know in advance that he had provided for it. there had
already been a question of his taking him to see the great gloriani,
who was at home on sunday afternoons and at whose house, for the most
part, fewer bores were to be met than elsewhere; but the project,
through some accident, had not had instant effect, and now revived in
happier conditions.  chad had made the point that the celebrated
sculptor had a queer old garden, for which the weather--spring at last
frank and fair
 
 ___________________________
 
ion, something more he could enjoy. he liked gloriani, but
should never see him again; of that he was sufficiently sure.  chad
accordingly, who was wonderful with both of them, was a kind of link
for hopeless fancy, an implication of possibilities--oh if everything
had been different! strether noted at all events that he was thus on
terms with illustrious spirits, and also that--yes, distinctly--he
hadn't in the least swaggered about it.  our friend hadn't come there
only for this figure of abel newsome's son, but that presence
threatened to affect the observant mind as positively central. gloriani
indeed, remembering something and excusing himself, pursued chad to
speak to him, and strether was left musing on many things.  one of them
was the question of whether, since he had been tested, he had passed.
did the artist drop him from having made out that he wouldn't do? he
really felt just to-day that he might do better than usual. hadn't he
done well enough, so far as that went, in being exact
 
 ___________________________
 
d
obviously happened.  "i didn't even know of her knowing you."

"well, now she'll tell you all.  i'm so glad you're in relation with
her."

this was one of the things--the "all" miss gostrey would now tell
him--that, with every deference to present preoccupation, was uppermost
for strether after they had taken their seat.  one of the others was,
at the end of five minutes, that she--oh incontestably, yes--differed
less; differed, that is, scarcely at all--well, superficially speaking,
from mrs. newsome or even from mrs. pocock. she was ever so much
younger than the one and not so young as the other; but what was there
in her, if anything, that would have made it impossible he should meet
her at woollett? and wherein was her talk during their moments on the
bench together not the same as would have been found adequate for a
woollett garden-party?--unless perhaps truly in not being quite so
bright.  she observed to him that mr. newsome had, to her knowledge,
taken extraordinary pleasure in his 
 
 ___________________________
 
visit; but there was no good lady
at woollett who wouldn't have been at least up to that. was there in
chad, by chance, after all, deep down, a principle of aboriginal
loyalty that had made him, for sentimental ends, attach himself to
elements, happily encountered, that would remind him most of the old
air and the old soil? why accordingly be in a flutter--strether could
even put it that way--about this unfamiliar phenomenon of the femme du
monde?  on these terms mrs. newsome herself was as much of one.  little
bilham verily had testified that they came out, the ladies of the type,
in close quarters; but it was just in these quarters--now comparatively
close--that he felt madame de vionnet's common humanity.  she did come
out, and certainly to his relief, but she came out as the usual thing.
there might be motives behind, but so could there often be even at
woollett.  the only thing was that if she showed him she wished to like
him--as the motives behind might conce
 
 ___________________________
 
ivably prompt--it would possibly
have been more thrilling for him that she should have shown as more
vividly alien.  ah she was neither turk nor pole!--which would be
indeed flat once more for mrs. newsome and mrs. pocock.  a lady and two
gentlemen had meanwhile, however, approached their bench, and this
accident stayed for the time further developments.

they presently addressed his companion, the brilliant strangers; she
rose to speak to them, and strether noted how the escorted lady, though
mature and by no means beautiful, had more of the bold high look, the
range of expensive reference, that he had, as might have been said,
made his plans for.  madame de vionnet greeted her as "duchesse" and
 
 ___________________________
 
erything in fine made her immeasurably new, and nothing so new as the
old house and the old objects.  there were books, two or three, on a
small table near his chair, but they hadn't the lemon-coloured covers
with which his eye had begun to dally from the hour of his arrival and
to the opportunity of a further acquaintance with which he had for a
fortnight now altogether succumbed.  on another table, across the room,
he made out the great _revue_; but even that familiar face, conspicuous
in mrs. newsome's parlours, scarce counted here as a modern note.  he
was sure on the spot--and he afterwards knew he was right--that this
was a touch of chad's own hand.  what would mrs. newsome say to the
circumstance that chad's interested "influence" kept her paper-knife in
the _revue_?  the interested influence at any rate had, as we say, gone
straight to the point--had in fact soon left it quite behind.

she was seated, near the fire, on a small stuffed and fringed chair one
of the few modern articles in
 
 ___________________________
 
ere accompanied it an extraordinary sense of her raising from
somewhere below him her beautiful suppliant eyes.  he might have been
perched at his door-step or at his window and she standing in the road.
for a moment he let her stand and couldn't moreover have spoken.  it
had been sad, of a sudden, with a sadness that was like a cold breath
in his face.  "what can i do," he finally asked, "but listen to you as
i promised chadwick?"

"ah but what i'm asking you," she quickly said, "isn't what mr. newsome
had in mind." she spoke at present, he saw, as if to take courageously
all her risk.  "this is my own idea and a different thing."

it gave poor strether in truth--uneasy as it made him too--something of
the thrill of a bold perception justified.  "well," he answered kindly
enough, "i was sure a moment since that some idea of your own had come
to you."

she seemed still to look up at him, but now more serenely.  "i made out
you were sure--and that helped it to come.  so you see," she continued,
 
 ___________________________
 
ecisely," she exclaimed--"you wonderful gentleman! i do judge--i
have judged.  a woman can't.  you're safe--with every right to be.
you'd be much happier if you'd only believe it."

strether was silent a little; then he found himself speaking with a
cynicism of confidence of which even at the moment the sources were
strange to him.  "i try to believe it.  but it's a marvel," he
exclaimed, "how you already get at it!"

oh she was able to say.  "remember how much i was on the way to it
through mr. newsome--before i saw you.  he thinks everything of your
strength."

"well, i can bear almost anything!" our friend briskly interrupted.
deep and beautiful on this her smile came back, and with the effect of
making him hear what he had said just as she had heard it.  he easily
enough felt that it gave him away, but what in truth had everything
done but that?  it had been all very well to think at moments that he
was holding her nose down and that he had coerced her:  what had he by
this time done but l
 
 ___________________________
 
it?
nothing could prevent her--certainly he couldn't--from making it
pleasant.  at the back of his head, behind everything, was the sense
that she was--there, before him, close to him, in vivid imperative
form--one of the rare women he had so often heard of, read of, thought
of, but never met, whose very presence, look, voice, the mere
contemporaneous fact of whom, from the moment it was at all presented,
made a relation of mere recognition.  that was not the kind of woman he
had ever found mrs. newsome, a contemporaneous fact who had been
distinctly slow to establish herself; and at present, confronted with
madame de vionnet, he felt the simplicity of his original impression of
miss gostrey.  she certainly had been a fact of rapid growth; but the
world was wide, each day was more and more a new lesson.  there were at
any rate even among the stranger ones relations and relations. "of
course i suit chad's grand way," he quickly added.  "he hasn't had much
difficulty in working me in."

she seem
 
 ___________________________
 
er, and you must help us.
you must see her again."

strether felt awkward.  "ah with pleasure--she's so remarkably
attractive."

the mother's eagerness with which madame de vionnet jumped at this was
to come back to him later as beautiful in its grace.  "the dear thing
did please you?" then as he met it with the largest "oh!" of
enthusiasm:  "she's perfect.  she's my joy."

"well, i'm sure that--if one were near her and saw more of her--she'd
be mine."

"then," said madame de vionnet, "tell mrs. newsome that!"

he wondered the more.  "what good will that do you?" as she appeared
unable at once to say, however, he brought out something else.  "is
your daughter in love with our friend?"

"ah," she rather startlingly answered, "i wish you'd find out!"

he showed his surprise.  "i?  a stranger?"

"oh you won't be a stranger--presently.  you shall see her quite, i
assure you, as if you weren't."

it remained for him none the less an extraordinary notion.  "it seems
to me surely that if her mother c
 
 ___________________________
 
retext of
disgust.  he was building from day to day on the possibility of
disgust, but each day brought forth meanwhile a new and more engaging
bend of the road.  that possibility was now ever so much further from
sight than on the eve of his arrival, and he perfectly felt that,
should it come at all, it would have to be at best inconsequent and
violent.  he struck himself as a little nearer to it only when he asked
himself what service, in such a life of utility, he was after all
rendering mrs. newsome.  when he wished to help himself to believe that
he was still all right he reflected--and in fact with wonder--on the
unimpaired frequency of their correspondence; in relation to which what
was after all more natural than that it should become more frequent
just in proportion as their problem became more complicated?

certain it is at any rate that he now often brought himself balm by the
question, with the rich consciousness of yesterday's letter, "well,
what can i do more than that--what can 
 
 ___________________________
 
ght be able to say to himself from time to time "she knows it
now--even while i worry." it was a great comfort to him in general not
to have left past things to be dragged to light and explained; not to
have to produce at so late a stage anything not produced, or anything
even veiled and attenuated, at the moment.  she knew it now:  that was
what he said to himself to-night in relation to the fresh fact of
chad's acquaintance with the two ladies--not to speak of the fresher
one of his own.  mrs. newsome knew in other words that very night at
woollett that he himself knew madame de vionnet and that he had
conscientiously been to see her; also that he had found her remarkably
attractive and that there would probably be a good deal more to tell.
but she further knew, or would know very soon, that, again
conscientiously, he hadn't repeated his visit; and that when chad had
asked him on the countess's behalf--strether made her out vividly, with
a thought at the back of his head, a countess--if he w
 
 ___________________________
 
his allusion, but the next moment she had
understood; though indeed not before strether had noticed her momentary
mistake and wondered what might possibly be behind that too.  he
already knew that the sculptor admired madame de vionnet; but did this
admiration also represent an attachment of which the innocence was
discussable?  he was moving verily in a strange air and on ground not
of the firmest.  he looked hard for an instant at miss barrace, but she
had already gone on.  "all right with mr. newsome?  why of course she
is!"--and she got gaily back to the question of her own good friend. "i
dare say you're surprised that i'm not worn out with all i see--it
being so much!--of sitting bull.  but i'm not, you know--i don't mind
him; i bear up, and we get on beautifully.  i'm very strange; i'm like
that; and often i can't explain.  there are people who are supposed
interesting or remarkable or whatever, and who bore me to death; and
then there are others as to whom nobody can understand what an
 
 ___________________________
 
g his interlocutress had now
let drop.  yet, though he had kept away from her for days, had laid
wholly on herself the burden of their meeting again, she hadn't a gleam
of irritation to show him.  "well, about jeanne now?" she smiled--it
had the gaiety with which she had originally come in. he felt it on the
instant to represent her motive and real errand. but he had been
schooling her of a truth to say much in proportion to his little.  "do
you make out that she has a sentiment?  i mean for mr. newsome."

almost resentful, strether could at last be prompt.  "how can i make
out such things?"

she remained perfectly good-natured.  "ah but they're beautiful little
things, and you make out--don't pretend--everything in the world.
haven't you," she asked, "been talking with her?"

"yes, but not about chad.  at least not much."

"oh you don't require 'much'!" she reassuringly declared.  but she
immediately changed her ground.  "i hope you remember your promise of
the other day."

"to 'save' you, as
 
 ___________________________
 
t you mean."

"of course you see what i mean."

her triumph was gentle, and she really had tones to make justice weep.
"i've before me what he owes you."

"admit then that that's something," she said, yet still with the same
discretion in her pride.

he took in this note but went straight on.  "you've made of him what i
see, but what i don't see is how in the world you've done it."

"ah that's another question!" she smiled.  "the point is of what use is
your declining to know me when to know mr. newsome--as you do me the
honour to find him--is just to know me."

"i see," he mused, still with his eyes on her.  "i shouldn't have met
you to-night."

she raised and dropped her linked hands.  "it doesn't matter.  if i
trust you why can't you a little trust me too?  and why can't you
also," she asked in another tone, "trust yourself?"  but she gave him
no time to reply.  "oh i shall be so easy for you! and i'm glad at any
rate you've seen my child."

"i'm glad too," he said; "but she does you no goo
 
 ___________________________
 

"i mean that if he gives her up--!"

"yes?"

"well, he ought to be ashamed of himself."  but strether spoke with a
sound that might have passed for a laugh.





volume ii

book seventh




i


it wasn't the first time strether had sat alone in the great dim
church--still less was it the first of his giving himself up, so far as
conditions permitted, to its beneficent action on his nerves.  he had
been to notre dame with waymarsh, he had been there with miss gostrey,
he had been there with chad newsome, and had found the place, even in
company, such a refuge from the obsession of his problem that, with
renewed pressure from that source, he had not unnaturally recurred to a
remedy meeting the case, for the moment, so indirectly, no doubt, but
so relievingly.  he was conscious enough that it was only for the
moment, but good moments--if he could call them good--still had their
value for a man who by this time struck himself as living almost
disgracefully from hand to mouth.  having so well lear
 
 ___________________________
 
  for her too, she could assure him,
life was complicated--more complicated than he could have guessed; she
had moreover made certain of him--certain of not wholly missing him on
her return--before her disappearance.  if furthermore she didn't burden
him with letters it was frankly because of her sense of the other great
commerce he had to carry on.  he himself, at the end of a fortnight,
had written twice, to show how his generosity could be trusted; but he
reminded himself in each case of mrs. newsome's epistolary manner at
the times when mrs. newsome kept off delicate ground.  he sank his
problem, he talked of waymarsh and miss barrace, of little bilham and
the set over the river, with whom he had again had tea, and he was
easy, for convenience, about chad and madame de vionnet and jeanne.  he
admitted that he continued to see them, he was decidedly so confirmed a
haunter of chad's premises and that young man's practical intimacy with
them was so undeniably great; but he had his reason for 
 
 ___________________________
 
fund of
indifference--was he already at that point?  perversely, none the less,
his pause gave a strange air of truth to her supposition; and what was
he in fact but disconcerted at having struck her just in the way he had
most dreamed of not doing?  "i'm not in trouble yet," he at last
smiled.  "i'm not in trouble now."

"well, i'm always so.  but that you sufficiently know."  she was a
woman who, between courses, could be graceful with her elbows on the
table.  it was a posture unknown to mrs. newsome, but it was easy for a
femme du monde.  "yes--i am 'now'!"

"there was a question you put to me," he presently returned, "the night
of chad's dinner.  i didn't answer it then, and it has been very
handsome of you not to have sought an occasion for pressing me about it
since."

she was instantly all there.  "of course i know what you allude to. i
asked you what you had meant by saying, the day you came to see me,
just before you left me, that you'd save me.  and you then said--at our
friend's--t
 
 ___________________________
 

done something for you, in the sense of what i had said the day i went
to see you; but i wasn't then sure of the importance i might represent
this as having."

she was all eagerness.  "and you're sure now?"

"yes; i see that, practically, i've done for you--had done for you when
you put me your question--all that it's as yet possible to me to do.  i
feel now," he went on, "that it may go further than i thought.  what i
did after my visit to you," he explained, "was to write straight off to
mrs. newsome about you, and i'm at last, from one day to the other,
expecting her answer.  it's this answer that will represent, as i
believe, the consequences."

patient and beautiful was her interest.  "i see--the consequences of
your speaking for me."  and she waited as if not to hustle him.

he acknowledged it by immediately going on.  "the question, you
understand, was how i should save you.  well, i'm trying it by thus
letting her know that i consider you worth saving."

"i see--i see."  her eagerness
 
 ___________________________
 
e had my rest, my amusement and
refreshment; i've had, as we say at woollett, a lovely time.  nothing
in it has been more lovely than this happy meeting with you--in these
fantastic conditions to which you've so delightfully consented.  i've a
sense of success.  it's what i wanted.  my getting all this good is
what chad has waited for, and i gather that if i'm ready to go he's the
same."

she shook her head with a finer deeper wisdom.  "you're not ready. if
you're ready why did you write to mrs. newsome in the sense you've
mentioned to me?"

strether considered.  "i shan't go before i hear from her.  you're too
much afraid of her," he added.

it produced between them a long look from which neither shrank.  "i
don't think you believe that--believe i've not really reason to fear
her."

"she's capable of great generosity," strether presently stated.

"well then let her trust me a little.  that's all i ask.  let her
recognise in spite of everything what i've done."

"ah remember," our friend repli
 
 ___________________________
 
ake it, for your interest in myself, but for your
interest in our friend.  the one's at any rate wholly dependent on the
other.  you can't in honour not see me through," she wound up, "because
you can't in honour not see him."

strange and beautiful to him was her quiet soft acuteness.  the thing
that most moved him was really that she was so deeply serious.  she had
none of the portentous forms of it, but he had never come in contact,
it struck him, with a force brought to so fine a head.  mrs. newsome,
goodness knew, was serious; but it was nothing to this.  he took it all
in, he saw it all together.  "no," he mused, "i can't in honour not see
him."

her face affected him as with an exquisite light.  "you will then?"

"i will."

at this she pushed back her chair and was the next moment on her feet.
"thank you!" she said with her hand held out to him across the table
and with no less a meaning in the words than her lips had so
particularly given them after chad's dinner.  the golden nail she 
 
 ___________________________
 
possessed himself, on closing his
door, of the numerous loose sheets of his unfinished composition, and
then, without reading them over, had torn them into small pieces.  he
had thereupon slept--as if it had been in some measure thanks to that
sacrifice--the sleep of the just, and had prolonged his rest
considerably beyond his custom.  thus it was that when, between nine
and ten, the tap of the knob of a walking-stick sounded on his door, he
had not yet made himself altogether presentable.  chad newsome's bright
deep voice determined quickly enough none the less the admission of the
visitor.  the little blue paper of the evening before, plainly an
object the more precious for its escape from premature destruction, now
lay on the sill of the open window, smoothed out afresh and kept from
blowing away by the superincumbent weight of his watch. chad, looking
about with careless and competent criticism, as he looked wherever he
went immediately espied it and permitted himself to fix it for a momen
 
 ___________________________
 
u know
what."

strether decided after a moment that he did know what, and in
consonance with this he spoke.  "you see then all the more what you owe
me."

"well, if i do see, how can i pay?"

"by not deserting me.  by standing by me."

"oh i say--!"  but chad, as they went downstairs, clapped a firm hand,
in the manner of a pledge, upon his shoulder.  they descended slowly
together and had, in the court of the hotel, some further talk, of
which the upshot was that they presently separated.  chad newsome
departed, and strether, left alone, looked about, superficially, for
waymarsh.  but waymarsh hadn't yet, it appeared, come down, and our
friend finally went forth without sight of him.



iii


at four o'clock that afternoon he had still not seen him, but he was
then, as to make up for this, engaged in talk about him with miss
gostrey.  strether had kept away from home all day, given himself up to
the town and to his thoughts, wandered and mused, been at once restless
and absorbed--and all with
 
 ___________________________
 


"that you decline to come?"

"that he declines.  we had it out this morning and i brought him round.
he had come in, before i was down, to tell me he was ready--ready, i
mean, to return.  and he went off, after ten minutes with me, to say he
wouldn't."

miss gostrey followed with intensity.  "then you've stopped him?"

strether settled himself afresh in his chair.  "i've stopped him. that
is for the time.  that"--he gave it to her more vividly--"is where i
am."

"i see, i see.  but where's mr. newsome?  he was ready," she asked, "to
go?"

"all ready."

"and sincerely--believing you'd be?"

"perfectly, i think; so that he was amazed to find the hand i had laid
on him to pull him over suddenly converted into an engine for keeping
him still."

it was an account of the matter miss gostrey could weigh.  "does he
think the conversion sudden?"

"well," said strether, "i'm not altogether sure what he thinks.  i'm
not sure of anything that concerns him, except that the more i've seen
of him the less 
 
 ___________________________
 
ative silence wasn't a denial she significantly
added: "i think i'm sorry for her."

"i think i am!"--and strether sprang up, moving about a little as her
eyes followed him.  "but it can't be helped."

"you mean her coming out can't be?"

he explained after another turn what he meant.  "the only way for her
not to come is for me to go home--as i believe that on the spot i could
prevent it.  but the difficulty as to that is that if i do go home--"

"i see, i see"--she had easily understood.  "mr. newsome will do the
same, and that's not"--she laughed out now--"to be thought of."

strether had no laugh; he had only a quiet comparatively placid look
that might have shown him as proof against ridicule.  "strange, isn't
it?"

they had, in the matter that so much interested them, come so far as
this without sounding another name--to which however their present
momentary silence was full of a conscious reference. strether's
question was a sufficient implication of the weight it had gained with
him du
 
 ___________________________
 
ring the absence of his hostess; and just for that reason a
single gesture from her could pass for him as a vivid answer.  yet he
was answered still better when she said in a moment: "will mr. newsome
introduce his sister--?"

"to madame de vionnet?"  strether spoke the name at last.  "i shall be
greatly surprised if he doesn't."

she seemed to gaze at the possibility.  "you mean you've thought of it
and you're prepared."

"i've thought of it and i'm prepared."

it was to her visitor now that she applied her consideration.  "bon!
you are magnificent!"

"well," he answered after a pause and a little wearily, but still
standing there before her--"well, that's what, just once in all my dull
day
 
 ___________________________
 
think i shall like to have been!"

two days later he had news from chad of a communication from woollett
in response to their determinant telegram, this missive being addressed
to chad himself and announcing the immediate departure for france of
sarah and jim and mamie.  strether had meanwhile on his own side
cabled; he had but delayed that act till after his visit to miss
gostrey, an interview by which, as so often before, he felt his sense
of things cleared up and settled.  his message to mrs. newsome, in
answer to her own, had consisted of the words: "judge best to take
another month, but with full appreciation of all re-enforcements."  he
had added that he was writing, but he was of course always writing; it
was a practice that continued, oddly enough, to relieve him, to make
him come nearer than anything else to the consciousness of doing
something: so that he often wondered if he hadn't really, under his
recent stress, acquired some hollow trick, one of the specious arts of
make-believe.
 
 ___________________________
 
ent of life, there were hours at which, to
be less on the stretch, he directly sought forgetfulness.  he knew it
for the queerest of adventures--a circumstance capable of playing such
a part only for lambert strether--that in paris itself, of all places,
he should find this ghost of the lady of woollett more importunate than
any other presence.

when he went back to maria gostrey it was for the change to something
else.  and yet after all the change scarcely operated for he talked to
her of mrs. newsome in these days as he had never talked before.  he
had hitherto observed in that particular a discretion and a law;
considerations that at present broke down quite as if relations had
altered.  they hadn't really altered, he said to himself, so much as
that came to; for if what had occurred was of course that mrs. newsome
had ceased to trust him, there was nothing on the other hand to prove
that he shouldn't win back her confidence.  it was quite his present
theory that he would leave no stone un
 
 ___________________________
 
er quite the same; this truth--though not too
disconcertingly--had come up between them on the renewal of their
meetings.  it was all contained in what she had then almost immediately
said to him; it was represented by the remark she had needed but ten
minutes to make and that he hadn't been disposed to gainsay.  he could
toddle alone, and the difference that showed was extraordinary.  the
turn taken by their talk had promptly confirmed this difference; his
larger confidence on the score of mrs. newsome did the rest; and the
time seemed already far off when he had held out his small thirsty cup
to the spout of her pail.  her pail was scarce touched now, and other
fountains had flowed for him; she fell into her place as but one of his
tributaries; and there was a strange sweetness--a melancholy mildness
that touched him--in her acceptance of the altered order.

it marked for himself the flight of time, or at any rate what he was
pleased to think of with irony and pity as the rush of experience;
 
 ___________________________
 
correctly.  he
accused himself of making believe to his own mind that sarah's
presence, her impression, her judgement would simplify and harmonise,
he accused himself of being so afraid of what they might do that he
sought refuge, to beg the whole question, in a vain fury.  he had
abundantly seen at home what they were in the habit of doing, and he
had not at present the smallest ground.  his clearest vision was when
he made out that what he most desired was an account more full and free
of mrs. newsome's state of mind than any he felt he could now expect
from herself; that calculation at least went hand in hand with the
sharp consciousness of wishing to prove to himself that he was not
afraid to look his behaviour in the face.  if he was by an inexorable
logic to pay for it he was literally impatient to know the cost, and he
held himself ready to pay in instalments.  the first instalment would
be precisely this entertainment of sarah; as a consequence of which
moreover, he should know vastly 
 
 ___________________________
 
better how he stood.





book eighth




i


strether rambled alone during these few days, the effect of the
incident of the previous week having been to simplify in a marked
fashion his mixed relations with waymarsh.  nothing had passed between
them in reference to mrs. newsome's summons but that our friend had
mentioned to his own the departure of the deputation actually at
sea--giving him thus an opportunity to confess to the occult
intervention he imputed to him.  waymarsh however in the event
confessed to nothing; and though this falsified in some degree
strether's forecast the latter amusedly saw in it the same depth of
good conscience out of which the dear man's impertinence had originally
sprung.  he was patient with the dear man now and delighted to observe
ho
 
 ___________________________
 
 see her again, and as if moreover he had brought it on himself by
not having been quite kind to her.

it was the advantage of his having let his fancy lose itself for a
little in the gloom that, as by reaction, the prospect began really to
brighten from the moment the deputation from woollett alighted on the
platform of the station.  they had come straight from havre, having
sailed from new york to that port, and having also, thanks to a happy
voyage, made land with a promptitude that left chad newsome, who had
meant to meet them at the dock, belated.  he had received their
telegram, with the announcement of their immediate further advance,
just as he was taking the train for havre, so that nothing had remained
for him but to await them in paris.  he hastily picked up strether, at
the hotel, for this purpose, and he even, with easy pleasantry,
suggested the attendance of waymarsh as well--waymarsh, at the moment
his cab rattled up, being engaged, under strether's contemplative
range, in a gra
 
 ___________________________
 
,
on his comrade's sombre sensibility.  he had insisted on the fact that
waymarsh would quite like mrs. pocock--one could be certain he would:
he would be with her about everything, and she would also be with him,
and miss barrace's nose, in short, would find itself out of joint.

strether had woven this web of cheerfulness while they waited in the
court for chad; he had sat smoking cigarettes to keep himself quiet
while, caged and leonine, his fellow traveller paced and turned before
him.  chad newsome was doubtless to be struck, when he arrived, with
the sharpness of their opposition at this particular hour; he was to
remember, as a part of it, how waymarsh came with him and with strether
to the street and stood there with a face half-wistful and half-rueful.
they talked of him, the two others, as they drove, and strether put
chad in possession of much of his own strained sense of things.  he had
already, a few days before, named to him the wire he was convinced
their friend had pulled--a co
 
 ___________________________
 
what he had been saying in the court to waymarsh;
how there was no doubt whatever that his sister would find the latter a
kindred spirit, no doubt of the alliance, based on an exchange of
views, that the pair would successfully strike up.  they would become
as thick as thieves--which moreover was but a development of what
strether remembered to have said in one of his first discussions with
his mate, struck as he had then already been with the elements of
affinity between that personage and mrs. newsome herself.  "i told him,
one day, when he had questioned me on your mother, that she was a
person who, when he should know her, would rouse in him, i was sure, a
special enthusiasm; and that hangs together with the conviction we now
feel--this certitude that mrs. pocock will take him into her boat.  for
it's your mother's own boat that she's pulling."

"ah," said chad, "mother's worth fifty of sally!"

"a thousand; but when you presently meet her, all the same you'll be
meeting your mother's repr
 
 ___________________________
 
esentative--just as i shall.  i feel like the
outgoing ambassador," said strether, "doing honour to his appointed
successor."  a moment after speaking as he had just done he felt he had
inadvertently rather cheapened mrs. newsome to her son; an impression
audibly reflected, as at first seen, in chad's prompt protest.  he had
recently rather failed of apprehension of the young man's attitude and
temper--remaining principally conscious of how little worry, at the
worst, he wasted, and he studied him at this critical hour with renewed
interest.  chad had done exactly what he had promised him a fortnight
previous--had accepted without another question his plea for delay.  he
was waiting cheerfully and handsomely, but also i
 
 ___________________________
 
 she must herself arrive at;
since she wanted so much to see, let her see then and welcome.  she had
come out in the pride of her competence, yet it hummed in strether's
inner sense that she practically wouldn't see.

that this was moreover what chad shrewdly suspected was clear from a
word that next dropped from him.  "they're children; they play at
life!"--and the exclamation was significant and reassuring.  it implied
that he hadn't then, for his companion's sensibility, appeared to give
mrs. newsome away; and it facilitated our friend's presently asking him
if it were his idea that mrs. pocock and madame de vionnet should
become acquainted.  strether was still more sharply struck, hereupon,
with chad's lucidity.  "why, isn't that exactly--to get a sight of the
company i keep--what she has come out for?"

"yes--i'm afraid it is," strether unguardedly replied.

chad's quick rejoinder lighted his precipitation.  "why do you say
you're afraid?"

"well, because i feel a certain responsibility. 
 
 ___________________________
 
s what i
hitherto haven't done."

"it has been," said chad, but without reproach, "only your own fault. i
tried to bring you together, and she, my dear fellow--i never saw her
more charming to any man.  but you've got your extraordinary ideas."

"well, i did have," strether murmured, while he felt both how they had
possessed him and how they had now lost their authority.  he couldn't
have traced the sequence to the end, but it was all because of mrs.
pocock.  mrs. pocock might be because of mrs. newsome, but that was
still to be proved.  what came over him was the sense of having
stupidly failed to profit where profit would have been precious.  it
had been open to him to see so much more of her, and he had but let the
good days pass.  fierce in him almost was the resolve to lose no more
of them, and he whimsically reflected, while at chad's side he drew
nearer to his destination, that it was after all sarah who would have
quickened his chance.  what her visit of inquisition might achieve in
ot
 
 ___________________________
 
her rather remarkably
long chin, which in her case represented invitation and urbanity, and
not, as in most others, pugnacity and defiance; the penetration of her
voice to a distance, the general encouragement and approval of her
manner, were all elements with which intercourse had made him familiar,
but which he noted today almost as if she had been a new acquaintance.
this first glimpse of her had given a brief but vivid accent to her
resemblance to her mother; he could have taken her for mrs. newsome
while she met his eyes as the train rolled into the station.  it was an
impression that quickly dropped; mrs. newsome was much handsomer, and
while sarah inclined to the massive her mother had, at an age, still
the girdle of a maid; also the latter's chin was rather short, than
long, and her smile, by good fortune, much more, oh ever so much more,
mercifully vague.  strether had seen mrs. newsome reserved; he had
literally heard her silent, though he had never known her unpleasant.
it was the c
 
 ___________________________
 
tised observation, crack and
crumble, and to reduce chad to the plain terms in which honest minds
could deal with him?  had they come in short to be sane where strether
was destined to feel that he himself had only been silly?

he glanced at such a contingency, but it failed to hold him long when
once he had reflected that he would have been silly, in this case, with
maria gostrey and little bilham, with madame de vionnet and little
jeanne, with lambert strether, in fine, and above all with chad newsome
himself.  wouldn't it be found to have made more for reality to be
silly with these persons than sane with sarah and jim?  jim in fact, he
presently made up his mind, was individually out of it; jim didn't
care; jim hadn't come out either for chad or for him; jim in short left
the moral side to sally and indeed simply availed himself now, for the
sense of recreation, of the fact that he left almost everything to
sally.  he was nothing compared to sally, and not so much by reason of
sally's temp
 
 ___________________________
 
e made no more of it
than that, and strether, so far as jim was concerned, desired to make
no more.  only strether's imagination, as always, worked, and he asked
himself if this side of life were not somehow connected, for those who
figured on it with the fact of marriage.  would his relation to it, had
he married ten years before, have become now the same as pocock's?
might it even become the same should he marry in a few months?  should
he ever know himself as much out of the question for mrs. newsome as
jim knew himself--in a dim way--for mrs. jim?

to turn his eyes in that direction was to be personally reassured; he
was different from pocock; he had affirmed himself differently and was
held after all in higher esteem.  what none the less came home to him,
however, at this hour, was that the society over there, that of which
sarah and mamie--and, in a more eminent way, mrs. newsome herself--were
specimens, was essentially a society of women, and that poor jim wasn't
in it.  he himself lamb
 
 ___________________________
 
 be, so far as capacity is concerned," he went
on, "the man to do it."

"where did he get his capacity," jim asked, "over here?"

"he didn't get it over here, and the wonderful thing is that over here
he hasn't inevitably lost it.  he has a natural turn for business, an
extraordinary head.  he comes by that," strether explained, "honestly
enough.  he's in that respect his father's son, and also--for she's
wonderful in her way too--his mother's.  he has other tastes and other
tendencies; but mrs. newsome and your wife are quite right about his
having that.  he's very remarkable."

"well, i guess he is!"  jim pocock comfortably sighed.  "but if you've
believed so in his making us hum, why have you so prolonged the
discussion?  don't you know we've been quite anxious about you?"

these questions were not informed with earnestness, but strether saw he
must none the less make a choice and take a line.  "because, you see,
i've greatly liked it.  i've liked my paris, i dare say i've liked it
too much
 
 ___________________________
 
."

"oh you old wretch!" jim gaily exclaimed.

"but nothing's concluded," strether went on.  "the case is more complex
than it looks from woollett."

"oh well, it looks bad enough from woollett!" jim declared.

"even after all i've written?"

jim bethought himself.  "isn't it what you've written that has made
mrs. newsome pack us off?  that at least and chad's not turning up?"

strether made a reflexion of his own.  "i see.  that she should do
something was, no doubt, inevitable, and your wife has therefore of
course come out to act."

"oh yes," jim concurred--"to act.  but sally comes out to act, you
know," he lucidly added, "every time she leaves the house.  she never
comes out but she does act.  she's acting moreover now for her mother,
and that fixes the scale." then he wound up, opening all his senses to
it
 
 ___________________________
 
t they are?  they're
about as intense as they can live."

"yes"--and strether's concurrence had a positive precipitation;
"they're about as intense as they can live."

"they don't lash about and shake the cage," said jim, who seemed
pleased with his analogy; "and it's at feeding-time that they're
quietest.  but they always get there."

"they do indeed--they always get there!" strether replied with a laugh
that justified his confession of nervousness.  he disliked to be
talking sincerely of mrs.  newsome with pocock; he could have talked
insincerely.  but there was something he wanted to know, a need created
in him by her recent intermission, by his having given from the first
so much, as now more than ever appeared to him, and got so little.  it
was as if a queer truth in his companion's metaphor had rolled over him
with a rush.  she had been quiet at feeding-time; she had fed, and
sarah had fed with her, out of the big bowl of all his recent free
communication, his vividness and pleasantness,
 
 ___________________________
 
ad taken his own stand on,  so far as he had taken a stand; and if
they were all only going to see nothing he had only wasted his time. he
gave his friend till the very last moment, till they had come into
sight of the hotel; and when poor pocock only continued cheerful and
envious and funny he fairly grew to dislike him, to feel him
extravagantly common.  if they were all going to see
nothing!--strether knew,  as this came back to him, that he was also
letting pocock represent for him what mrs. newsome wouldn't see.  he
went on disliking, in the light of jim's commonness, to talk to him
about that lady; yet just before the cab pulled up he knew the extent
of his desire for the real word from woollett.

"has mrs. newsome at all given way--?"

"'given way'?"--jim echoed it with the practical derision of his sense
of a long past.

"under the strain, i mean, of hope deferred, of disappointment repeated
and thereby intensified."

"oh is she prostrate, you mean?"--he had his categories in hand. "wh
 
 ___________________________
 
y
yes, she's prostrate--just as sally is.  but they're never so lively,
you know, as when they're prostrate."

"ah sarah's prostrate?" strether vaguely murmured.

"it's when they're prostrate that they most sit up."

"and mrs. newsome's sitting up?"

"all night, my boy--for you!"  and jim fetched him,  with a vulgar
little guffaw, a thrust that gave relief to the picture.  but he had
got what he wanted.  he felt on the spot that this was the real word
from woollett.  "so don't you go home!" jim added while he alighted and
while his friend, letting him profusely pay the cabman,  sat on in a
momentary muse.  strether wondered if that were the real word too.



iii


as the door of mrs. pocock's salon was pushed open for him, t
 
 ___________________________
 
 of relief for him in his
glimpse, so far as he had got it, of sarah's line.  she "knew paris."
madame de vionnet had, for that matter, lightly taken this up.  "ah
then you've a turn for that, an affinity that belongs to your family.
your brother, though his long experience makes a difference, i admit,
has become one of us in a marvellous way." and she appealed to strether
in the manner of a woman who could always glide off with smoothness
into another subject.  wasn't he struck with the way mr. newsome had
made the place his own, and hadn't he been in a position to profit by
his friend's wondrous expertness?

strether felt the bravery, at the least, of her presenting herself so
promptly to sound that note, and yet asked himself what other note,
after all, she could strike from the moment she presented herself at
all.  she could meet mrs. pocock only on the ground of the obvious, and
what feature of chad's situation was more eminent than the fact that he
had created for himself a new set of ci
 
 ___________________________
 
 to mutual aid.

waymarsh, at this, as if he had been in question, straightway turned
from the window.  "oh yes, countess--he has renewed acquaintance with
me, and he has, i guess, learnt something about me, though i don't know
how much he has liked it.  it's for strether himself to say whether he
has felt it justifies his course."

"oh but you," said the countess gaily, "are not in the least what he
came out for--is he really, strether? and i hadn't you at all in my
mind.  i was thinking of mr. newsome, of whom we think so much and with
whom, precisely, mrs. pocock has given herself the opportunity to take
up threads.  what a pleasure for you both!" madame de vionnet, with her
eyes on sarah, bravely continued.

mrs. pocock met her handsomely, but strether quickly saw she meant to
accept no version of her movements or plans from any other lips. she
required no patronage and no support, which were but other names for a
false position; she would show in her own way what she chose to show,
and th
 
 ___________________________
 

who most carried out the idea of a countess.  he quite took in,
however, that she would really return her visitor's civility:  she
wouldn't report again at woollett without at least so much producible
history as that in her pocket.

"i want extremely to be able to show you my little daughter." madame de
vionnet went on; "and i should have brought her with me if i hadn't
wished first to ask your leave.  i was in hopes i should perhaps find
miss pocock, of whose being with you i've heard from mr. newsome and
whose acquaintance i should so much like my child to make.  if i have
the pleasure of seeing her and you do permit it i shall venture to ask
her to be kind to jeanne.  mr. strether will tell you"--she beautifully
kept it up--"that my poor girl is gentle and good and rather lonely.
they've made friends, he and she, ever so happily, and he doesn't, i
believe, think ill of her.  as for jeanne herself he has had the same
success with her that i know he has had here wherever he has turned."
she 
 
 ___________________________
 
 add that it did so only
to save him.  the sombre glow stared it at him till it fairly sounded
out--"to save you, poor old man, to save you; to save you in spite of
yourself." yet it was somehow just this communication that showed him
to himself as more than ever lost. still another result of it was to
put before him as never yet that between his comrade and the interest
represented by sarah there was already a basis.  beyond all question
now, yes:  waymarsh had been in occult relation with mrs. newsome--out,
out it all came in the very effort of his face.  "yes, you're feeling
my hand"--he as good as proclaimed it; "but only because this at least
i shall have got out of the damned old world:  that i shall have picked
up the pieces into which it has caused you to crumble." it was as if in
short, after an instant, strether had not only had it from him, but had
recognised that so far as this went the instant had cleared the air.
our friend understood and approved; he had the sense that they woul
 
 ___________________________
 
for a performance, the performance of "europe" by his
confederate and himself.  well, the performance could only go on.  "say
five forty-five."

"five forty-five--good." and now at last madame de vionnet must leave
them, though it carried, for herself, the performance a little further.
"i did hope so much also to see miss pocock. mayn't i still?"

sarah hesitated, but she rose equal.  "she'll return your visit with
me.  she's at present out with mr. pocock and my brother."

"i see--of course mr. newsome has everything to show them.  he has told
me so much about her.  my great desire's to give my daughter the
opportunity of making her acquaintance.  i'm always on the lookout for
such chances for her.  if i didn't bring her to-day it was only to make
sure first that you'd let me." after which the charming woman risked a
more intense appeal.  "it wouldn't suit you also to mention some near
time, so that we shall be sure not to lose you?"  strether on his side
waited, for sarah likewise had, after
 
 ___________________________
 
 head.  madame de vionnet meanwhile, however,
made her point in her own way.  "i wish indeed i could offer you my
poor child as a dazzling attraction:  it would make one's position
simple enough!  she's as good as she can be, but of course she's
different, and the question is now--in the light of the way things seem
to go--if she isn't after all too different: too different i mean from
the splendid type every one is so agreed that your wonderful country
produces.  on the other hand of course mr. newsome, who knows it so
well, has, as a good friend, dear kind man that he is, done everything
he can--to keep us from fatal benightedness--for my small shy creature.
well," she wound up after mrs. pocock had signified, in a murmur still
a little stiff, that she would speak to her own young charge on the
question--"well, we shall sit, my child and i, and wait and wait and
wait for you." but her last fine turn was for strether.  "do speak of
us in such a way--!"

"as that something can't but come of it
 
 ___________________________
 
erhaps one of the
proofs of her success with him that he seemed so much to take his ease
while they talked. by the time he had explained to her why his
impressions, though multiplied, still baffled him, it was as if he had
been familiarly talking for hours.  they baffled him because
sarah--well, sarah was deep, deeper than she had ever yet had a chance
to show herself. he didn't say that this was partly the effect of her
opening so straight down, as it were, into her mother, and that, given
mrs. newsome's profundity, the shaft thus sunk might well have a reach;
but he wasn't without a resigned apprehension that, at such a rate of
confidence between the two women, he was likely soon to be moved to
show how already, at moments, it had been for him as if he were dealing
directly with mrs. newsome.  sarah, to a certainty, would have begun
herself to feel it in him--and this naturally put it in her power to
torment him the more.  from the moment she knew he could be tormented--!

"but why can you b
 
 ___________________________
 
y suspense i mean, you know," he laughed, "suspense
about my own case too!"

"oh yes--about your own case too!"  it diminished his magnanimity, but
she only looked at him the more tenderly.

"not, however," he went on, "that i want to talk to you about that.
it's my own little affair, and i mentioned it simply as part of mrs.
pocock's advantage." no, no; though there was a queer present
temptation in it, and his suspense was so real that to fidget was a
relief, he wouldn't talk to her about mrs. newsome, wouldn't work off
on her the anxiety produced in him by sarah's calculated omissions of
reference.  the effect she produced of representing her mother had been
produced--and that was just the immense, the uncanny part of
it--without her having so much as mentioned that lady.  she had brought
no message, had alluded to no question, had only answered his enquiries
with hopeless limited propriety.  she had invented a way of meeting
them--as if he had been a polite perfunctory poor relation, of di
 
 ___________________________
 
eaffirmed
for him its romantic side. "they ought to see this, you know.  they
must."

"the pococks?"--she looked about in deprecation; she seemed to see gaps
he didn't.

"mamie and sarah--mamie in particular."

"my shabby old place?  but their things--!"

"oh their things!  you were talking of what will do something for you--"

"so that it strikes you," she broke in, "that my poor place may? oh,"
she ruefully mused, "that would be desperate!"

"do you know what i wish?" he went on.  "i wish mrs. newsome herself
could have a look."

she stared, missing a little his logic.  "it would make a difference?"

her tone was so earnest that as he continued to look about he laughed.
"it might!"

"but you've told her, you tell me--"

"all about you?  yes, a wonderful story.  but there's all the
indescribable--what one gets only on the spot."

"thank you!" she charmingly and sadly smiled.

"it's all about me here," he freely continued.  "mrs. newsome feels
things."

but she seemed doomed always to come bac
 
 ___________________________
 
d seen her; one of his sisters, a
charming woman--we know all about them--had observed her somewhere with
me.  she had spoken to her brother--turned him on; and we were again
observed, poor jeanne and i, without our in the least knowing it.  it
was at the beginning of the winter; it went on for some time; it
outlasted our absence; it began again on our return; and it luckily
seems all right.  the young man had met chad, and he got a friend to
approach him--as having a decent interest in us.  mr. newsome looked
well before he leaped; he kept beautifully quiet and satisfied himself
fully; then only he spoke.  it's what has for some time past occupied
us.  it seems as if it were what would do; really, really all one could
wish.  there are only two or three points to be settled--they depend on
her father.  but this time i think we're safe."

strether, consciously gaping a little, had fairly hung upon her lips.
"i hope so with all my heart." and then he permitted himself: "does
nothing depend on he
 
 ___________________________
 
xtraordinarily speak as if in
such an affair his being satisfied had an importance.  it was all a
wonder and made the whole case larger.  he had struck himself at the
hotel, before sarah and waymarsh, as being in her boat; but where on
earth was he now?  this question was in the air till her own lips
quenched it with another.  "and do you suppose he--who loves her
so--would do anything reckless or cruel?"

he wondered what he supposed.  "do you mean your young man--?"

"i mean yours.  i mean mr. newsome." it flashed for strether the next
moment a finer light, and the light deepened as she went on. "he takes,
thank god, the truest tenderest interest in her."

it deepened indeed.  "oh i'm sure of that!"

"you were talking," she said, "about one's trusting him.  you see then
how i do."

he waited a moment--it all came.  "i see--i see." he felt he really did
see.

"he wouldn't hurt her for the world, nor--assuming she marries at
all--risk anything that might make against her happiness.
and--willin
 
 ___________________________
 
ignons."

she wondered.  "and what do they do after?  they can't come straight
home."

"no, they can't come straight home--at least sarah can't. it's their
secret, but i think i've guessed it." then as she waited: "the circus."

it made her stare a moment longer, then laugh almost to extravagance.
"there's no one like you!"

"like me?"--he only wanted to understand.

"like all of you together--like all of us:  woollett, milrose and their
products.  we're abysmal--but may we never be less so! mr. newsome,"
she continued, "meanwhile takes miss pocock--?"

"precisely--to the francais:  to see what you took waymarsh and me to,
a family-bill."

"ah then may mr. chad enjoy it as i did!"  but she saw so much in
things.  "do they spend their evenings, your young people, like that,
alone together?"

"well, they're young people--but they're old friends."

"i see, i see.  and do they dine--for a difference--at brebant's?"

"oh where they dine is their secret too.  but i've my idea that it will
be, very q
 
 ___________________________
 
 matter. "mrs. pocock, with
her brother, is trusting only to her general charm?"

"so it would seem."

"and the charm's not working?"

well, strether put it otherwise, "she's sounding the note of
home--which is the very best thing she can do."

"the best for madame de vionnet?"

"the best for home itself.  the natural one; the right one."

"right," maria asked, "when it fails?"

strether had a pause.  "the difficulty's jim.  jim's the note of home."

she debated.  "ah surely not the note of mrs. newsome."

but he had it all.  "the note of the home for which mrs. newsome wants
him--the home of the business.  jim stands, with his little legs apart,
at the door of that tent; and jim is, frankly speaking, extremely
awful."

maria stared.  "and you in, you poor thing, for your evening with him?"

"oh he's all right for me!" strether laughed.  "any one's good enough
for me.  but sarah shouldn't, all the same, have brought him. she
doesn't appreciate him."

his friend was amused with this statement o
 
 ___________________________
 
f it.  "doesn't know, you
mean, how bad he is?"

strether shook his head with decision.  "not really."

she wondered.  "then doesn't mrs. newsome?"

it made him frankly do the same.  "well, no--since you ask me."

maria rubbed it in.  "not really either?"

"not at all.  she rates him rather high." with which indeed,
immediately, he took himself up.  "well, he is good too, in his way. it
depends on what you want him for."

miss gostrey, however, wouldn't let it depend on anything--wouldn't
have it, and wouldn't want him, at any price.  "it suits my book," she
said, "that he should be impossible; and it suits it still better," she
more ima
 
 ___________________________
 
ginatively added, "that mrs. newsome doesn't know he is."

strether, in consequence, had to take it from her, but he fell back on
something else.  "i'll tell you who does really know."

"mr. waymarsh?  never!"

"never indeed.  i'm not always thinking of mr. waymarsh; in fact i find
now i never am." then he mentioned the person as if there were a good
deal in it.  "mamie."

"his own sister?"  oddly enough it but let her down.  "what good will
that do?"

"none perhaps.  but there--as usual--we are!"



iii


there they were yet agai
 
 ___________________________
 
lmon-coloured revue; noted further
that mamie appeared to have received a present of fromentin's "maitres
d'autrefois" from chad, who had written her name on the cover; and
pulled up at the sight of a heavy letter addressed in a hand he knew.
this letter, forwarded by a banker and arriving in mrs. pocock's
absence, had been placed in evidence, and it drew from the fact of its
being unopened a sudden queer power to intensify the reach of its
author.  it brought home to him the scale on which mrs. newsome--for
she had been copious indeed this time--was writing to her daughter
while she kept him in durance; and it had altogether such an effect
upon him as made him for a few minutes stand still and breathe low.  in
his own room, at his own hotel, he had dozens of well-filled envelopes
superscribed in that character; and there was actually something in the
renewal of his interrupted vision of the character that played straight
into the so frequent question of whether he weren't already
disinherited
 
 ___________________________
 
 beyond appeal.  it was such an assurance as the sharp
downstrokes of her pen hadn't yet had occasion to give him; but they
somehow at the present crisis stood for a probable absoluteness in any
decree of the writer.  he looked at sarah's name and address, in short,
as if he had been looking hard into her mother's face, and then turned
from it as if the face had declined to relax.  but since it was in a
manner as if mrs. newsome were thereby all the more, instead of the
less, in the room, and were conscious, sharply and sorely conscious, of
himself, so he felt both held and hushed, summoned to stay at least and
take his punishment.  by staying, accordingly, he took it--creeping
softly and vaguely about and waiting for sarah to come in.  she would
come in if he stayed long enough, and he had now more than ever the
sense of her success in leaving him a prey to anxiety.  it wasn't to be
denied that she had had a happy ins
 
 ___________________________
 
osing him involved in appearances that, had he had
to describe them--for instance to maria--he would have conveniently
qualified as more subtle.  it came to him indeed the next thing that
there was perhaps almost an excess of refinement in having left mamie
in such weather up there alone; however she might in fact have
extemporised, under the charm of the rue de rivoli, a little makeshift
paris of wonder arid fancy.  our friend in any case now recognised--and
it was as if at the recognition mrs. newsome's fixed intensity had
suddenly, with a deep audible gasp, grown thin and vague--that day
after day he had been conscious in respect to his young lady of
something odd and ambiguous, yet something into which he could at last
read a meaning.  it had been at the most, this mystery, an
obsession--oh an obsession agreeable; and it had just now fallen into
its place as at the touch of a spring.  it had represented the
possibility between them of some communication baffled by accident and
delay--the p
 
 ___________________________
 
ossibility even of some relation as yet unacknowledged.

there was always their old relation, the fruit of the woollett years;
but that--and it was what was strangest--had nothing whatever in common
with what was now in the air.  as a child, as a "bud," and then again
as a flower of expansion, mamie had bloomed for him, freely, in the
almost incessantly open doorways of home; where he remembered her as
first very forward, as then very backward--for he had carried on at one
period, in mrs. newsome's parlours (oh mrs. newsome's phases and his
own!) a course of english literature re-enforced by exams and teas--and
once more, finally, as very much in advance.  but he had kept no great
sense of points of contact; it not being in the nature of things at
woollett that the freshest of the buds should find herself in the same
basket with the most withered of the winter apples.  the child had
given sharpness, above all, to his sense of the flight of time; it was
but the day before yesterday that 
 
 ___________________________
 
 quite braced itself, to
include her.  she had in fine more to say to him than he had ever
dreamed the pretty girl of the moment could have; and the proof of the
circumstance was that, visibly, unmistakeably, she had been able to say
it to no one else.  it was something she could mention neither to her
brother, to her sister-in-law nor to chad; though he could just imagine
that had she still been at home she might have brought it out, as a
supreme tribute to age, authority and attitude, for mrs. newsome.  it
was moreover something in which they all took an interest; the strength
of their interest was in truth just the reason of her prudence.  all
this then, for five minutes, was vivid to strether, and it put before
him that, poor child, she had now but her prudence to amuse her.  that,
for a pretty girl in paris, struck him, with a rush, as a sorry state;
so that under the impression he went out to her with a step as
hypocritically alert, he was well aware, as if he had just come into
the room
 
 ___________________________
 
ays be the person
who, at the present sharp hour, had been disinterestedly tender.  "if i
see a little more of her, as i hope i shall, i think she'll like me
enough--for she seemed to like me to-day--to want me to tell her."

"and shall you?"

"perfectly.  i shall tell her the matter with her is that she wants
only too much to do right.  to do right for her, naturally," said
mamie, "is to please."

"her mother, do you mean?"

"her mother first."

strether waited.  "and then?"

"well, 'then'--mr. newsome."

there was something really grand for him in the serenity of this
reference.  "and last only monsieur de montbron?"

"last only"--she good-humouredly kept it up.

strether considered.  "so that every one after all then will be suited?"

she had one of her few hesitations, but it was a question only of a
moment; and it was her nearest approach to being explicit with him
about what was between them.  "i think i can speak for myself.  i shall
be."

it said indeed so much, told such a story of he
 
 ___________________________
 
shows, and for all your friend 'jim'
does--about twenty years old.  that's another of her ideas; to be for
him, and to be quite easily and charmingly, as young as a little girl."

strether assisted at his distance.  "'for him'?  for chad--?"

"for chad, in a manner, naturally, always.  but in particular to-night
for mr.  pocock."  and then as her friend still stared: "yes, it is of
a bravery but that's what she has:  her high sense of duty."  it was
more than sufficiently before them.  "when mr. newsome has his hands so
embarrassed with his sister--"

"it's quite the least"--strether filled it out--"that she should take
his sister's husband?  certainly--quite the least.  so she has taken
him."

"she has taken him."  it was all miss barrace had meant.

still it remained enough.  "it must be funny."

"oh it is funny."  that of course essentially went with it.

but it brought them back.  "how indeed then she must care!" in answer to
which strether's entertainer dropped a comprehensive "ah!" expre
 
 ___________________________
 
ed states direct.
mr. and mrs. pocock and miss mamie are thinking of a little trip before
their own return, and we've been talking for some days past of our
joining forces.  we've settled it that we do join and that we sail
together the end of next month. but we start to-morrow for switzerland.
mrs. pocock wants some scenery.  she hasn't had much yet."

he was brave in his way too, keeping nothing back, confessing all there
was, and only leaving strether to make certain connexions. "is what
mrs. newsome had cabled her daughter an injunction to break off short?"

the grand manner indeed at this just raised its head a little. "i know
nothing about mrs. newsome's cables."

their eyes met on it with some intensity--during the few seconds of
which something happened quite out of proportion to the time. it
happened that strether, looking thus at his friend, didn't take his
answer for truth--and that something more again occurred in consequence
of that.  yes--waymarsh just did know about mrs. newsome
 
 ___________________________
 
's cables:  to
what other end than that had they dined together at bignon's?  strether
almost felt for the instant that it was to mrs. newsome herself the
dinner had been given; and, for that matter, quite felt how she must
have known about it and, as he might think, protected and consecrated
it.  he had a quick blurred view of daily cables, questions, answers,
signals:  clear enough was his vision of the expense that, when so
wound up, the lady at home was prepared to incur.  vivid not less was
his memory of what, during his long observation of her, some of her
attainments of that high pitch had cost her.  distinctly she was at the
h
 
 ___________________________
 
erself.  it hadn't yet so come
home to him that she was nobly and appointedly officious. she was
acting in interests grander and clearer than that of her poor little
personal, poor little parisian equilibrium, and all his consciousness
of her mother's moral pressure profited by this proof of its sustaining
force.  she would be held up; she would be strengthened; he needn't in
the least be anxious for her. what would once more have been distinct
to him had he tried to make it so was that, as mrs. newsome was
essentially all moral pressure, the presence of this element was almost
identical with her own presence. it wasn't perhaps that he felt he was
dealing with her straight, but it was certainly as if she had been
dealing straight with him. she was reaching him somehow by the
lengthened arm of the spirit, and he was having to that extent to take
her into account; but he wasn't reaching her in turn, not making her
take him; he was only reaching sarah, who appeared to take so little of
him. "some
 
 ___________________________
 
mean's all right in having said to
you--well anything he may have said.  i'll take it all--what he does
put on me.  only i must see him before i see you again."

she hesitated, but she brought it out.  "is it absolutely necessary you
should see me again?"

"certainly, if i'm to give you any definite word about anything."

"is it your idea then," she returned, "that i shall keep on meeting you
only to be exposed to fresh humiliation?"

he fixed her a longer time.  "are your instructions from mrs. newsome
that you shall, even at the worst, absolutely and irretrievably break
with me?"

"my instructions from mrs. newsome are, if you please, my affair. you
know perfectly what your own were, and you can judge for yourself of
what it can do for you to have made what you have of them.  you can
perfectly see, at any rate, i'll go so far as to say, that if i wish
not to expose myself i must wish still less to expose her."  she had
already said more than she had quite expected; but, though she had also
p
 
 ___________________________
 
ment and my tenderness the expression of her personal sense of
everything, and the assertion of her personal dignity."

they were the very words of the lady of woollett--he would have known
them in a thousand; her parting charge to her child.  mrs. pocock
accordingly spoke to this extent by book, and the fact immensely moved
him.  "if she does really feel as you say it's of course very very
dreadful.  i've given sufficient proof, one would have thought," he
added, "of my deep admiration for mrs. newsome."

"and pray what proof would one have thought you'd call sufficient? that
of thinking this person here so far superior to her?"

he wondered again; he waited.  "ah dear sarah, you must leave me this
person here!"

in his desire to avoid all vulgar retorts, to show how, even
perversely, he clung to his rag of reason, he had softly almost wailed
this plea.  yet he knew it to be perhaps the most positive declaration
he had ever made in his life, and his visitor's reception of it
virtually gave it
 
 ___________________________
 
to
them"--he seemed to make it out, as he smoked, with his eyes still on
the stars.  he might in quiet sport have been reading their horoscope.
strether wondered meanwhile what had been open to them, and he finally
let him have it.  "it was open to them simply to let me alone; to have
made up their minds, on really seeing me for themselves, that i could
go on well enough as i was."

strether assented to this proposition with full lucidity, his
companion's plural pronoun, which stood all for mrs. newsome and her
daughter, having no ambiguity for him.  there was nothing, apparently,
to stand for mamie and jim; and this added to our friend's sense of
chad's knowing what he thought.  "but they've made up their minds to
the opposite--that you can't go on as you are."

"no," chad continued in the same way; "they won't have it for a minute."

strether on his side also reflectively smoked.  it was as if their high
place really represented some moral elevation from which they could
look down on their r
 
 ___________________________
 
 has come of their
visit?"

chad looked as if he thought it nice of his old friend to put it so.
"don't you count it as anything that you're dished--if you are dished?
are you, my dear man, dished?"

it sounded as if he were asking if he had caught cold or hurt his foot,
and strether for a minute but smoked and smoked.  "i want to see her
again.  i must see her."

"of course you must." then chad hesitated.  "do you mean--a--mother
herself?"

"oh your mother--that will depend."

it was as if mrs. newsome had somehow been placed by the words very far
off.  chad however endeavoured in spite of this to reach the place.
"what do you mean it will depend on?"

strether, for all answer, gave him a longish look.  "i was speaking of
sarah.  i must positively--though she quite cast me off--see her again.
i can't part with her that way."

"then she was awfully unpleasant?"

again strether exhaled.  "she was what she had to be.  i mean that from
the moment they're not delighted they can only be--well what 
 
 ___________________________
 
 fact that he was with her
again at the same hour on the very morrow--with no less fine a
consciousness moreover of being able to hold her ear. it continued
inveterately to occur, for that matter, that whenever he had taken one
of his greater turns he came back to where she so faithfully awaited
him.  none of these excursions had on the whole been livelier than the
pair of incidents--the fruit of the short interval since his previous
visit--on which he had now to report to her.  he had seen chad newsome
late the night before, and he had had that morning, as a sequel to this
conversation, a second interview with sarah.  "but they're all off," he
said, "at last."

it puzzled her a moment.  "all?--mr. newsome with them?"

"ah not yet!  sarah and jim and mamie.  but waymarsh with them--for
sarah.  it's too beautiful," strether continued; "i find i don't get
over that--it's always a fresh joy.  but it's a fresh joy too," he
added, "that--well, what do you think?  little bilham also goes. but he
of 
 
 ___________________________
 
doesn't really want it."

she could believe that, but she made, as always, for clearness. "still,
what, after all, has he seen?"

"what they want of him.  and it's enough."

"it contrasts so unfavourably with what madame de vionnet wants?"

"it contrasts--just so; all round, and tremendously."

"therefore, perhaps, most of all with what you want?"

"oh," said strether, "what i want is a thing i've ceased to measure or
even to understand."

but his friend none the less went on.  "do you want mrs. newsome--after
such a way of treating you?"

it was a straighter mode of dealing with this lady than they had as
yet--such was their high form--permitted themselves; but it seemed not
wholly for this that he delayed a moment.  "i dare say it has been,
after all, the only way she could have imagined."

"and does that make you want her any more?"

"i've tremendously disappointed her," strether thought it worth while
to mention.

"of course you have.  that's rudimentary; that was plain to us long
ago.  bu
 
 ___________________________
 
 not afraid to stay on; the
summer here must be amusing in a wild--if it isn't a tame--way of its
own; the place at no time more picturesque.  i think i shall like it.
and then," he benevolently smiled for her, "there will be always you."

"oh," she objected, "it won't be as a part of the picturesqueness that
i shall stay, for i shall be the plainest thing about you. you may, you
see, at any rate," she pursued, "have nobody else. madame de vionnet
may very well be going off, mayn't she?--and mr. newsome by the same
stroke:  unless indeed you've had an assurance from them to the
contrary.  so that if your idea's to stay for them"--it was her duty to
suggest it--"you may be left in the lurch. of course if they do
stay"--she kept it up--"they would be part of the picturesqueness.  or
else indeed you might join them somewhere."

strether seemed to face it as if it were a happy thought; but the next
moment he spoke more critically.  "do you mean that they'll probably go
off together?"

she just con
 
 ___________________________
 
ll, when one makes it out, would, i dare say, be that mr.
chad should for a while go off by himself.  it's a pity, from that
point of view," she wound up, "that he doesn't pay his mother a visit.
it would at least occupy your interval." the thought in fact held her a
moment.  "why doesn't he pay his mother a visit?  even a week, at this
good moment, would do."

"my dear lady," strether replied--and he had it even to himself
surprisingly ready--"my dear lady, his mother has paid him a visit.
mrs. newsome has been with him, this month, with an intensity that i'm
sure he has thoroughly felt; he has lavishly entertained her, and she
has let him have her thanks.  do you suggest he shall go back for more
of them?"

well, she succeeded after a little in shaking it off.  "i see. it's
what you don't suggest--what you haven't suggested. and you know."

"so would you, my dear," he kindly said, "if you had so much as seen
her."

"as seen mrs. newsome?"

"no, sarah--which, both for chad and for myself, has
 
 ___________________________
 
lso thinks."

"there you are then--though it isn't for him to complain of it!"

"oh he doesn't complain of it," said strether.

"that's all that would be wanting! but apropos of what," maria went on,
"did the question come up?"

"well, of his asking me what it is i gain."

she had a pause.  "then as i've asked you too it settles my case. oh
you have," she repeated, "treasures of imagination."

but he had been for an instant thinking away from this, and he came up
in another place.  "and yet mrs. newsome--it's a thing to remember--has
imagined, did, that is, imagine, and apparently still does, horrors
about what i should have found.  i was booked, by her
vision--extraordinarily intense, after all--to find them; and that i
didn't, that i couldn't, that, as she evidently felt, i wouldn't--this
evidently didn't at all, as they say, 'suit' her book. it was more than
she could bear.  that was her disappointment."

"you mean you were to have found chad himself horrible?"

"i was to have found the wom
 
 ___________________________
 
ful creature that i must gruesomely shadow
forth for them, even more than to eliminate the distincter
evil--thereby a little less portentous--of the person whose confederate
you've suffered yourself to become.  however, that's comparatively
simple.  you can easily, at the worst, after all, give me up."

"i can easily at the worst, after all, give you up." the irony was so
obvious that it needed no care.  "i can easily at the worst, after all,
even forget you."

"call that then workable.  but mr. newsome has much more to forget. how
can he do it?"

"ah there again we are! that's just what i was to have made him do;
just where i was to have worked with him and helped."

she took it in silence and without attenuation--as if perhaps from very
familiarity with the facts; and her thought made a connexion without
showing the links.  "do you remember how we used to talk at chester and
in london about my seeing you through?"  she spoke as of far-off
things and as if they had spent weeks at the places s
 
 ___________________________
 
he named.

"it's just what you are doing."

"ah but the worst--since you've left such a margin--may be still to
come.  you may yet break down."

"yes, i may yet break down.  but will you take me--?"

he had hesitated, and she waited.  "take you?"

"for as long as i can bear it."

she also debated "mr. newsome and madame de vionnet may, as we were
saying, leave town.  how long do you think you can bear it without
them?"

strether's reply to this was at first another question.  "do you mean
in order to get away from me?"

her answer had an abruptness.  "don't find me rude if i say i should
think they'd want to!"

he looked at her hard again--seemed even for an instant to have an
intensity of thought under which his colour changed.  but he smiled.
"you mean after what they've done to me?"

"after what 
 
 ___________________________
 
l uncertainties.  it came out for him more than ever yet
that she had had from the first a knowledge she believed him not to
have had, a knowledge the sharp acquisition of which might be destined
to make a difference for him.  the difference for him might not
inconceivably be an arrest of his independence and a change in his
attitude--in other words a revulsion in favour of the principles of
woollett.  she had really prefigured the possibility of a shock that
would send him swinging back to mrs. newsome.  he hadn't, it was true,
week after week, shown signs of receiving it, but the possibility had
been none the less in the air.  what maria accordingly had had now to
take in was that the shock had descended and that he hadn't, all the
same, swung back.  he had grown clear, in a flash, on a point long
since settled for herself; but no reapproximation to mrs. newsome had
occurred in consequence.  madame de vionnet had by her visit held up
the torch to these truths, and what now lingered in poor m
 
 ___________________________
 
aria's face
was the somewhat smoky light of the scene between them. if the light
however wasn't, as we have hinted, the glow of joy, the reasons for
this also were perhaps discernible to strether even through the blur
cast over them by his natural modesty.  she had held herself for months
with a firm hand; she hadn't interfered on any chance--and chances were
specious enough--that she might interfere to her profit.  she had
turned her back on the dream that mrs. newsome's rupture, their
friend's forfeiture--the engagement the relation itself, broken beyond
all mending--might furnish forth her advantage; and, to stay her hand
from promoting these things, she had on private, difficult, but rigid,
lines, played strictly fair.  she couldn't therefore but feel that,
though, as the end of all, the facts in question had been stoutly
confirmed, her ground for personal, for what might have been called
interested, elation remained rather vague.  strether might easily ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve
made out that she had been asking herself, in the hours she had just
sat through, if there were still for her, or were only not, a fair
shade of uncertainty.  let us hasten to add, however, that what he at
first made out on this occasion he also at first kept to himself.  he
only asked what in particular madame de vionnet had come for, and as to
this his companion was ready.

"she wants tidings of mr. newsome, whom she appears not to have seen
for some days."

"then she hasn't been away with him again?"

"she seemed to think," maria answered, "that he might have gone away
with you."

"and did you tell her i know nothing of him?"

she had her indulgent headshake.  "i've known nothing of what you know.
i could only tell her i'd ask you."

"then i've not seen him for a week--and of course i've wondered." his
wonderment showed at this moment as sharper, but he presently went on.
"still, i dare say i can
 
 ___________________________
 
n
in the dust.  and as put there by our little chad!"

"yet wasn't 'your' little chad just your miracle?"

strether admitted it.  "of course i moved among miracles.  it was all
phantasmagoric.  but the great fact was that so much of it was none of
my business--as i saw my business.  it isn't even now."

his companion turned away on this, and it might well have been yet
again with the sharpness of a fear of how little his philosophy could
bring her personally.  "i wish she could hear you!"

"mrs. newsome?"

"no--not mrs. newsome; since i understand you that it doesn't matter
now what mrs. newsome hears.  hasn't she heard everything?"

"practically--yes." he had thought a moment, but he went on.  "you wish
madame de vionnet could hear me?"

"madame de vionnet." she had come back to him.  "she thinks just the
contrary of what you say.  that you distinctly judge her."

he turned over the scene as the two women thus placed together for him
seemed to give it.  "she might have known--!"

"might have 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat was to follow this.  "i don't think it will be for the money." and
then as she seemed uncertain:  "i mean i don't believe it will be for
that he'll give her up."

"then he will give her up?"

strether waited a moment, rather slow and deliberate now, drawing out a
little this last soft stage, pleading with her in various suggestive
and unspoken ways for patience and understanding. "what were you just
about to ask me?"

"is there anything he can do that would make you patch it up?"

"with mrs. newsome?"

her assent, as if she had had a delicacy about sounding the name, was
only in her face; but she added with it:  "or is there anything he can
do that would make her try it?"

"to patch it up with me?"  his answer came at last in a conclusive
headshake.  "there's nothing any one can do.  it's over.  over for both
of us."

maria wondered, seemed a little to doubt.  "are you so sure for her?"

"oh yes--sure now.  too much has happened.  i'm different for her."

she took it in then, drawing a dee
 
 ___________________________
 
ore than he did
last night on the question of the infamy of not sticking to her."

"is that what you called it for him--'infamy'?"

"oh rather!  i described to him in detail the base creature he'd be,
and he quite agrees with me about it."

"so that it's really as if you had nailed him?"

"quite really as if--!  i told him i should curse him."

"oh," she smiled, "you have done it." and then having thought again:
"you can't after that propose--!"  yet she scanned his face.

"propose again to mrs. newsome?"

she hesitated afresh, but she brought it out.  "i've never believed,
you know, that you did propose.  i always believed it was really
she--and, so far as that goes, i can understand it.  what i mean is,"
she explained, "that with such a spirit--the spirit of curses!--your
breach is past mending.  she has only to know what you've done to him
never again to raise a finger."

"i've done," said strether, "what i could--one can't do more. he
protests his devotion and his horror.  but i'm not sure