
as strained, and her own face for a moment kept him so.  at last she
also got up.  "well, don't you think that for that--"

"i ought to save you?"  so it was that the way to meet her--and the
way, as well, in a manner, to get off--came over him.  he heard himself
use the exorbitant word, the very sound of which helped to determine
his flight.  "i'll save you if i can."



ii


in chad's lovely home, however, one evening ten days later, he felt
himself present at the collapse of the question of jeanne de vionnet's
shy secret.  he had been dining there in the company of that young lady
and her mother, as well as of other persons, and he had gone into the
petit salon, at chad's request, on purpose to talk with her. the young
man had put this to him as a favour--"i should like so awfully to know
what you think of her.  it will really be a chance for you," he had
said, "to see the jeune fille--i mean the type--as she actually is, and
i don't think that, as an observer of manners, it's a thing you ought
to 
 
 ___________________________
 
e inferred from chad's behaviour, which had been in this
connexion as easy as in every other.  he was easy, always, when he
understood; he was easier still, if possible, when he didn't; he had
replied that he would make it all right; and he had proceeded to do
this by substituting the present occasion--as he was ready to
substitute others--for any, for every occasion as to which his old
friend should have a funny scruple.

"oh but i'm not a little foreign girl; i'm just as english as i can
be," jeanne de vionnet had said to him as soon as, in the petit salon,
he sank, shyly enough on his own side, into the place near her vacated
by madame gloriani at his approach.  madame gloriani, who was in black
velvet, with white lace and powdered hair, and whose somewhat massive
majesty melted, at any contact, into the graciousness of some
incomprehensible tongue, moved away to make room for the vague
gentleman, after benevolent greetings to him which embodied, as he
believed, in baffling accents, some recognition
 
 ___________________________
 
y this
circumstance, met another pair which had just come within their range
and which struck him as reflecting his sense of what he had done.  he
recognised them at the same moment as those of little bilham, who had
apparently drawn near on purpose to speak to him, and little bilham
wasn't, in the conditions, the person to whom his heart would be most
closed. they were seated together a minute later at the angle of the
room obliquely opposite the corner in which gloriani was still engaged
with jeanne de vionnet, to whom at first and in silence their attention
had been benevolently given.  "i can't see for my life," strether had
then observed, "how a young fellow of any spirit--such a one as you for
instance--can be admitted to the sight of that young lady without being
hard hit.  why don't you go in, little bilham?"  he remembered the tone
into which he had been betrayed on the garden-bench at the sculptor's
reception, and this might make up for that by being much more the right
sort of thing to say t
 
 ___________________________
 
 for chad, who was all genial
attention to the needs of his friends, besides having arranged that his
servant should reinforce him; the ladies were certainly pleasant to
see, and mamie would be at any time and anywhere pleasant to exhibit.
she would look extraordinarily like his young wife--the wife of a
honeymoon, should he go about with her; but that was his own affair--or
perhaps it was hers; it was at any rate something she couldn't help.
strether remembered how he had seen him come up with jeanne de vionnet
in gloriani's garden, and the fancy he had had about that--the fancy
obscured now, thickly overlaid with others; the recollection was during
these minutes his only note of trouble.  he had often, in spite of
himself, wondered if chad but too probably were not with jeanne the
object of a still and shaded flame.  it was on the cards that the child
might be tremulously in love, and this conviction now flickered up not
a bit the less for his disliking to think of it, for its being, in a
complicated
 
 ___________________________
 
ch he abounds.
and the circus afterwards--which is cheaper, but which he'll find some
means of making as dear as possible--that's also his tribute to the
ideal.  it does for him.  he'll see her through.  they won't talk of
anything worse than you and me."

"well, we're bad enough perhaps, thank heaven," she laughed, "to upset
them!  mr. waymarsh at any rate is a hideous old coquette." and the
next moment she had dropped everything for a different pursuit.  "what
you don't appear to know is that jeanne de vionnet has become engaged.
she's to marry--it has been definitely arranged--young monsieur de
montbron."

he fairly blushed.  "then--if you know it--it's 'out'?"

"don't i often know things that are not out?  however," she said, "this
will be out to-morrow.  but i see i've counted too much on your
possible ignorance.  you've been before me, and i don't make you jump
as i hoped."

he gave a gasp at her insight.  "you never fail!  i've had my jump. i
had it when i first heard."

"then if you knew why di