t
to hospitality, a bid for an invitation, had fallen back upon silence
as the corrective most to his own taste.  he had asked mrs. newsome
moreover not to announce him again; he had so distinct an opinion on
his attacking his job, should he attack it at all, in his own way.  not
the least of this lady's high merits for him was that he could
absolutely rest on her word.  she was the only woman he had known, even
at woollett, as to whom his conviction was positive that to lie was
beyond her art. sarah pocock, for instance, her own daughter, though
with social ideals, as they said, in some respects different--sarah who
was, in her way, aesthetic, had never refused to human commerce that
mitigation of rigour; there were occasions when he had distinctly seen
her apply it.  since, accordingly, at all events, he had had it from
mrs. newsome that she had, at whatever cost to her more strenuous view,
conformed, in the matter of preparing chad, wholly to his restrictions,
he now looked up at the fine conti
 
 ___________________________
 
himself over.  on those
lines he could still be liberal, yet it was at best a sort of whistling
in the dark.  it was unmistakeable moreover that the sense of being in
the dark now pressed on him more sharply--creating thereby the need for
a louder and livelier whistle.  he whistled long and hard after sending
his message; he whistled again and again in celebration of chad's news;
there was an interval of a fortnight in which this exercise helped him.
he had no great notion of what, on the spot, sarah pocock would have to
say, though he had indeed confused premonitions; but it shouldn't be in
her power to say--it shouldn't be in any one's anywhere to say--that he
was neglecting her mother.  he might have written before more freely,
but he had never written more copiously; and he frankly gave for a
reason at woollett that he wished to fill the void created there by
sarah's departure.

the increase of his darkness, however, and the quickening, as i have
called it, of his tune, resided in the fact tha
 
 ___________________________
 
elf.  "it's just your particular
charm."

his answer too was always the same.  "of course i'm youth--youth for
the trip to europe.  i began to be young, or at least to get the
benefit of it, the moment i met you at chester, and that's what has
been taking place ever since.  i never had the benefit at the proper
time--which comes to saying that i never had the thing itself.  i'm
having the benefit at this moment; i had it the other day when i said
to chad 'wait'; i shall have it still again when sarah pocock arrives.
it's a benefit that would make a poor show for many people; and i don't
know who else but you and i, frankly, could begin to see in it what i
feel.  i don't get drunk; i don't pursue the ladies; i don't spend
money; i don't even write sonnets.  but nevertheless i'm making up late
for what i didn't have early.  i cultivate my little benefit in my own
little way.  it amuses me more than anything that has happened to me in
all my life.  they may say what they like--it's my surrender, it's
 
 ___________________________
 
ght
agreeably give him.  an ideal rigour would perhaps postpone the trial
till after the pococks had shown their spirit; and it was to an ideal
rigour that he had quite promised himself to conform.

suddenly, however, on this particular day, he felt a particular fear
under which everything collapsed.  he knew abruptly that he was afraid
of himself--and yet not in relation to the effect on his sensibilities
of another hour of madame de vionnet.  what he dreaded was the effect
of a single hour of sarah pocock, as to whom he was visited, in
troubled nights, with fantastic waking dreams.  she loomed at him
larger than life; she increased in volume as she drew nearer; she so
met his eyes that, his imagination taking, after the first step, all,
and more than all, the strides, he already felt her come down on him,
already burned, under her reprobation, with the blush of guilt, already
consented, by way of penance, to the instant forfeiture of everything.
he saw himself, under her direction, recommitted t
 
 ___________________________
 
, moreover, strether could see, was to penetrate; he saw that is,
how chad judged a system of influence in which waymarsh had served as a
determinant--an impression just now quickened again; with the whole
bearing of such a fact on the youth's view of his relatives.  as it
came up between them that they might now take their friend for a
feature of the control of these latter now sought to be exerted from
woollett, strether felt indeed how it would be stamped all over him,
half an hour later for sarah pocock's eyes, that he was as much on
chad's "side" as waymarsh had probably described him.  he was letting
himself at present, go; there was no denying it; it might be
desperation, it might be confidence; he should offer himself to the
arriving travellers bristling with all the lucidity he had cultivated.

he repeated to chad what he had been saying in the court to waymarsh;
how there was no doubt whatever that his sister would find the latter a
kindred spirit, no doubt of the alliance, based on an e
 
 ___________________________
 
spoken handsomely."

"never more handsomely of any woman.  but it's just that tone--!"

"that tone," said chad, "that has fetched her?  i dare say; but i've no
quarrel with you about it.  and no more has madame de vionnet. don't
you know by this time how she likes you?"

"oh!"--and strether had, with his groan, a real pang of melancholy.
"for all i've done for her!"

"ah you've done a great deal."

chad's urbanity fairly shamed him, and he was at this moment absolutely
impatient to see the face sarah pocock would present to a sort of
thing, as he synthetically phrased it to himself, with no adequate
forecast of which, despite his admonitions, she would certainly arrive.
"i've done this!"

"well, this is all right.  she likes," chad comfortably remarked,
 "to be liked."

it gave his companion a moment's thought.  "and she's sure mrs. pocock
will--?"

"no, i say that for you.  she likes your liking her; it's so much, as
it were," chad laughed, "to the good.  however, she doesn't despair of
sarah eit
 
 ___________________________
 
or him gave strether a glow of
pleasure.  "i say, you know, this is about my shape, and if it hadn't
been for you--!" so he broke out as the charming streets met his
healthy appetite; and he wound up, after an expressive nudge, with a
clap of his companion's knee and an "oh you, you--you are doing it!"
that was charged with rich meaning. strether felt in it the intention
of homage, but, with a curiosity otherwise occupied, postponed taking
it up.  what he was asking himself for the time was how sarah pocock,
in the opportunity already given her, had judged her brother--from whom
he himself, as they finally, at the station, separated for their
different conveyances, had had a look into which he could read more
than one message.  however sarah was judging her brother, chad's
conclusion about his sister, and about her husband and her husband's
sister, was at the least on the way not to fail of confidence. strether
felt the confidence, and that, as the look between them was an
exchange, what he himsel
 
 ___________________________
 
he enquired of mrs. pocock, "about dear old maria?  the
worst is that miss gostrey is really a wonderful woman."

"oh yes indeed," strether answered for her, "mrs. pocock knows about
miss gostrey.  your mother, sarah, must have told you about her; your
mother knows everything," he sturdily pursued.  "and i cordially
admit," he added with his conscious gaiety of courage, "that she's as
wonderful a woman as you like."

"ah it isn't i who 'like,' dear mr. strether, anything to do with the
matter!" sarah pocock promptly protested; "and i'm by no means sure i
have--from my mother or from any one else--a notion of whom you're
talking about."

"well, he won't let you see her, you know," madame de vionnet
sympathetically threw in.  "he never lets me--old friends as we are: i
mean as i am with maria.  he reserves her for his best hours; keeps her
consummately to himself; only gives us others the crumbs of the feast."

"well, countess, i've had some of the crumbs," waymarsh observed with
weight and covering
 
 ___________________________
 
at was part of the typical tale, the part most
significant in respect to himself.  he liked the place she lived in,
the picture that each time squared itself, large and high and clear,
around her:  every occasion of seeing it was a pleasure of a different
shade.  yet what precisely was he doing with shades of pleasure now,
and why hadn't he properly and logically compelled her to commit
herself to whatever of disadvantage and penalty the situation might
throw up?  he might have proposed, as for sarah pocock, the cold
hospitality of his own salon de lecture, in which the chill of sarah's
visit seemed still to abide and shades of pleasure were dim; he might
have suggested a stone bench in the dusty tuileries or a penny chair at
the back part of the champs elysees.  these things would have been a
trifle stern, and sternness alone now wouldn't be sinister.  an
instinct in him cast about for some form of discipline in which they
might meet--some awkwardness they would suffer from, some danger, or at
le