that he found her nicer than
he had really dreamed--a pause that ended when he had said to himself
that, so far as it at all mattered for her, she had in fact perhaps
already made this out.  he risked accordingly a different
question--though conscious, as soon as he had spoken, that he seemed to
place it in relation to her last speech.  "but that mademoiselle de
vionnet is to be married--i suppose you've heard of that." for all, he
then found, he need fear!  "dear, yes; the gentleman was there:
monsieur de montbron, whom madame de vionnet presented to us."

"and was he nice?"

mamie bloomed and bridled with her best reception manner.  "any man's
nice when he's in love."

it made strether laugh.  "but is monsieur de montbron in
love--already--with you?"

"oh that's not necessary--it's so much better he should be so with her:
which, thank goodness, i lost no time in discovering for myself.  he's
perfectly gone--and i couldn't have borne it for her if he hadn't been.
she's just too sweet."

strether hesitate
 
 ___________________________
 
ore of her, as i hope i shall, i think she'll like me
enough--for she seemed to like me to-day--to want me to tell her."

"and shall you?"

"perfectly.  i shall tell her the matter with her is that she wants
only too much to do right.  to do right for her, naturally," said
mamie, "is to please."

"her mother, do you mean?"

"her mother first."

strether waited.  "and then?"

"well, 'then'--mr. newsome."

there was something really grand for him in the serenity of this
reference.  "and last only monsieur de montbron?"

"last only"--she good-humouredly kept it up.

strether considered.  "so that every one after all then will be suited?"

she had one of her few hesitations, but it was a question only of a
moment; and it was her nearest approach to being explicit with him
about what was between them.  "i think i can speak for myself.  i shall
be."

it said indeed so much, told such a story of her being ready to help
him, so committed to him that truth, in short, for such use as he might
make of it toward thos