ne of the suffered treacheries has consisted
precisely, for chad's whole figure and presence, of a direct
presentability diminished and compromised--despoiled, that is, of its
proportional advantage; so that, in a word, the whole economy of his
author's relation to him has at important points to be redetermined.
the book, however, critically viewed, is touchingly full of these
disguised and repaired losses, these insidious recoveries, these
intensely redemptive consistencies. the pages in which mamie pocock
gives her appointed and, i can't but think, duly felt lift to the whole
action by the so inscrutably-applied side-stroke or short-cut of our
just watching and as quite at an angle of vision as yet untried, her
single hour of suspense in the hotel salon, in our partaking of her
concentrated study of the sense of matters bearing on her own case, all
the bright warm paris afternoon, from the balcony that overlooks the
tuileries garden--these are as marked an example of the
representational virtue 
 
 ___________________________
 
in.  he wants, as i see him, to be protected.
protected i mean from life."

"ah voila!"--her thought fitted with a click.  "from life.  what you
really want to get him home for is to marry him."

"well, that's about the size of it."

"of course," she said, "it's rudimentary.  but to any one in
particular?"

he smiled at this, looking a little more conscious.  "you get
everything out."

for a moment again their eyes met.  "you put everything in!"

he acknowledged the tribute by telling her.  "to mamie pocock."

she wondered; then gravely, even exquisitely, as if to make the oddity
also fit:  "his own niece?"

"oh you must yourself find a name for the relation.  his
brother-in-law's sister.  mrs. jim's sister-in-law."

it seemed to have on miss gostrey a certain hardening effect.  "and who
in the world's mrs. jim?"

"chad's sister--who was sarah newsome.  she's married--didn't i mention
it?--to jim pocock."

"ah yes," she tacitly replied; but he had mentioned things--! then,
however, with all the so
 
 ___________________________
 
hing to do--it so fully achieved all this that
he appeared to himself simply to meet it in its own spirit by the last
frankness of admiration.  admiration was of itself almost accusatory,
but nothing less would serve to show her how nearly he understood.  he
put out his hand for good-bye with a "splendid, splendid, splendid!"
and he left her, in her splendour, still waiting for little bilham.





book tenth




i


strether occupied beside little bilham, three evenings after his
interview with mamie pocock, the same deep divan they had enjoyed
together on the first occasion of our friend's meeting madame de
vionnet and her daughter in the apartment of the boulevard malesherbes,
where his position affirmed itself again as ministering to an easy
exchange of impressions.  the present evening had a different stamp; if
the company was much more numerous, so, inevitably, were the ideas set
in motion.  it was on the other hand, however, now strongly marked that
the talkers moved, in respect to such matt
 
 ___________________________
 
pness.

"oh precisely!  but he needn't marry at all--i'm at any rate not
obliged to provide for it.  whereas in your case i rather feel that i
am."

little bilham was amused.  "obliged to provide for my marrying?"

"yes--after all i've done to you!"

the young man weighed it.  "have you done as much as that?"

"well," said strether, thus challenged, "of course i must remember what
you've also done to me.  we may perhaps call it square.  but all the
same," he went on, "i wish awfully you'd marry mamie pocock yourself."

little bilham laughed out.  "why it was only the other night, in this
very place, that you were proposing to me a different union altogether."

"mademoiselle de vionnet?"  well, strether easily confessed it. "that,
i admit, was a vain image.  this is practical politics. i want to do
something good for both of you--i wish you each so well; and you can
see in a moment the trouble it will save me to polish you off by the
same stroke.  she likes you, you know.  you console her.  and she