opelled my hero to where this lively extractor of his value
and distiller of his essence awaits him, is normal and entire, is
really an excellent standard scene; copious, comprehensive, and
accordingly never short, but with its office as definite as that of the
hammer on the gong of the clock, the office of expressing all that is
in the hour.

the "ficelle" character of the subordinate party is as artfully
dissimulated, throughout, as may be, and to that extent that, with the
seams or joints of maria gostrey's ostensible connectedness taken
particular care of, duly smoothed over, that is, and anxiously kept
from showing as "pieced on;" this figure doubtless achieves, after a
fashion, something of the dignity of a prime idea: which circumstance
but shows us afresh how many quite incalculable but none the less clear
sources of enjoyment for the infatuated artist, how many copious
springs of our never-to-be-slighted "fun" for the reader and critic
susceptible of contagion, may sound their incidental p
 
 ___________________________
 
ng seen to walk off with a gentleman who has to ask who i
am--i assure you i don't in the least mind.  here, however," she
continued, "is my card, and as i find there's something else again i
have to say at the office, you can just study it during the moment i
leave you."

she left him after he had taken from her the small pasteboard she had
extracted from her pocket-book, and he had extracted another from his
own, to exchange with it, before she came back.  he read thus the
simple designation "maria gostrey," to which was attached, in a corner
of the card, with a number, the name of a street, presumably in paris,
without other appreciable identity than its foreignness.  he put the
card into his waistcoat pocket, keeping his own meanwhile in evidence;
and as he leaned against the door-post he met with the smile of a
straying thought what the expanse before the hotel offered to his view.
it was positively droll to him that he should already have maria
gostrey, whoever she was--of which he hadn't rea
 
 ___________________________
 
ompt, it was possibly even premature, and there was
little doubt of the expression of face the sight of it would have
produced in a certain person.  but if it was "wrong"--why then he had
better not have come out at all.  at this, poor man, had he
already--and even before meeting waymarsh--arrived.  he had believed he
had a limit, but the limit had been transcended within thirty-six
hours.  by how long a space on the plane of manners or even of morals,
moreover, he felt still more sharply after maria gostrey had come back
to him and with a gay decisive "so now--!" led him forth into the
world. this counted, it struck him as he walked beside her with his
overcoat on an arm, his umbrella under another and his personal
pasteboard a little stiffly retained between forefinger and thumb, this
struck him as really, in comparison his introduction to things.  it
hadn't been "europe" at liverpool no--not even in the dreadful
delightful impressive streets the night before--to the extent his
present companion 
 
 ___________________________
 
 people?"

"other countries.  other people--yes.  i want to encourage our own."

strether wondered.  "not to come?  why then do you 'meet'  them--since
it doesn't appear to be to stop them?"

"oh that they shouldn't come is as yet too much to ask.  what i attend
to is that they come quickly and return still more so.  i meet them to
help it to be over as soon as possible,  and though i don't stop them
i've my way of putting them through.  that's my little system; and, if
you want to know,"  said maria gostrey, "it's my real secret, my
innermost mission and use.  i only seem, you see, to beguile and
approve; but i've thought it all out and i'm working all the while
underground.  i can't perhaps quite give you my formula, but i think
that practically i succeed.  i send you back spent.  so you stay back.
passed through my hands--"

"we don't turn up again?"  the further she went the further he always
saw himself able to follow.  "i don't want your formula--i feel quite
enough, as i hinted yesterday, yo
 
 ___________________________
 
."

"then i shall walk."

"in the rain?"

"i like the rain," said strether.  "good-night!"

she kept him a moment, while his hand was on the door, by not
answering; after which she answered by repeating her question. "what do
you stand to lose?"

why the question now affected him as other he couldn't have said; he
could only this time meet it otherwise.  "everything."

"so i thought.  then you shall succeed.  and to that end i'm yours--"

"ah, dear lady!" he kindly breathed.

"till death!" said maria gostrey.  "good-night."



ii


strether called, his second morning in paris, on the bankers of the rue
scribe to whom his letter of credit was addressed, and he made this
visit attended by waymarsh, in whose company he had crossed from london
two days before.  they had hastened to the rue scribe on the morrow of
their arrival, but strether had not then found the letters the hope of
which prompted this errand.  he had had as yet none at all; hadn't
expected them in london, but had counted on several in
 
 ___________________________
 
compatriots showed a candour, he thought, surpassing even the candour
of woollett; they were red-haired and long-legged, they were quaint and
queer and dear and droll; they made the place resound with the
vernacular, which he had never known so marked as when figuring for the
chosen language, he must suppose, of contemporary art.  they twanged
with a vengeance the aesthetic lyre--they drew from it wonderful airs.
this aspect of their life had an admirable innocence; and he looked on
occasion at maria gostrey to see to what extent that element reached
her.  she gave him however for the hour, as she had given him the
previous day, no further sign than to show how she dealt with boys;
meeting them with the air of old parisian practice that she had for
every one, for everything, in turn. wonderful about the delicate daubs,
masterful about the way to make tea, trustful about the legs of chairs
and familiarly reminiscent of those, in the other time, the named, the
numbered or the caricatured, who had flo
 
 ___________________________
 
y looked true moreover from the way chad was to behave after
this.  he was full of attentions to his mother's ambassador; in spite
of which, all the while, the latter's other relations rather remarkably
contrived to assert themselves.  strether's sittings pen in hand with
mrs. newsome up in his own room were broken, yet they were richer; and
they were more than ever interspersed with the hours in which he
reported himself, in a different fashion, but with scarce less
earnestness and fulness, to maria gostrey.  now that, as he would have
expressed it, he had really something to talk about he found himself,
in respect to any oddity that might reside for him in the double
connexion, at once more aware and more indifferent.  he had been fine
to mrs. newsome about his useful friend, but it had begun to haunt his
imagination that chad, taking up again for her benefit a pen too long
disused, might possibly be finer.  it wouldn't at all do, he saw, that
anything should come up for him at chad's hand but wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ffectually for the time--that is for
the next few days--that it had given strether almost a new lease of
life.  it must be added however that, thanks to his constant habit of
shaking the bottle in which life handed him the wine of experience, he
presently found the taste of the lees rising as usual into his draught.
his imagination had in other words already dealt with his young
friend's assertion; of which it had made something that sufficiently
came out on the very next occasion of his seeing maria gostrey.  this
occasion moreover had been determined promptly by a new circumstance--a
circumstance he was the last man to leave her for a day in ignorance
of.  "when i said to him last night," he immediately began, "that
without some definite word from him now that will enable me to speak to
them over there of our sailing--or at least of mine, giving them some
sort of date--my responsibility becomes uncomfortable and my situation
awkward; when i said that to him what do you think was his reply?"  and

 
 ___________________________
 
ence out of any proportion to his adventures; so
that, though it was doubtless no great adventure to sit on there with
miss gostrey and hear about madame de vionnet, the hour, the picture,
the immediate, the recent, the possible--as well as the communication
itself, not a note of which failed to reverberate--only gave the
moments more of the taste of history.

it was history, to begin with, that jeanne's mother had been
three-and-twenty years before, at geneva, schoolmate and good
girlfriend to maria gostrey, who had moreover enjoyed since then,
though interruptedly and above all with a long recent drop, other
glimpses of her.  twenty-three years put them both on, no doubt; and
madame de vionnet--though she had married straight after
school--couldn't be today an hour less than thirty-eight. this made her
ten years older than chad--though ten years, also, if strether liked,
older than she looked; the least, at any rate, that a prospective
mother-in-law could be expected to do with.  she would be of 
 
 ___________________________
 
dy quite enough on his way to that, and there
was moreover, as it came to him, perceptibly, something behind these
allusions and professions that, should he take it in, would square but
ill with his present resolve to simplify. it was as if, for him, all
the same, her softness and sadness were sincere.  he felt that not less
when she soon went on: "i'm extremely glad of her happiness."  but it
also left him mute--sharp and fine though the imputation it conveyed.
what it conveyed was that he was maria gostrey's happiness, and for the
least little instant he had the impulse to challenge the thought.  he
could have done so however only by saying "what then do you suppose to
be between us?" and he was wonderfully glad a moment later not to have
spoken.  he would rather seem stupid any day than fatuous, and he drew
back as well, with a smothered inward shudder, from the consideration
of what women--of highly-developed type in particular--might think of
each other.  whatever he had come out for he hadn't
 
 ___________________________
 

on this pleasant basis of costly disorder, consequently, that they
eventually seated themselves, on either side of a small table, at a
window adjusted to the busy quay and the shining barge-burdened seine;
where, for an hour, in the matter of letting himself go, of diving
deep, strether was to feel he had touched bottom.  he was to feel many
things on this occasion, and one of the first of them was that he had
travelled far since that evening in london, before the theatre, when
his dinner with maria gostrey, between the pink-shaded candles, had
struck him as requiring so many explanations.  he had at that time
gathered them in, the explanations--he had stored them up; but it was
at present as if he had either soared above or sunk below them--he
couldn't tell which; he could somehow think of none that didn't seem to
leave the appearance of collapse and cynicism easier for him than
lucidity.  how could he wish it to be lucid for others, for any one,
that he, for the hour, saw reasons enough in the m
 
 ___________________________
 
that, in this last long period, has been
happening to him.  it took no account whatever of the impression i was
here on the spot immediately to begin to receive from him--impressions
of which i feel sure i'm far from having had the last."

miss gostrey had a smile of the most genial criticism.  "so your idea
is--more or less--to stay out of curiosity?"

"call it what you like! i don't care what it's called--"

"so long as you do stay?  certainly not then.  i call it, all the same,
immense fun," maria gostrey declared; "and to see you work it out will
be one of the sensations of my life.  it is clear you can toddle alone!"

he received this tribute without elation.  "i shan't be alone when the
pococks have come."

her eyebrows went up.  "the pococks are coming?"

"that, i mean, is what will happen--and happen as quickly as
possible--in consequence of chad's cable.  they'll simply embark. sarah
will come to speak for her mother--with an effect different from my
muddle."

miss gostrey more gravely won
 
 ___________________________
 
or him, in the special conditions,
almost an obsession; and though the obsession sharpened his pulses,
adding really to the excitement of life, there were hours at which, to
be less on the stretch, he directly sought forgetfulness.  he knew it
for the queerest of adventures--a circumstance capable of playing such
a part only for lambert strether--that in paris itself, of all places,
he should find this ghost of the lady of woollett more importunate than
any other presence.

when he went back to maria gostrey it was for the change to something
else.  and yet after all the change scarcely operated for he talked to
her of mrs. newsome in these days as he had never talked before.  he
had hitherto observed in that particular a discretion and a law;
considerations that at present broke down quite as if relations had
altered.  they hadn't really altered, he said to himself, so much as
that came to; for if what had occurred was of course that mrs. newsome
had ceased to trust him, there was nothing on the o
 
 ___________________________
 
ose business it was not; it was not at all
events such a circumstance as sarah's own unaided lights would help her
to.  even if she had come out to flash those lights more than yet
appeared she wouldn't make much headway against mere pleasantness.  he
counted on being able to be merely pleasant to the end, and if only
from incapacity moreover to formulate anything different.  he couldn't
even formulate to himself his being changed and queer; it had taken
place, the process, somewhere deep down; maria gostrey had caught
glimpses of it; but how was he to fish it up, even if he desired, for
mrs. pocock?  this was then the spirit in which he hovered, and with
the easier throb in it much indebted furthermore to the impression of
high and established adequacy as a pretty girl promptly produced in him
by mamie.  he had wondered vaguely--turning over many things in the
fidget of his thoughts--if mamie were as pretty as woollett published
her; as to which issue seeing her now again was to be so swept away b
 
 ___________________________
 
 this contribution of the
real possibly the mission of the pococks?--had they come to make the
work of observation, as he had practised observation, crack and
crumble, and to reduce chad to the plain terms in which honest minds
could deal with him?  had they come in short to be sane where strether
was destined to feel that he himself had only been silly?

he glanced at such a contingency, but it failed to hold him long when
once he had reflected that he would have been silly, in this case, with
maria gostrey and little bilham, with madame de vionnet and little
jeanne, with lambert strether, in fine, and above all with chad newsome
himself.  wouldn't it be found to have made more for reality to be
silly with these persons than sane with sarah and jim?  jim in fact, he
presently made up his mind, was individually out of it; jim didn't
care; jim hadn't come out either for chad or for him; jim in short left
the moral side to sally and indeed simply availed himself now, for the
sense of recreation, of t
 
 ___________________________
 
to her idea with a good conscience at
which our friend was aware that he marvelled, though he trusted also
for it, as he met her exquisitely expressive eyes, to some later light.

the prime effect of her tone, however--and it was a truth which his own
eyes gave back to her in sad ironic play--could only be to make him
feel that, to say such things to a man in public, a woman must
practically think of him as ninety years old.  he had turned awkwardly,
responsively red, he knew, at her mention of maria gostrey; sarah
pocock's presence--the particular quality of it--had made this
inevitable; and then he had grown still redder in proportion as he
hated to have shown anything at all.  he felt indeed that he was
showing much, as, uncomfortably and almost in pain, he offered up his
redness to waymarsh, who, strangely enough, seemed now to be looking at
him with a certain explanatory yearning.  something deep--something
built on their old old relation--passed, in this complexity, between
them; he got the s
 
 ___________________________
 
marsh's--and lost himself anew in lambinet.  it was as if he had
found out he was tired--tired not from his walk, but from that inward
exercise which had known, on the whole, for three months, so little
intermission.  that was it--when once they were off he had dropped;
this moreover was what he had dropped to, and now he was touching
bottom.  he was kept luxuriously quiet, soothed and amused by the
consciousness of what he had found at the end of his descent.  it was
very much what he had told maria gostrey he should like to stay on for,
the hugely-distributed paris of summer, alternately dazzling and dusky,
with a weight lifted for him off its columns and cornices and with
shade and air in the flutter of awnings as wide as avenues.  it was
present to him without attenuation that, reaching out, the day after
making the remark, for some proof of his freedom, he had gone that very
afternoon to see madame de vionnet. he had gone again the next day but
one, and the effect of the two visits, the after-
 
 ___________________________
 
oked down at him.  it denoted
however no reappearance of his younger friend; it quickly defined
itself in the tempered darkness as chad's more solid shape; so that
chad's was the attention that after he had stepped forward into the
street and signalled, he easily engaged; chad's was the voice that,
sounding into the night with promptness and seemingly with joy, greeted
him and called him up.

that the young man had been visible there just in this position
expressed somehow for strether that, as maria gostrey had reported, he
had been absent and silent; and our friend drew breath on each
landing--the lift, at that hour, having ceased to work--before the
implications of the fact.  he had been for a week intensely away, away
to a distance and alone; but he was more back than ever, and the
attitude in which strether had surprised him was something more than a
return--it was clearly a conscious surrender.  he had arrived but an
hour before, from london, from lucerne, from homburg, from no matter
where--
 
 ___________________________
 
an imaginary object flying.  it was accordingly as if
they were once more rid of the question and could come back to what
really concerned him.  "of course i shall see you tomorrow."

but strether scarce heeded the plan proposed for this; he had still the
impression--not the slighter for the simulated kick--of an irrelevant
hornpipe or jig.  "you're restless."

"ah," returned chad as they parted, "you're exciting."



v


he had, however, within two days, another separation to face. he had
sent maria gostrey a word early, by hand, to ask if he might come to
breakfast; in consequence of which, at noon, she awaited him in the
cool shade of her little dutch-looking dining-room. this retreat was at
the back of the house, with a view of a scrap of old garden that had
been saved from modern ravage; and though he had on more than one other
occasion had his legs under its small and peculiarly polished table of
hospitality, the place had never before struck him as so sacred to
pleasant knowledge, to intimat
 
 ___________________________
 
he
products of woollett--for all the good she had got from them.  she
desired no further news of them, and she mentioned that madame de
vionnet herself had, to her knowledge, lived exempt from the
information he was ready to supply.  she had never consented to receive
it, though she would have taken it, under stress, from mrs. pocock. but
it was a matter about which mrs. pocock appeared to have had little to
say--never sounding the word--and it didn't signify now.  there was
nothing clearly for maria gostrey that signified now--save one sharp
point, that is, to which she came in time. "i don't know whether it's
before you as a possibility that, left to himself, mr. chad may after
all go back.  i judge that it is more or less so before you, from what
you just now said of him."

her guest had his eyes on her, kindly but attentively, as if foreseeing
what was to follow this.  "i don't think it will be for the money." and
then as she seemed uncertain:  "i mean i don't believe it will be for
that he'll 