r's benefit, into as few words as possible--planted
or "sunk," stiffly and saliently, in the centre of the current, almost
perhaps to the obstruction of traffic.  never can a composition of this
sort have sprung straighter from a dropped grain of suggestion, and
never can that grain, developed, overgrown and smothered, have yet
lurked more in the mass as an independent particle.  the whole case, in
fine, is in lambert strether's irrepressible outbreak to little bilham
on the sunday afternoon in gloriani's garden, the candour with which he
yields, for his young friend's enlightenment, to the charming
admonition of that crisis.  the idea of the tale resides indeed in the
very fact that an hour of such unprecedented ease should have been felt
by him as a crisis, and he is at pains to express it for us as neatly
as we could desire.  the remarks to which he thus gives utterance
contain the essence of "the ambassadors," his fingers close, before he
has done, round the stem of the full-blown flower; 
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"but do you suppose then little bilham has lied?"

"you must find out."

it made him almost turn pale.  "find out any more?"

he had dropped on a sofa for dismay; but she seemed, as she stood over
him, to have the last word.  "wasn't what you came out for to find out
all?"





book fifth




i


the sunday of the next week was a wonderful day, and chad newsome had
let his friend know in advance that he had provided for it. there had
already been a question of his taking him to see the great gloriani,
who was at home on sunday afternoons and at whose house, for the most
part, fewer bores were to be met than elsewhere; but the project,
through some accident, had not had instant effect, and now revived in
happier conditions.  chad had made the point that the celebrated
sculptor had a queer old garden, for which the weather--spring at last
frank and fair--was propitious; and two or three of his other allusions
had confirmed for strether the expectation of something special.  he
had by this tim
 
 ___________________________
 
r had presently the sense of a great convent, a convent
of missions, famous for he scarce knew what, a nursery of young
priests, of scattered shade, of straight alleys and chapel-bells, that
spread its mass in one quarter; he had the sense of names in the air,
of ghosts at the windows, of signs and tokens, a whole range of
expression, all about him, too thick for prompt discrimination.

this assault of images became for a moment, in the address of the
distinguished sculptor, almost formidable:  gloriani showed him, in
such perfect confidence, on chad's introduction of him, a fine worn
handsome face, a face that was like an open letter in a foreign tongue.
with his genius in his eyes, his manners on his lips, his long career
behind him and his honours and rewards all round, the great artist, in
the course of a single sustained look and a few words of delight at
receiving him, affected our friend as a dazzling prodigy of type.
strether had seen in museums--in the luxembourg as well as, more
reve
 
 ___________________________
 
er of the mysteries? was it the most special
flare, unequalled, supreme, of the aesthetic torch, lighting that
wondrous world for ever, or was it above all the long straight shaft
sunk by a personal acuteness that life had seasoned to steel?  nothing
on earth could have been stranger and no one doubtless more surprised
than the artist himself, but it was for all the world to strether just
then as if in the matter of his accepted duty he had positively been on
trial. the deep human expertness in gloriani's charming smile--oh the
terrible life behind it!--was flashed upon him as a test of his stuff.

chad meanwhile, after having easily named his companion, had still more
easily turned away and was already greeting other persons present. he
was as easy, clever chad, with the great artist as with his obscure
compatriot, and as easy with every one else as with either: this fell
into its place for strether and made almost a new light, giving him, as
a concatenation, something more he could enjoy. he
 
 ___________________________
 
 liked gloriani, but
should never see him again; of that he was sufficiently sure.  chad
accordingly, who was wonderful with both of them, was a kind of link
for hopeless fancy, an implication of possibilities--oh if everything
had been different! strether noted at all events that he was thus on
terms with illustrious spirits, and also that--yes, distinctly--he
hadn't in the least swaggered about it.  our friend hadn't come there
only for this figure of abel newsome's son, but that presence
threatened to affec
 
 ___________________________
 
t the observant mind as positively central. gloriani
indeed, remembering something and excusing himself, pursued chad to
speak to him, and strether was left musing on many things.  one of them
was the question of whether, since he had been tested, he had passed.
did the artist drop him from having made out that he wouldn't do? he
really felt just to-day that he might do better than usual. hadn't he
done well enough, so far as that went, in being exactly so dazzled? and
in not having too, as he almost believed, wholly hidden from his host
that he 
 
 ___________________________
 
y, across the garden, he saw
little bilham approach, and it was a part of the fit that was on him
that as their eyes met he guessed also his knowledge. if he had said to
him on the instant what was uppermost he would have said:  "have i
passed?--for of course i know one has to pass here." little bilham
would have reassured him, have told him that he exaggerated, and have
adduced happily enough the argument of little bilham's own very
presence; which, in truth, he could see, was as easy a one as
gloriani's own or as chad's.  he himself would perhaps then after a
while cease to be frightened, would get the point of view for some of
the faces--types tremendously alien, alien to woollett--that he had
already begun to take in.  who were they all, the dispersed groups and
couples, the ladies even more unlike those of woollett than the
gentlemen?--this was the enquiry that, when his young friend had
greeted him, he did find himself making.

"oh they're every one--all sorts and sizes; of course i mean
 
 ___________________________
 
fter an instant and in sustained response to the reference: "you're
quite sure her husband's living?"

"oh dear, yes."

"ah then--!"

"ah then what?"

strether had after all to think.  "well, i'm sorry for them."  but it
didn't for the moment matter more than that.  he assured his young
friend he was quite content.  they wouldn't stir; were all right as
they were.  he didn't want to be introduced; had been introduced
already about as far as he could go.  he had seen moreover an
immensity; liked gloriani, who, as miss barrace kept saying, was
wonderful; had made out, he was sure, the half-dozen other 'men who
were distinguished, the artists, the critics and oh the great
dramatist--him it was easy to spot; but wanted--no, thanks, really--to
talk with none of them; having nothing at all to say and finding it
would do beautifully as it was; do beautifully because what it
was--well, was just simply too late. and when after this little bilham,
submissive and responsive, but with an eye to the consol
 
 ___________________________
 
about it," said strether, "to be more amusing."

little bilham continued to think, but at last had a smile.  "well, you
are amusing--to me."

"impayable, as you say, no doubt.  but what am i to myself?" strether
had risen with this, giving his attention now to an encounter that, in
the middle of the garden, was in the act of taking place between their
host and the lady at whose side madame de vionnet had quitted him. this
lady, who appeared within a few minutes to have left her friends,
awaited gloriani's eager approach with words on her lips that strether
couldn't catch, but of which her interesting witty face seemed to give
him the echo. he was sure she was prompt and fine, but also that she
had met her match, and he liked--in the light of what he was quite sure
was the duchess's latent insolence--the good humour with which the
great artist asserted equal resources.  were they, this pair, of the
"great world"?--and was he himself, for the moment and thus related to
them by his observation, i
 
 ___________________________
 
reat
world covertly tigerish, which came to him across the lawn and in the
charming air as a waft from the jungle. yet it made him admire most of
the two, made him envy, the glossy male tiger, magnificently marked.
these absurdities of the stirred sense, fruits of suggestion ripening
on the instant, were all reflected in his next words to little bilham.
"i know--if we talk of that--whom i should enjoy being like!"

little bilham followed his eyes; but then as with a shade of knowing
surprise:  "gloriani?"

our friend had in fact already hesitated, though not on the hint of his
companion's doubt, in which there were depths of critical reserve.  he
had just made out, in the now full picture, something and somebody
else; another impression had been superimposed.  a young girl in a
white dress and a softly plumed white hat had suddenly come into view,
and what was presently clear was that her course was toward them.  what
was clearer still was that the handsome young man at her side was chad
newso
 
 ___________________________
 
s
bilham's enquiry was concerned, had thrust in the answer. "oh
chad!"--it was that rare youth he should have enjoyed being "like." the
virtuous attachment would be all there before him; the virtuous
attachment would be in the very act of appeal for his blessing; jeanne
de vionnet, this charming creature, would be exquisitely, intensely
now--the object of it.  chad brought her straight up to him, and chad
was, oh yes, at this moment--for the glory of woollett or
whatever--better still even than gloriani.  he had plucked this
blossom; he had kept it over-night in water; and at last as he held it
up to wonder he did enjoy his effect.  that was why strether had felt
at first the breath of calculation--and why moreover, as he now knew,
his look at the girl would be, for the young man, a sign of the
latter's success.  what young man had ever paraded about that way,
without a reason, a maiden in her flower?  and there was nothing in his
reason at present obscure.  her type sufficiently told of it--t
 
 ___________________________
 
er still, if possible, when he didn't; he had
replied that he would make it all right; and he had proceeded to do
this by substituting the present occasion--as he was ready to
substitute others--for any, for every occasion as to which his old
friend should have a funny scruple.

"oh but i'm not a little foreign girl; i'm just as english as i can
be," jeanne de vionnet had said to him as soon as, in the petit salon,
he sank, shyly enough on his own side, into the place near her vacated
by madame gloriani at his approach.  madame gloriani, who was in black
velvet, with white lace and powdered hair, and whose somewhat massive
majesty melted, at any contact, into the graciousness of some
incomprehensible tongue, moved away to make room for the vague
gentleman, after benevolent greetings to him which embodied, as he
believed, in baffling accents, some recognition of his face from a
couple of sundays before.  then he had remarked--making the most of the
advantage of his years--that it frightened him
 
 ___________________________
 
rply presented.  her mother gave it, no doubt; but her mother, to
make that less sensible, gave so much else besides, and on neither of
the two previous occasions, extraordinary woman, strether felt,
anything like what she was giving tonight.  little jeanne was a case,
an exquisite case of education; whereas the countess, whom it so amused
him to think of by that denomination, was a case, also exquisite,
of--well, he didn't know what.

"he has wonderful taste, notre jeune homme":  this was what gloriani
said to him on turning away from the inspection of a small picture
suspended near the door of the room.  the high celebrity in question
had just come in, apparently in search of mademoiselle de vionnet, but
while strether had got up from beside her their fellow guest, with his
eye sharply caught, had paused for a long look.  the thing was a
landscape, of no size, but of the french school, as our friend was glad
to feel he knew, and also of a quality--which he liked to think he
should also have 
 
 ___________________________
 
guessed; its frame was large out of proportion to the
canvas, and he had never seen a person look at anything, he thought,
just as gloriani, with his nose very near and quick movements of the
head from side to side and bottom to top, examined this feature of
chad's collection.  the artist used that word the next moment smiling
courteously, wiping his nippers and looking round him further--paying
the place in short by the very manner of his presence and by something
strether fancied he could make out in this particular glance, such a
tribute as, to the latter's sense, settled many things once for all.
strether was conscious at this 
 
 ___________________________
 
instant, for that matter, as he hadn't
yet been, of how, round about him, quite without him, they were
consistently settled.  gloriani's smile, deeply italian, he considered,
and finely inscrutable, had had for him, during dinner, at which they
were not neighbours, an indefinite greeting; but the quality in it was
gone that had appeared on the other occasion to turn him inside out; it
was as if even the momentary link supplied by the doubt between them
had snapped.  he was conscious now of the final reality, which was that
there wasn't so much a doubt as a difference altogether; all the more
that over the difference the famous
 
 ___________________________
 
ptor seemed to signal almost
condolingly, yet oh how vacantly! as across some great flat sheet of
water.  he threw out the bridge of a charming hollow civility on which
strether wouldn't have trusted his own full weight a moment.  that
idea, even though but transient and perhaps belated, had performed the
office of putting strether more at his ease, and the blurred picture
had already dropped--dropped with the sound of something else said and
with his becoming aware, by another quick turn, that gloriani was now
on the sofa talking with jeanne, while he himself had in his ears again
the familiar friendliness and the elusive meaning of the "oh, oh, oh!"
that had made him, a fortnight before, challenge miss barrace in vain.
she had always the air, this picturesque and original lady, who struck
him, so oddly, as both antique and modern--she had always the air of
taking up some joke that one had already had out with her.  the point
itself, no doubt, was what was antique, and the use she made of it 
 
 ___________________________
 
t yet in line.  "at all events," he
roundly brought out, "the attachment's an innocent one."

"mine and his?  ah," she laughed, "don't rob it of all interest!"

"i mean our friend's here--to the lady we've been speaking of." that
was what he had settled to as an indirect but none the less closely
involved consequence of his impression of jeanne.  that was where he
meant to stay.  "it's innocent," he repeated--"i see the whole thing."

mystified by his abrupt declaration, she had glanced over at gloriani
as at the unnamed subject of his allusion, but the next moment she had
understood; though indeed not before strether had noticed her momentary
mistake and wondered what might possibly be behind that too.  he
already knew that the sculptor admired madame de vionnet; but did this
admiration also represent an attachment of which the innocence was
discussable?  he was moving verily in a strange air and on ground not
of the firmest.  he looked hard for an instant at miss barrace, but she
had already
 
 ___________________________
 
inner he had met chad's eyes in a longish look; but these
communications had in truth only stirred up again old ambiguities--so
little was it clear from them whether they were an appeal or an
admonition. "you see how i'm fixed," was what they appeared to convey;
yet how he was fixed was exactly what strether didn't see.  however,
perhaps he should see now.

"are you capable of the very great kindness of going to relieve
newsome, for a few minutes, of the rather crushing responsibility of
madame gloriani, while i say a word, if he'll allow me, to mr.
strether, of whom i've a question to ask?  our host ought to talk a bit
to those other ladies, and i'll come back in a minute to your rescue."
she made this proposal to miss barrace as if her consciousness of a
special duty had just flickered-up, but that lady's recognition of
strether's little start at it--as at a betrayal on the speaker's part
of a domesticated state--was as mute as his own comment; and after an
instant, when their fellow guest h
 
 ___________________________
 
-"it was the day after
i called on you--but she was already on her way, and her concierge told
me that in case of my coming i was to be informed she had written to
me.  i found her note when i got home."

madame de vionnet listened with interest and with her eyes on
strether's face; then her delicately decorated head had a small
melancholy motion.  "she didn't write to me.  i went to see her," she
added, "almost immediately after i had seen you, and as i assured her i
would do when i met her at gloriani's.  she hadn't then told me she was
to be absent, and i felt at her door as if i understood. she's
absent--with all respect to her sick friend, though i know indeed she
has plenty--so that i may not see her.  she doesn't want to meet me
again.  well," she continued with a beautiful conscious mildness, "i
liked and admired her beyond every one in the old time, and she knew
it--perhaps that's precisely what has made her go--and i dare say i
haven't lost her for ever."  strether still said nothing
 
 ___________________________
 
he considered with some intensity this
circumstance, met another pair which had just come within their range
and which struck him as reflecting his sense of what he had done.  he
recognised them at the same moment as those of little bilham, who had
apparently drawn near on purpose to speak to him, and little bilham
wasn't, in the conditions, the person to whom his heart would be most
closed. they were seated together a minute later at the angle of the
room obliquely opposite the corner in which gloriani was still engaged
with jeanne de vionnet, to whom at first and in silence their attention
had been benevolently given.  "i can't see for my life," strether had
then observed, "how a young fellow of any spirit--such a one as you for
instance--can be admitted to the sight of that young lady without being
hard hit.  why don't you go in, little bilham?"  he remembered the tone
into which he had been betrayed on the garden-bench at the sculptor's
reception, and this might make up for that by being m
 
 ___________________________
 
l genial
attention to the needs of his friends, besides having arranged that his
servant should reinforce him; the ladies were certainly pleasant to
see, and mamie would be at any time and anywhere pleasant to exhibit.
she would look extraordinarily like his young wife--the wife of a
honeymoon, should he go about with her; but that was his own affair--or
perhaps it was hers; it was at any rate something she couldn't help.
strether remembered how he had seen him come up with jeanne de vionnet
in gloriani's garden, and the fancy he had had about that--the fancy
obscured now, thickly overlaid with others; the recollection was during
these minutes his only note of trouble.  he had often, in spite of
himself, wondered if chad but too probably were not with jeanne the
object of a still and shaded flame.  it was on the cards that the child
might be tremulously in love, and this conviction now flickered up not
a bit the less for his disliking to think of it, for its being, in a
complicated situation, 