nd the lady
on his left.  the lady on his left, the lady thus promptly and
ingeniously invited to "meet" mr. strether and mr. waymarsh--it was the
way she herself expressed her case--was a very marked person, a person
who had much to do with our friend's asking himself if the occasion
weren't in its essence the most baited, the most gilded of traps.
baited it could properly be called when the repast was of so wise a
savour, and gilded surrounding objects seemed inevitably to need to be
when miss barrace--which was the lady's name--looked at them with
convex parisian eyes and through a glass with a remarkably long
tortoise-shell handle.  why miss barrace, mature meagre erect and
eminently gay, highly adorned, perfectly familiar, freely
contradictions and reminding him of some last-century portrait of a
clever head without powder--why miss barrace should have been in
particular the note of a "trap" strether couldn't on the spot have
explained; he blinked in the light of a conviction that he shou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld know
later on, and know well--as it came over him, for that matter, with
force, that he should need to.  he wondered what he was to think
exactly of either of his new friends; since the young man, chad's
intimate and deputy, had, in thus constituting the scene, practised so
much more subtly than he had been prepared for, and since in especial
miss barrace, surrounded clearly by every consideration, hadn't
scrupled to figure as a familiar object.  it was interesting to him to
feel that he was in the presence of new measures, other standards, a
different scale of relations, and that evidently here were a happy pair
who didn't think of things at all as he and waymarsh thought.  nothing
was less to have been calculated in the business than that it should
now be for him as if he and waymarsh were comparatively quite at one.

the latter was magnificen
 
 ___________________________
 
t--this at least was an assurance privately
given him by miss barrace.  "oh your friend's a type, the grand old
american--what shall one call it? the hebrew prophet, ezekiel,
jeremiah, who used when i was a little girl in the rue montaigne to
come to see my father and who was usually the american minister to the
tuileries or some other court.  i haven't seen one these ever so many
years; the sight of it warms my poor old chilled heart; this specimen
is wonderful; in the right quarter, you know, he'll have a succes fou."
strether hadn't failed to ask what the righ
 
 ___________________________
 
--is this the artist-quarter?" but she had already disposed of
the question with a wave of all her tortoise-shell and an easy "bring
him to me!"  he knew on the spot how little he should be able to bring
him, for the very air was by this time, to his sense, thick and hot
with poor waymarsh's judgement of it. he was in the trap still more
than his companion and, unlike his companion, not making the best of
it; which was precisely what doubtless gave him his admirable sombre
glow.  little did miss barrace know that what was behind it was his
grave estimate of her own laxity. the general assumption with which our
two friends had arrived had been that of finding mr. bilham ready to
conduct them to one or other of those resorts of the earnest, the
aesthetic fraternity which were shown among the sights of paris.  in
this character it would have justified them in a proper insistence on
discharging their score.  waymarsh's only proviso at the last had been
that nobody should pay for him; but he found 
 
 ___________________________
 
t befell therefore that when poor strether put it to himself
that their badness was ultimately, or perhaps even insolently, what
such a scene as the one before him was, so to speak, built upon, he
could scarce shirk the dilemma of reading a roundabout echo of them
into almost anything that came up.  this, he was well aware, was a
dreadful necessity; but such was the stern logic, he could only gather,
of a relation to the irregular life.

it was the way the irregular life sat upon bilham and miss barrace that
was the insidious, the delicate marvel.  he was eager to concede that
their relation to it was all indirect, for anything else in him would
have shown the grossness of bad manners; but the indirectness was none
the less consonant--that was striking-with a grateful enjoyment of
everything that was chad's.  they spoke of him repeatedly, invoking his
good name and good nature, and the worst confusion of mind for strether
was that all their mention of him was of a kind to do him honour. they
c
 
 ___________________________
 
 one thing was certain--he saw he must
make up his mind.  he must approach chad, must wait for him, deal with
him, master him, but he mustn't dispossess himself of the faculty of
seeing things as they were.  he must bring him to him--not go himself,
as it were, so much of the way.  he must at any rate be clearer as to
what--should he continue to do that for convenience--he was still
condoning.  it was on the detail of this quantity--and what could the
fact be but mystifying?-that bilham and miss barrace threw so little
light.  so there they were.



ii


when miss gostrey arrived, at the end of a week, she made him a sign;
he went immediately to see her, and it wasn't till then that he could
again close his grasp on the idea of a corrective. this idea however
was luckily all before him again from the moment he crossed the
threshold of the little entresol of the quartier marboeuf into which
she had gathered, as she said, picking them up in a thousand flights
and funny little passionate pounces,
 
 ___________________________
 
know himself "in" hadn't his friend been on the
spot to measure the amount to his appetite.  her compact and crowded
little chambers, almost dusky, as they at first struck him, with
accumulations, represented a supreme general adjustment to
opportunities and conditions.  wherever he looked he saw an old ivory
or an old brocade, and he scarce knew where to sit for fear of a
misappliance.  the life of the occupant struck him of a sudden as more
charged with possession even than chad's or than miss barrace's; wide
as his glimpse had lately become of the empire of "things," what was
before him still enlarged it; the lust of the eyes and the pride of
life had indeed thus their temple.  it was the innermost nook of the
shrine--as brown as a pirate's cave.  in the brownness were glints of
gold; patches of purple were in the gloom; objects all that caught,
through the muslin, with their high rarity, the light of the low
windows. nothing was clear about them but that they were precious, and
they brushe
 
 ___________________________
 
e were
moments when these echoes made him exclaim on her want of tact.  he
blushed of course, at once, still more for the explanation than for the
ground of it:  it came to him in time to save his manners that she
couldn't at the best become tactful as quickly as he.  her tact had to
reckon with the atlantic ocean, the general post-office and the
extravagant curve of the globe.  chad had one day offered tea at the
boulevard malesherbes to a chosen few, a group again including the
unobscured miss barrace; and strether had on coming out walked away
with the acquaintance whom in his letters to mrs. newsome he always
spoke of as the little artist-man.  he had had full occasion to mention
him as the other party, so oddly, to the only close personal alliance
observation had as yet detected in chad's existence.  little bilham's
way this afternoon was not strether's, but he had none the less kindly
come with him, and it was somehow a part of his kindness that as it had
sadly begun to rain they suddenl
 
 ___________________________
 
y found themselves seated for
conversation at a cafe in which they had taken refuge.  he had passed
no more crowded hour in chad's society than the one just ended; he had
talked with miss barrace, who had reproached him with not having come
to see her, and he had above all hit on a happy thought for causing
waymarsh's tension to relax.  something might possibly be extracted for
the latter from the idea of his success with that lady, whose quick
apprehension of what might amuse her had given strether a free hand.
what had she meant if not to ask whether she couldn't help him with his
splendid encumbrance, and mightn't the sacred rage at any rate be kept
a little in abeyance by thus creat
 
 ___________________________
 
how then
can it be so good?"

"you'll see for yourself.  one does see."

"chad's in love with the daughter?"

"that's what i mean."

strether wondered.  "then where's the difficulty?"

"why, aren't you and i--with our grander bolder ideas?"

"oh mine--!" strether said rather strangely.  but then as if to
attenuate:  "you mean they won't hear of woollett?"

little bilham smiled.  "isn't that just what you must see about?"

it had brought them, as she caught the last words, into relation with
miss barrace, whom strether had already observed--as he had never
before seen a lady at a party--moving about alone.  coming within sound
of them she had already spoken, and she took again, through her
long-handled glass, all her amused and amusing possession.  "how much,
poor mr. strether, you seem to have to see about! but you can't say,"
she gaily declared, "that i don't do what i can to help you.  mr.
waymarsh is placed.  i've left him in the house with miss gostrey."

"the way," little bilham exclaimed
 
 ___________________________
 
, "mr. strether gets the ladies to
work for him! he's just preparing to draw in another; to pounce--don't
you see him?--on madame de vionnet."

"madame de vionnet?  oh, oh, oh!" miss barrace cried in a wonderful
crescendo.  there was more in it, our friend made out, than met the
ear.  was it after all a joke that he should be serious about anything?
he envied miss barrace at any rate her power of not being.  she seemed,
with little cries and protests and quick recognitions, movements like
the darts of some fine high-feathered free-pecking bird, to stand
before life as before some full shop-window.  you could fairly hear, as
she selected and pointed, the tap of her tortoise-shell against the
glass.  "it's certain that we do need seeing about; only i'm glad it's
not i who have to do it. one does, no doubt, begin that way; then
suddenly one finds that one has given
 
 ___________________________
 
's done."

"oh you, mr. bilham," she replied as with an impatient rap on the
glass, "you're not worth sixpence! you come over to convert the
savages--for i know you verily did, i remember you--and the savages
simply convert you."

"not even!" the young man woefully confessed:  "they haven't gone
through that form.  they've simply--the cannibals!--eaten me; converted
me if you like, but converted me into food.  i'm but the bleached bones
of a christian."

"well then there we are!  only"--and miss barrace appealed again to
strether--"don't let it discourage you.  you'll break down soon enough,
but you'll meanwhile have had your moments.  il faut en avoir.  i
always like to see you while you last.  and i'll tell you who will
last."

"waymarsh?"--he had already taken her up.

she laughed out as at the alarm of it.  "he'll resist even miss
gostrey:  so grand is it not to understand.  he's wonderful."

"he is indeed," strether conceded.  "he wouldn't tell me of this
affair--only said he had an engag
 
 ___________________________
 
ement; but with such a gloom, you must
let me insist, as if it had been an engagement to be hanged. then
silently and secretly he turns up here with you.  do you call that
'lasting'?"

"oh i hope it's lasting!" miss barrace said.  "but he only, at the
best, bears with me.  he doesn't understand--not one little scrap. he's
delightful.  he's wonderful," she repeated.

"michelangelesque!"--little bilham completed her meaning.  "he is a
success.  moses, on the ceiling, brought down to the floor;
overwhelming, colossal, but somehow portable."

"certainly, if you mean by portable," she returned, "looking so well in
one's carriage.  he's too funny beside me in his comer; he looks like
somebody, somebody foreign and famou
 
 ___________________________
 
hington to see the
great father, stands wrapt in his blanket and gives no sign.  i might
be the great father--from the way he takes everything."  she was
delighted at this hit of her identity with that personage--it fitted so
her character; she declared it was the title she meant henceforth to
adopt.  "and the way he sits, too, in the corner of my room, only
looking at my visitors very hard and as if he wanted to start
something! they wonder what he does want to start.  but he's
wonderful," miss barrace once more insisted.  "he has never started
anything yet."

it presented him none the less, in truth, to her actual friends, who
looked at each other in intelligence, with frank amusement on bilham's
part and a shade of sadness on strether's.  strether's sadness
sprang--for the image had its grandeur--from his thinking how little he
himself was wrapt in his blanket, how little, in marble halls, all too
oblivious of the great father, he resembled a really majestic
aboriginal.  but he had also ano
 
 ___________________________
 
ther reflexion. "you've all of you here
so much visual sense that you've somehow all 'run' to it.  there are
moments when it strikes one that you haven't any other."

"any moral," little bilham explained, watching serenely, across the
garden, the several femmes du monde.  "but miss barrace has a moral
distinction," he kindly continued; speaking as if for strether's
benefit not less than for her own.

"have you?" strether, scarce knowing what he was about, asked of her
almost eagerly.

"oh not a distinction"--she was mightily amused at his tone--"mr.
bilham's too good.  but i think i may say a sufficiency.  yes, a
sufficiency. have you supposed strange things of me?"--and she fixed
him again, through all her tortoise-shell, with the droll interest of
it. "you are all indeed wonder
 
 ___________________________
 
s to be my doom--as if i were always one of their
habits:  it's wonderful! i dare say moreover," she pursued with an
interested gravity, "that i do, that we all do here, run too much to
mere eye.  but how can it be helped? we're all looking at each
other--and in the light of paris one sees what things resemble.  that's
what the light of paris seems always to show.  it's the fault of the
light of paris--dear old light!"

"dear old paris!" little bilham echoed.

"everything, every one shows," miss barrace went on.

"but for what they really are?" strether asked.

"oh i like your boston 'reallys'!  but sometimes--yes."

"dear old paris then!" strether resignedly sighed while for a moment
they looked at each other.  then he broke out:  "does madame de vionnet
do that? i mean really show for what she is?"

her answer was prompt.  "she's charming.  she's perfect."

"then why did you a minute ago say 'oh, oh, oh!' at her name?"

she easily remembered.  "why just because--!  she's wonderful."

"ah she
 
 ___________________________
 
 too?"--strether had almost a groan.

but miss barrace had meanwhile perceived relief.  "why not put your
question straight to the person who can answer it best?"

"no," said little bilham; "don't put any question; wait, rather--it
will be much more fun--to judge for yourself.  he has come to take you
to her."



ii


on which strether saw that chad was again at hand, and he afterwards
scarce knew, absurd as it may seem, what had then quickly occurred. the
moment concerned him, he felt, more deeply than he could have
explained, and he had a subsequ
 
 ___________________________
 
 sustained response to the reference: "you're
quite sure her husband's living?"

"oh dear, yes."

"ah then--!"

"ah then what?"

strether had after all to think.  "well, i'm sorry for them."  but it
didn't for the moment matter more than that.  he assured his young
friend he was quite content.  they wouldn't stir; were all right as
they were.  he didn't want to be introduced; had been introduced
already about as far as he could go.  he had seen moreover an
immensity; liked gloriani, who, as miss barrace kept saying, was
wonderful; had made out, he was sure, the half-dozen other 'men who
were distinguished, the artists, the critics and oh the great
dramatist--him it was easy to spot; but wanted--no, thanks, really--to
talk with none of them; having nothing at all to say and finding it
would do beautifully as it was; do beautifully because what it
was--well, was just simply too late. and when after this little bilham,
submissive and responsive, but with an eye to the consolation nearest,
easily 
 
 ___________________________
 
rld outside and the little plash in
the court, by the first empire and the relics in the stiff cabinets, by
matters as far off as those and by others as near as the unbroken clasp
of her hands in her lap and the look her expression had of being most
natural when her eyes were most fixed.  "you count upon me of course
for something really much greater than it sounds."

"oh it sounds great enough too!" she laughed at this.

he found himself in time on the point of telling her that she was, as
miss barrace called it, wonderful; but, catching himself up, he said
something else instead.  "what was it chad's idea then that you should
say to me?"

"ah his idea was simply what a man's idea always is--to put every
effort off on the woman."

"the 'woman'--?" strether slowly echoed.

"the woman he likes--and just in proportion as he likes her.  in
proportion too--for shifting the trouble--as she likes him."

strether followed it; then with an abruptness of his own: "how much do
you like chad?"

"just as 
 
 ___________________________
 
weight a moment.  that
idea, even though but transient and perhaps belated, had performed the
office of putting strether more at his ease, and the blurred picture
had already dropped--dropped with the sound of something else said and
with his becoming aware, by another quick turn, that gloriani was now
on the sofa talking with jeanne, while he himself had in his ears again
the familiar friendliness and the elusive meaning of the "oh, oh, oh!"
that had made him, a fortnight before, challenge miss barrace in vain.
she had always the air, this picturesque and original lady, who struck
him, so oddly, as both antique and modern--she had always the air of
taking up some joke that one had already had out with her.  the point
itself, no doubt, was what was antique, and the use she made of it what
was modern.  he felt just now that her good-natured irony did bear on
something, and it troubled him a little that she wouldn't be more
explicit only assuring him, with the pleasure of observation so visible

 
 ___________________________
 
in her, that she wouldn't tell him more for the world.  he could take
refuge but in asking her what she had done with waymarsh, though it
must be added that he felt himself a little on the way to a clue after
she had answered that this personage was, in the other room, engaged in
conversation with madame de vionnet.  he stared a moment at the image
of such a conjunction; then, for miss barrace's benefit, he wondered.
"is she too then under the charm--?"

"no, not a bit"--miss barrace was prompt.  "she makes nothing of him.
she's bored.  she won't help you with him."

"oh," strether laughed, "she can't do everything.

"of course not--wonderful as she is.  besides, he makes nothing of her.
she won't take him from me--though she wouldn't, no doubt, having other
affairs in hand, even if she could.  i've never," said miss barrace,
"seen her fail with any one before.  and to-night, when she's so
magnificent, it would seem to her strange--if she minded.  so at any
rate i have him 
 
 ___________________________
 
all.  je suis tranquille!"

strether understood, so far as that went; but he was feeling for his
clue.  "she strikes you to-night as particularly magnificent?"

"surely.  almost as i've never seen her.  doesn't she you? why it's for
you."

he persisted in his candour.  "'for' me--?"

"oh, oh, oh!" cried miss barrace, who persisted in the opposite of that
quality.

"well," he acutely admitted, "she is different.  she's gay."

"she's gay!" miss barrace laughed.  "and she has beautiful
shoulders--though there's nothing different in that."

"no," said strether, "one was sure of her shoulders. it isn't her
shoulders."

his companion, with renewed mirth and the finest sense,  between the
puffs of her cigarette, of the drollery of things, appeared to find
their conversation highly delightful.  "yes, it isn't her shoulders ."

"what then is it?" strether earnestly enquired.

"why, it's she--simply.  it's her mood.  it's her charm."

"of course it's
 
 ___________________________
 
 her charm, but we're speaking of the difference."
"well," miss barrace explained, "she's just brilliant, as we used to
say.  that's all.  she's various.  she's fifty women."

"ah but only one"--strether kept it clear--"at a time."

"perhaps.  but in fifty times--!"

"oh we shan't come to that," our friend declared; and the next moment
he had moved in another direction.  "will you answer me a plain
question?  will she ever divorce?"

miss barrace looked at him through all her tortoise-shell.  "why should
she?"

it wasn't what he had asked for, he signified; but he met it well
enough.  "to marry chad."

"why should she marry chad?"

"because i'm convinced she's very fond of him.  she has done wonders
for him."

"well then, how could she do more?  marrying a man, or woman either,"
miss barrace sagely went on, "is never the wonder for any jack and jill
can bring that off.  the wonder is their doing such things without
marrying."

strether 
 
 ___________________________
 
 had glanced over at gloriani
as at the unnamed subject of his allusion, but the next moment she had
understood; though indeed not before strether had noticed her momentary
mistake and wondered what might possibly be behind that too.  he
already knew that the sculptor admired madame de vionnet; but did this
admiration also represent an attachment of which the innocence was
discussable?  he was moving verily in a strange air and on ground not
of the firmest.  he looked hard for an instant at miss barrace, but she
had already gone on.  "all right with mr. newsome?  why of course she
is!"--and she got gaily back to the question of her own good friend. "i
dare say you're surprised that i'm not worn out with all i see--it
being so much!--of sitting bull.  but i'm not, you know--i don't mind
him; i bear up, and we get on beautifully.  i'm very strange; i'm like
that; and often i can't explain.  there are people who are supposed
interesting or remarkable or whatever, and who bore me to death; and
the
 
 ___________________________
 
likes it
so--at the doors of shops, the sight of him there helps me, when i come
out, to know my carriage away off in the rank.  but sometimes, for a
change, he goes with me into the shops, and then i've all i can do to
prevent his buying me things."

"he wants to 'treat' you?"  strether almost gasped at all he himself
hadn't thought of.  he had a sense of admiration.  "oh he's much more
in the real tradition than i.  yes," he mused, "it's the sacred rage."

"the sacred rage, exactly!"--and miss barrace, who hadn't before heard
this term applied, recognised its bearing with a clap of her gemmed
hands.  "now i do know why he's not banal.  but i do prevent him all
the same--and if you saw what he sometimes selects--from buying.  i
save him hundreds and hundreds.  i only take flowers."

"flowers?" strether echoed again with a rueful reflexion.  how many
nosegays had her present converser sent?

"innocent flowers," she pursued, "as much as he likes.  and he sends me
splendours; he knows all the be
 
 ___________________________
 
rmed it. "oh, oh,
oh!"

"no--not for myself.  i seem to have a life only for other people."

"ah for them and with them! just now for instance with--"

"well, with whom?" he asked before she had had time to say.

his tone had the effect of making her hesitate and even, as he guessed,
speak with a difference.  "say with miss gostrey.  what do you do for
her?"  it really made him wonder.  "nothing at all!"



iii


madame de vionnet, having meanwhile come in, was at present close to
them, and miss barrace hereupon, instead of risking a rejoinder, became
again with a look that measured her from top to toe all mere
long-handled appreciative tortoise-shell.  she had struck our friend,
from the first of her appearing, as dressed for a great occasion, and
she met still more than on either of the others the conception
reawakened in him at their garden-party, the idea of the femme du monde
in her habit as she lived.  her bare shoulders and arms were white and
beautiful; the materials of her dress, a mi
 
 ___________________________
 
was what they appeared to convey;
yet how he was fixed was exactly what strether didn't see.  however,
perhaps he should see now.

"are you capable of the very great kindness of going to relieve
newsome, for a few minutes, of the rather crushing responsibility of
madame gloriani, while i say a word, if he'll allow me, to mr.
strether, of whom i've a question to ask?  our host ought to talk a bit
to those other ladies, and i'll come back in a minute to your rescue."
she made this proposal to miss barrace as if her consciousness of a
special duty had just flickered-up, but that lady's recognition of
strether's little start at it--as at a betrayal on the speaker's part
of a domesticated state--was as mute as his own comment; and after an
instant, when their fellow guest had good-naturedly left them, he had
been given something else to think of.  "why has maria so suddenly
gone?  do you know?"  that was the question madame de vionnet had
brought with her.

"i'm afraid i've no reason to give you bu
 
 ___________________________
 
 the other day? didn't you
adjure me, in accents i shall never forget, to see, while i've a
chance, everything i can?--and really to see, for it must have been
that only you meant.  well, you did me no end of good, and i'm doing my
best.  i do make it out a situation."

"so do i!" strether went on after a moment.  but he had the next minute
an inconsequent question.  "how comes chad so mixed up, anyway?"

"ah, ah, ah!"--and little bilham fell back on his cushions.

it reminded our friend of miss barrace, and he felt again the brush of
his sense of moving in a maze of mystic closed allusions.  yet he kept
hold of his thread.  "of course i understand really; only the general
transformation makes me occasionally gasp.  chad with such a voice in
the settlement of the future of a little countess--no," he declared,
"it takes more time! you say moreover," he resumed, "that we're
inevitably, people like you and me, out of the running.  the curious
fact remains that chad himself isn't.  the situation d
 
 ___________________________
 
 them.  it's a friendship, of a
beautiful sort; and that's what makes them so strong.  they're
straight, they feel; and they keep each other up. it's doubtless she,
however, who, as you yourself have hinted, feels it most."

little bilham appeared to wonder what he had hinted.  "feels most that
they're straight?"

"well, feels that she is, and the strength that comes from it.  she
keeps him up--she keeps the whole thing up.  when people are able to
it's fine.  she's wonderful, wonderful, as miss barrace says; and he
is, in his way, too; however, as a mere man, he may sometimes rebel and
not feel that he finds his account in it.  she has simply given him an
immense moral lift, and what that can explain is prodigious. that's why
i speak of it as a situation.  it is one, if there ever was."  and
strether, with his head back and his eyes on the ceiling, seemed to
lose himself in the vision of it.

his companion attended deeply.  "you state it much better than i
could." "oh you see it doesn't conce
 
 ___________________________
 
im--certain of not wholly missing him on
her return--before her disappearance.  if furthermore she didn't burden
him with letters it was frankly because of her sense of the other great
commerce he had to carry on.  he himself, at the end of a fortnight,
had written twice, to show how his generosity could be trusted; but he
reminded himself in each case of mrs. newsome's epistolary manner at
the times when mrs. newsome kept off delicate ground.  he sank his
problem, he talked of waymarsh and miss barrace, of little bilham and
the set over the river, with whom he had again had tea, and he was
easy, for convenience, about chad and madame de vionnet and jeanne.  he
admitted that he continued to see them, he was decidedly so confirmed a
haunter of chad's premises and that young man's practical intimacy with
them was so undeniably great; but he had his reason for not attempting
to render for miss gostrey's benefit the impression of these last days.
that would be to tell her too much about himself--i
 
 ___________________________
 
which the
heat of justice was measured and shaded.  he had looked very hard, as
if affectionately sorry for the friend--the friend of fifty-five--whose
frivolity had had thus to be recorded; becoming, however, but obscurely
sententious and leaving his companion to formulate a charge.  it was in
this general attitude that he had of late altogether taken refuge; with
the drop of discussion they were solemnly sadly superficial; strether
recognised in him the mere portentous rumination to which miss barrace
had so good-humouredly described herself as assigning a corner of her
salon.  it was quite as if he knew his surreptitious step had been
divined, and it was also as if he missed the chance to explain the
purity of his motive; but this privation of relief should be precisely
his small penance:  it was not amiss for strether that he should find
himself to that degree uneasy.  if he had been challenged or accused,
rebuked for meddling or otherwise pulled up, he would probably have
shown, on his ow
 
 ___________________________
 
imself.  he
wanted to feel right about it, but could only, at the best, for the
time, feel vague. "i shall look to you, you know, immensely," our
friend had said, "to help me with them," and he had been quite
conscious of the effect of the remark, and of others of the same sort,
on his comrade's sombre sensibility.  he had insisted on the fact that
waymarsh would quite like mrs. pocock--one could be certain he would:
he would be with her about everything, and she would also be with him,
and miss barrace's nose, in short, would find itself out of joint.

strether had woven this web of cheerfulness while they waited in the
court for chad; he had sat smoking cigarettes to keep himself quiet
while, caged and leonine, his fellow traveller paced and turned before
him.  chad newsome was doubtless to be struck, when he arrived, with
the sharpness of their opposition at this particular hour; he was to
remember, as a part of it, how waymarsh came with him and with strether
to the street and stood there 
 
 ___________________________
 
ion a moment's thought.  "and she's sure mrs. pocock
will--?"

"no, i say that for you.  she likes your liking her; it's so much, as
it were," chad laughed, "to the good.  however, she doesn't despair of
sarah either, and is prepared, on her own side, to go all lengths."

"in the way of appreciation?"

"yes, and of everything else.  in the way of general amiability,
hospitality and welcome.  she's under arms," chad laughed again; "she's
prepared."

strether took it in; then as if an echo of miss barrace were in the
air:  "she's wonderful."

"you don't begin to know how wonderful!"

there was a depth in it, to strether's ear, of confirmed luxury--almost
a kind of unconscious insolence of proprietorship; but the effect of
the glimpse was not at this moment to foster speculation: there was
something so conclusive in so much graceful and generous assurance.  it
was in fact a fresh evocation; and the evocation had before many
minutes another consequence.  "well, i shall see her oftener now.  i
shal
 
 ___________________________
 

"do you think she looked at me--or even at you--as if she had?"
strether easily dismissed that irony.  "every one, you see, must strike
her as having somebody.  you've got chad--and chad has got you."

"i see"--she made of it what she could.  "and you've got maria."

well, he on his side accepted that.  "i've got maria.  and maria has
got me.  so it goes."

"but mr. jim--whom has he got?"

"oh he has got--or it's as if he had--the whole place."

"but for mr. waymarsh"--she recalled--"isn't miss barrace before any
one else?"

he shook his head.  "miss barrace is a raffinee, and her amusement
won't lose by mrs. pocock.  it will gain rather--especially if sarah
triumphs and she comes in for a view of it."

"how well you know us!" madame de vionnet, at this, frankly sighed.

"no--it seems to me it's we that i know.  i know sarah--it's perhaps on
that ground only that my feet are firm.  waymarsh will take her round
while chad takes jim--and i shall be, i assure you delighted for both
of them.  sar
 
 ___________________________
 
 had positively motions and flutters of
this conscious hour-to-hour kind, temporary surrenders to irony, to
fancy, frequent instinctive snatches at the growing rose of
observation, constantly stronger for him, as he felt, in scent and
colour, and in which he could bury his nose even to wantonness.  this
last resource was offered him, for that matter, in the very form of his
next clear perception--the vision of a prompt meeting, in the doorway
of the room, between little bilham and brilliant miss barrace, who was
entering as bilham withdrew.  she had apparently put him a question, to
which he had replied by turning to indicate his late interlocutor;
toward whom, after an interrogation further aided by a resort to that
optical machinery which seemed, like her other ornaments, curious and
archaic, the genial lady, suggesting more than ever for her fellow
guest the old french print, the historic portrait, directed herself
with an intention that strether instantly met.  he knew in advance the
first
 
 ___________________________
 
 for me at home." and
then as this elicited from his companion her gay "oh, oh, oh!" he
explained that he meant sitting up in suspense and prayer.  "we thought
it on the whole better she shouldn't be present; and either way of
course it's a terrible worry for her." he abounded in the sense of his
appeal to the ladies, and they might take their choice of his doing so
from humility or from pride.  "yet she inclines to believe i shall come
out."

"oh i incline to believe too you'll come out!"--miss barrace, with her
laugh, was not to be behind.  "only the question's about where, isn't
it?  however," she happily continued, "if it's anywhere at all it must
be very far on, mustn't it?  to do us justice, i think, you know," she
laughed, "we do, among us all, want you rather far on.  yes, yes," she
repeated in her quick droll way; "we want you very, very far on!" after
which she wished to know why he had thought it better maria shouldn't
be present.

"oh," he replied, "it was really her own idea.  i s
 
 ___________________________
 
hould have wished
it.  but she dreads responsibility."

"and isn't that a new thing for her?"

"to dread it?  no doubt--no doubt.  but her nerve has given way."

miss barrace looked at him a moment.  "she has too much at stake." then
less gravely:  "mine, luckily for me, holds out."

"luckily for me too"--strether came back to that.  "my own isn't so
firm, my appetite for responsibility isn't so sharp, as that i haven't
felt the very principle of this occasion to be 'the more the merrier.'
if we are so merry it's because chad has understood so well."

"he has understood amazingly," said miss barrace.

"it's wonderful--strether anticipated for her.

"it's wonderful!"
 
 ___________________________
 
 it, they largely and recklessly laughed.  but she presently added:
"oh i see the principle.  if one didn't one would be lost.  but when
once one has got hold of it--"

"it's as simple as twice two!  from the moment he had to do something--"

"a crowd"--she took him straight up--"was the only thing?  rather,
rather:  a rumpus of sound," she laughed, "or nothing.  mrs. pocock's
built in, or built out--whichever you call it; she's packed so tight
she can't move.  she's in splendid isolation"--miss barrace embroidered
the theme.

strether followed, but scrupulous of justice.  "yet with every one in
the place successively introduced to her."

"wonderfully--but just so that it does build her out.  she's bricked
up, she's buried alive!"

strether seemed for a moment to look at it; but it brought him to a
sigh.  "oh but she's not dead!  it will take more than this to kill
her."

his companion had a pause that might have been for pity.  "no, i can't
pretend i think she's finished--or that it's for mor
 
 ___________________________
 
had--"

"he wouldn't"--she quite understood--"have taken all this trouble? i
dare say not, and, if i may be quite free and dreadful, i very much
hope he won't take any more.  of course i won't pretend now," she
added, "not to know what it's a question of."

"oh every one must know now," poor strether thoughtfully admitted; "and
it's strange enough and funny enough that one should feel everybody
here at this very moment to be knowing and watching and waiting."

"yes--isn't it indeed funny?"  miss barrace quite rose to it. "that's
the way we are in paris." she was always pleased with a new
contribution to that queerness.  "it's wonderful!  but, you know," she
declared, "it all depends on you.  i don't want to turn the knife in
your vitals, but that's naturally what you just now meant by our all
being on top of you.  we know you as the hero of the drama, and we're
gathered to see what you'll do."

strether looked at her a moment with a light perhaps slightly obscured.
"i think that must be why th
 
 ___________________________
 
y when you
will."

but she gave it to him back.  "it's nothing to the way you will when
you must."

he winced at it as at the very voice of prophecy, and it kept him a
moment quiet.  he detained her, however, on her appearing about to
leave him alone in the rather cold clearance their talk had made.
"there positively isn't a sign of a hero to-night; the hero's dodging
and shirking, the hero's ashamed.  therefore, you know, i think, what
you must all really be occupied with is the heroine."

miss barrace took a minute.  "the heroine?"

"the heroine.  i've treated her," said strether, "not a bit like a
hero.  oh," he sighed, "i don't do it well!"

she eased him off.  "you do it as you can."  and then after another
hesitation:  "i think she's satisfied."

but he remained compunctious.  "i haven't been near her.  i haven't
looked at her."

"ah then you've lost a good deal!"

he showed he knew it.  "she's more wonderful than ever?"

"than ever.  with mr. pocock."

strether wondered.  "madame de vio
 
 ___________________________
 
nnet--with jim?"

"madame de vionnet--with 'jim.'"  miss barrace was historic.

"and what's she doing with him?"

"ah you must ask him!"

strether's face lighted again at the prospect.  "it will be amusing to
do so."  yet he continued to wonder.  "but she must have some idea."

"of course she has--she has twenty ideas.  she has in the first place,"
said miss barrace, swinging a little her tortoise-shell, "that of doing
her part.  her part is to help you."

it came out as nothing had come yet; links were missing and connexions
unnamed, but it was suddenly as if they were at the heart of their
subject.  "yes; how much more she does it," strether gravely reflected,
"than i help her!"  it all came over him as with the near presence of
the beauty, the grace, the intense, dissimulated spirit with which he
had, as he said, been putting off contact.  "she has cour
 
 ___________________________
 
age."

"ah she has courage!" miss barrace quite agreed; and it was as if for a
moment they saw the quantity in each other's face.

but indeed the whole thing was present.  "how much she must care!"

"ah there it is.  she does care.  but it isn't, is it," miss barrace
considerately added, "as if you had ever had any doubt of that?"

strether seemed suddenly to like to feel that he really never had. "why
of course it's the whole point."

"voila!" miss barrace smiled.

"it's why one came out," strether went on.  "and it's why one has
stayed so long.  and it's also"--he abounded--"why one's going home.
it's why, it's why--"

"it's why everything!" she concurred.  "it's why she might be
to-night--for all she looks and shows, and for all your friend 'jim'
does--about twenty years old.  that's another of her ideas; to be for
him, and to be quite easily and charmingly, as young as a little girl."

strether assisted at his distance.  "'for him'?  for chad-
 
 ___________________________
 


"for chad, in a manner, naturally, always.  but in particular to-night
for mr.  pocock."  and then as her friend still stared: "yes, it is of
a bravery but that's what she has:  her high sense of duty."  it was
more than sufficiently before them.  "when mr. newsome has his hands so
embarrassed with his sister--"

"it's quite the least"--strether filled it out--"that she should take
his sister's husband?  certainly--quite the least.  so she has taken
him."

"she has taken him."  it was all miss barrace had meant.

still it remained enough.  "it must be funny."

"oh it is funny."  that of course essentially went with it.

but it brought them back.  "how indeed then she must care!" in answer to
which strether's entertainer dropped a comprehensive "ah!" expressive
perhaps of some impatience for the time he took to get used to it.  she
herself had got used to it long before.



ii


when one morning within the week he perceived the whole thing to be
really at last upon him strether's immediate fe
 
 ___________________________
 
ay--!"  but she caught herself up, and her
comment on his description rang out sufficiently loud.  "do you
consider her even an apology for a decent woman?"

ah there it was at last! she put the matter more crudely than, for his
own mixed purposes, he had yet had to do; but essentially it was all
one matter.  it was so much--so much; and she treated it, poor lady, as
so little.  he grew conscious, as he was now apt to do, of a strange
smile, and the next moment he found himself talking like miss barrace.
"she has struck me from the first as wonderful.  i've been thinking too
moreover that, after all, she would probably have represented even for
yourself something rather new and rather good."

he was to have given mrs. pocock with this, however, but her best
opportunity for a sound of derision.  "rather new?  i hope so with all
my heart!"

"i mean," he explained, "that she might have affected you by her
exquisite amiability--a real revelation, it has seemed to myself; her
high rarity, her disti
 
 ___________________________
 
ul.  at any rate, even so far as
it's true, we've thrust on you appearances that you've had to take in
and that have therefore made your obligation.  ugly or beautiful--it
doesn't matter what we call them--you were getting on without them, and
that's where we're detestable.  we bore you--that's where we are.  and
we may well--for what we've cost you.  all you can do now is not to
think at all.  and i who should have liked to seem to you--well,
sublime!"

he could only after a moment re-echo miss barrace.  "you're wonderful!"

"i'm old and abject and hideous"--she went on as without hearing him.
"abject above all.  or old above all.  it's when one's old that it's
worst.  i don't care what becomes of it--let what will; there it is.
it's a doom--i know it; you can't see it more than i do myself.  things
have to happen as they will." with which she came back again to what,
face to face with him, had so quite broken down.  "of course you
wouldn't, even if possible, and no matter what may happen to 