ms
simply to appal our actual, our general weaker, digestion. "harking
back to make up" took at any rate more doing, as the phrase is, not
only than the reader of to-day demands, but than he will tolerate at
any price any call upon him either to understand or remotely to
measure; and for the beauty of the thing when done the current
editorial mind in particular appears wholly without sense.  it is not,
however, primarily for either of these reasons, whatever their weight,
that strether's friend waymarsh is so keenly clutched at, on the
threshold of the book, or that no less a pounce is made on maria
gostrey--without even the pretext, either, of her being, in essence,
strether's friend.  she is the reader's friend much rather--in
consequence of dispositions that make him so eminently require one; and
she acts in that capacity, and really in that capacity alone, with
exemplary devotion from beginning to and of the book.  she is an
enrolled, a direct, aid to lucidity; she is in fine, to tear off 
 
 ___________________________
 
her
mask, the most unmitigated and abandoned of ficelles.  half the
dramatist's art, as we well know--since if we don't it's not the fault
of the proofs that lie scattered about us--is in the use of ficelles;
by which i mean in a deep dissimulation of his dependence on them.
waymarsh only to a slighter degree belongs, in the whole business, less
to my subject than to my treatment of it; the interesting proof, in
these connexions, being that one has but to take one's subject for the
stuff of drama to interweave with enthusiasm as many gostreys as need
be.

the material of "the ambassadors," conforming in this respect exactly
to that of "the wings of the dove," published just before it, is taken
absolutely for the stuff of drama; so that, availing myself of the
opportunity gi
 
 ___________________________
 
ion
with it.  i consciously fail to shrink in fact from that
extravagance--i risk it rather, for the sake of the moral involved;
which is not that the particular production before us exhausts the
interesting questions it raises, but that the novel remains still,
under the right persuasion, the most independent, most elastic, most
prodigious of literary forms.


henry james.





book first



i

strether's first question, when he reached the hotel, was about his
friend; yet on his learning that waymarsh was apparently not to arrive
till evening he was not wholly disconcerted.  a telegram from him
bespeaking a room "only if not noisy," reply paid, was produced for the
enquirer at the office, so that the understanding they should meet at
chester rather than at liverpool remained to that extent sound.  the
same secret principle, however, that had prompted strether not
absolutely to desire waymarsh's presence at the dock, that had led him
thus to postpone for a few hours his enjoyment of it, now o
 
 ___________________________
 
perated to
make him feel he could still wait without disappointment.  they would
dine together at the worst, and, with all respect to dear old
waymarsh--if not even, for that matter, to himself--there was little
fear that in the sequel they shouldn't see enough of each other.  the
principle i have just mentioned as operating had been, with the most
newly disembarked of the two men, wholly instinctive--the fruit of a
sharp sense that, delightful as it would be to find himself looking,
after so much separation, into his comrade's face, his business would
be a trifle bungled should he simply arrange for this countenance to
present itself to the n
 
 ___________________________
 
e, had been indifferently
aware of the number of persons who esteemed themselves fortunate in
being, unlike himself, "met," and had even independently, unsociably,
alone, without encounter or relapse and by mere quiet evasion, given
his afternoon and evening to the immediate and the sensible.  they
formed a qualified draught of europe, an afternoon and an evening on
the banks of the mersey, but such as it was he took his potion at least
undiluted.  he winced a little, truly, at the thought that waymarsh
might be already at chester; he reflected that, should he have to
describe himself there as having "got in" so early, it would be
difficult to make the interval look particularly eager; but he was like
a man who, elatedly finding in his pocket more money than usual,
handles it a while and idly and pleasantly chinks it before addressing
himself to the business of spending.  that he was prepared to be vague
to waymarsh about the hour of the ship's touching, and that he both
wanted extremely to se
 
 ___________________________
 
ip's company.  nothing had actually passed between them,
and he would as little have been able to say what had been the sign of
her face for him on the first occasion as to name the ground of his
present recognition. recognition at any rate appeared to prevail on her
own side as well--which would only have added to the mystery.  all she
now began by saying to him nevertheless was that, having chanced to
catch his enquiry, she was moved to ask, by his leave, if it were
possibly a question of mr. waymarsh of milrose connecticut--mr.
waymarsh the american lawyer.

"oh yes," he replied, "my very well-known friend.  he's to meet me
here, coming up from malvern, and i supposed he'd already have arrived.
but he doesn't come till later, and i'm relieved not to have kept him.
do you know him?" strether wound up.

it wasn't till after he had spoken that he became aware of how much
there had been in him of response; when the tone of her own rejoinder,
as well as the play of something more in her face--so
 
 ___________________________
 
 him at milrose--where i used sometimes, a good while ago, to
stay; i had friends there who were friends of his, and i've been at his
house.  i won't answer for it that he would know me," strether's new
acquaintance pursued; "but i should be delighted to see him.  perhaps,"
she added, "i shall--for i'm staying over."  she paused while our
friend took in these things, and it was as if a good deal of talk had
already passed. they even vaguely smiled at it, and strether presently
observed that mr. waymarsh would, no doubt, be easily to be seen. this,
however, appeared to affect the lady as if she might have advanced too
far.  she appeared to have no reserves about anything. "oh," she said,
"he won't care!"--and she immediately thereupon remarked that she
believed strether knew the munsters; the munsters being the people he
had seen her with at liverpool.

but he didn't, it happened, know the munsters well enough to give the
case much of a lift; so that they were left together as if over the
mere 
 
 ___________________________
 
emed
nothing else to serve.  their attitude remained, none the less, that of
not forsaking the board; and the effect of this in turn was to give
them the appearance of having accepted each other with an absence of
preliminaries practically complete.  they moved along the hall
together, and strether's companion threw off that the hotel had the
advantage of a garden.  he was aware by this time of his strange
inconsequence:  he had shirked the intimacies of the steamer and had
muffled the shock of waymarsh only to find himself forsaken, in this
sudden case, both of avoidance and of caution.  he passed, under this
unsought protection and before he had so much as gone up to his room,
into the garden of the hotel, and at the end of ten minutes had agreed
to meet there again, as soon as he should have made himself tidy, the
dispenser of such good assurances.  he wanted to look at the town, and
they would forthwith look together.  it was almost as if she had been
in possession and received him as a gu
 
 ___________________________
 
n response, had been, he would have sketched to himself his
impression of her as:  "well, she's more thoroughly civilized--!" if
"more thoroughly than whom?" would not have been for him a sequel to
this remark, that was just by reason of his deep consciousness of the
bearing of his comparison.

the amusement, at all events, of a civilisation intenser was
what--familiar compatriot as she was, with the full tone of the
compatriot and the rattling link not with mystery but only with dear
dyspeptic waymarsh--she appeared distinctly to promise.  his pause
while he felt in his overcoat was positively the pause of confidence,
and it enabled his eyes to make out as much of a case for her, in
proportion, as her own made out for himself.  she affected him as
almost insolently young; but an easily carried five-and-thirty could
still do that.  she was, however, like himself marked and wan; only it
naturally couldn't have been known to him how much a spectator looking
from one to the other might have disce
 
 ___________________________
 
eserve the little token he had just tucked in.  he gazed
with unseeing lingering eyes as he followed some of the implications of
his act, asking himself if he really felt admonished to qualify it as
disloyal.  it was prompt, it was possibly even premature, and there was
little doubt of the expression of face the sight of it would have
produced in a certain person.  but if it was "wrong"--why then he had
better not have come out at all.  at this, poor man, had he
already--and even before meeting waymarsh--arrived.  he had believed he
had a limit, but the limit had been transcended within thirty-six
hours.  by how long a space on the plane of manners or even of morals,
moreover, he felt still more sharply after maria gostrey had come back
to him and with a gay decisive "so now--!" led him forth into the
world. this counted, it struck him as he walked beside her with his
overcoat on an arm, his umbrella under another and his personal
pasteboard a little stiffly retained between forefinger and thu
 
 ___________________________
 
to homely streets and under the brows
of gables, views of cathedral tower and waterside fields, of huddled
english town and ordered english country.  too deep almost for words
was the delight of these things to strether; yet as deeply mixed with
it were certain images of his inward picture.  he had trod this walks
in the far-off time, at twenty-five; but that, instead of spoiling it,
only enriched it for present feeling and marked his renewal as a thing
substantial enough to share.  it was with waymarsh he should have
shared it, and he was now accordingly taking from him something that
was his due.  he looked repeatedly at his watch, and when he had done
so for the fifth time miss gostrey took him up.

"you're doing something that you think not right."

it so touched the place that he quite changed colour and his laugh grew
almost awkward.  "am i enjoying it as much as that?"

"you're not enjoying it, i think, so much as you ought."

"i see"--he appeared thoughtfully to agree.  "great is my pr
 
 ___________________________
 
ficiently separate fashion
within range of the hotel-door.  the young lady they had left in the
glass cage watched as if she had come to await them on the threshold.
at her side stood a person equally interested, by his attitude, in
their return, and the effect of the sight of whom was instantly to
determine for strether another of those responsive arrests that we have
had so repeatedly to note.  he left it to miss gostrey to name, with
the fine full bravado as it almost struck him, of her "mr. waymarsh!"
what was to have been, what--he more than ever felt as his short stare
of suspended welcome took things in--would have been, but for herself,
his doom.  it was already upon him even at that distance--mr. waymarsh
was for his part joyless.



ii

he had none the less to confess to this friend that evening that he
knew almost nothing about her, and it was a deficiency that waymarsh,
even with his memory refreshed by contact, by her own prompt and lucid
allusions and enquiries, by their having p
 
 ___________________________
 
recollection of
miss gostrey, and two or three questions that she put to him about
those members of his circle had, to strether's observation, the same
effect he himself had already more directly felt--the effect of
appearing to place all knowledge, for the time, on this original
woman's side.  it interested him indeed to mark the limits of any such
relation for her with his friend as there could possibly be a question
of, and it particularly struck him that they were to be marked
altogether in waymarsh's quarter.  this added to his own sense of
having gone far with her-gave him an early illustration of a much
shorter course.  there was a certitude he immediately grasped--a
conviction that waymarsh would quite fail, as it were, and on whatever
degree of acquaintances to profit by her.

there had been after the first interchange among the three a talk of
some five minutes in the hall, and then the two men had adjourned to
the garden, miss gostrey for the time disappearing. strether in due
cours
 
 ___________________________
 
cked out; he
roamed, fidgeted and wasted time; but he was to have his more intimate
session with his friend before the evening closed.

it was late--not till strether had spent an hour upstairs with
him--that this subject consented to betake himself to doubtful rest.
dinner and the subsequent stroll by moonlight--a dream, on strether's
part, of romantic effects rather prosaically merged in a mere missing
of thicker coats--had measurably intervened, and this midnight
conference was the result of waymarsh's having (when they were free, as
he put it, of their fashionable friend) found the smoking-room not
quite what he wanted, and yet bed what he wanted less.  his most
frequent form of words was that he knew himself, and they were applied
on this occasion to his certainty of not sleeping.  he knew himself
well enough to know that he should have a night of prowling unless he
should succeed, as a preliminary, in getting prodigiously tired.  if
the effort directed to this end involved till a late ho
 
 ___________________________
 
ur the presence
of strether--consisted, that is, in the detention of the latter for
full discourse--there was yet an impression of minor discipline
involved for our friend in the picture waymarsh made as he sat in
trousers and shirt on the edge of his couch.  with his long legs
extended and his large back much bent, he nursed alternately, for an
almost incredible time, his elbows and his beard.  he struck his
visitor as extremely, as almost wilfully uncomfortable; yet what had
this been for strether, from that first glimpse of him disconcerted in
the porch of the hotel, but the predominant notes.  the discomfort was
in a manner contagious, as well as also in a manner inconsequent and
un
 
 ___________________________
 
founded; the visitor felt that unless he should get used to it--or
unless waymarsh himself should--it would constitute a menace for his
own prepared, his own already confirmed, consciousness of the
agreeable.  on their first going up together to the room strether had
selected for him waymarsh had looked it over in silence and with a sigh
that represented for his companion, if not the habit of disapprobation,
at least the despair of felicity; and this look had recurred to
strether as the key of much he had since observed. "europe," he had
begun to gather from these things, had up to now rather failed of its
message to him; he hadn't got into tune with it and had at the end of
three months almost renounced any such expectation.

he really appeared at present to insist on that by just 
 
 ___________________________
 
such ideal justice.  the head was bigger, the eyes finer, than
they need have been for the career; but that only meant, after all,
that the career was itself expressive.  what it expressed at midnight
in the gas-glaring bedroom at chester was that the subject of it had,
at the end of years, barely escaped, by flight in time, a general
nervous collapse.  but this very proof of the full life, as the full
life was understood at milrose, would have made to strether's
imagination an element in which waymarsh could have floated easily had
he only consented to float.  alas nothing so little resembled floating
as the rigour with which, on the edge of his bed, he hugged his posture
of prolonged impermanence.  it suggested to his comrade something that
always, when kept up, worried him--a person established in a
railway-coach with a forward inclination.  it represented the angle at
which poor waymarsh was to sit through the ordeal of europe.

thanks to the stress of occupation, the strain of professions
 
 ___________________________
 
 clustered and expectant,
like a somewhat defiant family-group, on the doorstep of their
residence.  the room was narrow for its length, and the occupant of the
bed thrust so far a pair of slippered feet that the visitor had almost
to step over them in his recurrent rebounds from his chair to fidget
back and forth.  there were marks the friends made on things to talk
about, and on things not to, and one of the latter in particular fell
like the tap of chalk on the blackboard. married at thirty, waymarsh
had not lived with his wife for fifteen years, and it came up vividly
between them in the glare of the gas that strether wasn't to ask about
her.  he knew they were still separate and that she lived at hotels,
travelled in europe, painted her face and wrote her husband abusive
letters, of not one of which, to a certainty, that sufferer spared
himself the perusal; but he respected without difficulty the cold
twilight that had settled on this side of his companion's life.  it was
a province in wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ich mystery reigned and as to which waymarsh had never
spoken the informing word.  strether, who wanted to do him the highest
justice wherever he could do it, singularly admired him for the dignity
of this reserve, and even counted it as one of the grounds--grounds all
handled and numbered--for ranking him, in the range of their
acquaintance, as a success.  he was a success, waymarsh, in spite of
overwork, or prostration, of sensible shrinkage, of his wife's letters
and of his not liking europe.  strether would have reckoned his own
career less futile had he been able to put into it anything so handsome
as so much fine silence.  one might one's self easily have left mrs.
waymarsh; and one would assuredly have paid one's tribute to the ideal
in covering with that attitude the derision of having been left by her.
her husband had held his tongue and had made a large income; an
 
 ___________________________
 
d these
were in especial the achievements as to which strether envied him.  our
friend had had indeed on his side too a subject for silence, which he
fully appreciated; but it was a matter of a different sort, and the
figure of the income he had arrived at had never been high enough to
look any one in the face.

"i don't know as i quite see what you require it for.  you don't appear
sick to speak of."  it was of europe waymarsh thus finally spoke.

"well," said strether, who fell as much as possible into step, "i guess
i don't feel sick now that i've started.  but i had pretty well run
down before i did start."

waymarsh raised his melancholy look.  "ain't you about up to your usual
average?"

it was not quite pointedly sceptical, but it seemed somehow a plea for
the purest veracity, and it thereby affected our friend as the very
voice of milrose.  he had long since made a mental distinction--though
never in truth dar
 
 ___________________________
 
n the voice of milrose and
the voice even of woollett.  it was the former he felt, that was most
in the real tradition.  there had been occasions in his past when the
sound of it had reduced him to temporary confusion, and the present,
for some reason, suddenly became such another.  it was nevertheless no
light matter that the very effect of his confusion should be to make
him again prevaricate.  "that description hardly does justice to a man
to whom it has done such a lot of good to see you."

waymarsh fixed on his washing-stand the silent detached stare with
which milrose in person, as it were, might have marked the
unexpectedness of a compliment from woollett, and strether for his
part, felt once more like woollett in person.  "i mean," his friend
presently continued, "that your appearance isn't as bad as i've seen
it:  it compares favourably with what it was when i last noticed it."
on this appearance waymarsh's eyes yet failed to rest; it was almost as
if they obeyed an instinct of propri
 
 ___________________________
 
had the first sign of that
lift i was led to expect."  with this he broke out more earnestly.
"look here--i want to go back."

his eyes were all attached to strether's now, for he was one of the men
who fully face you when they talk of themselves.  this enabled his
friend to look at him hard and immediately to appear to the highest
advantage in his eyes by doing so.  "that's a genial thing to say to a
fellow who has come out on purpose to meet you!"

nothing could have been finer, on this, than waymarsh's sombre glow.
"have you come out on purpose?"

"well--very largely."

"i thought from the way you wrote there was something back of it."

strether hesitated.  "back of my desire to be with you?"

"back of your prostration."

strether, with a smile made more dim by a certain consciousness, shook
his head.  "there are all the causes of it!"

"and no particular cause that seemed most to drive you?"

our friend could at last conscientiously answer.  "yes.  one.  there is
a matter that has had much
 
 ___________________________
 
 to do with my coming out."

waymarsh waited a little.  "too private to mention?"

"no, not too private--for you.  only rather complicated."

"well," said waymarsh, who had waited again, "i may lose my mind over
here, but i don't know as i've done so yet."

"oh you shall have the whole thing.  but not tonight."

waymarsh seemed to sit stiffer and to hold his elbows tighter.  "why
not--if i can't sleep?"

"because, my dear man, i can!"

"then where's your prostration?"

"just in that--that i can put in eight hours."  and strether brought it
out that if waymarsh didn't "gain" it was because he didn't go to bed:
the result of which was, in its order, that, to do the latter justice,
he permitted his friend to insist on his really getting settled.
strether, with a kind coercive hand for it, assisted him to this
cons
 
 ___________________________
 
ummation, and again found his own part in their relation
auspiciously enlarged by the smaller touches of lowering the lamp and
seeing to a sufficiency of blanket.  it somehow ministered for him to
indulgence to feel waymarsh, who looked unnaturally big and black in
bed, as much tucked in as a patient in a hospital and, with his
covering up to his chin, as much simplified by it he hovered in vague
pity, to be brief, while his companion challenged him out of the
bedclothes.  "is she really after you?  is that what's behind?"

strether felt an uneasiness at the direction taken by his companion's
insight, but he played a little at uncertainty.  "behind my coming out?"

"behind your prostration or whatever.  it's genera
 
 ___________________________
 
lly felt, you know,
that she follows you up pretty close."

strether's candour was never very far off.  "oh it has occurred to you
that i'm literally running away from mrs. newsome?"

"well, i haven't known but what you are.  you're a very attractive man,
strether.  you've seen for yourself," said waymarsh "what that lady
downstairs makes of it.  unless indeed," he rambled on with an effect
between the ironic and the anxious, "it's you who are after her.  is
mrs. newsome over here?"  he spoke as with a droll dread of her.

it made his friend--though rather dimly--smile.  "dear no she's safe,
thank goodness--as i think i more and more feel--at home.  she thought
of coming, but she gave it up.  i've come in a manner instead of her;
and come to that extent--for you're right in your inference--on her
 
 ___________________________
 

business.  so you see there is plenty of connexion."

waymarsh continued to see at least all there was.  "involving
accordingly the particular one i've referred to?"

strether took another turn about the room, giving a twitch to his
companion's blanket and finally gaining the door.  his feeling was that
of a nurse who had earned personal rest by having made everything
straight.  "involving more things than i can think of breaking ground
on now.  but don't be afraid--you shall have them from me:  you'll
probably find yourself having quite as much of them as
 
 ___________________________
 
 you can do with.
i shall--if we keep together--very much depend on your impression of
some of them."

waymarsh's acknowledgement of this tribute was characteristically
indirect.  "you mean to say you don't believe we will keep together?"

"i only glance at the danger," strether paternally said, "because when
i hear you wail to go back i seem to see you open up such possibilities
of folly."

waymarsh took it--silent a little--like a large snubbed child "what are
you going to do with me?"

it was the very question strether himself had put to miss gostrey, and
he wondered if he had sounded like that.  but he at least could be more
definite.  "i'm going to take you right down to london."

"oh i've been down to london!" waymarsh more softly moaned.  "i've no
use, strether, for anything down there."

"well," said strether, good-humouredly, "i guess you've some use for
me."

"so i've got to go?"

 
 ___________________________
 

"oh you've got to go further yet."

"well," waymarsh sighed, "do your damnedest! only you will tell me
before you lead me on all the way--?"

our friend had again so lost himself, both for amusement and for
contrition, in the wonder of whether he had made, in his own challenge
that afternoon, such another figure, that he for an instant missed the
thread.  "tell you--?"

"why what you've got on hand."

strether hesitated.  "why it's such a matter as that even if i
positively wanted i shouldn't be able to keep it from you."

waymarsh gloomily gazed
 
 ___________________________
 
.  "what does that mean then but that your trip
is just for her?"

"for mrs. newsome?  oh it certainly is, as i say.  very much."

"then why do you also say it's for me?"

strether, in impatience, violently played with his latch.  "it's simple
enough.  it's for both of you."

waymarsh at last turned over with a groan.  "well, i won't marry you!"

"neither, when it comes to that--!" but the visitor had already laughed
and escaped.



iii

he had told miss gostrey he should probably take, for departure with
waymarsh, some afternoon train, and it thereupon in the morning
appeared that this lady had made her own plan for an earlier one.  she
had breakfasted when strether came into the coffee-room; but, waymarsh
not having yet emerged, he was in time to recall her to the terms of
 
 ___________________________
 
th
the morning papers beside her, she reminded him, as he let her know, of
major pendennis breakfasting at his club--a compliment of which she
professed a deep appreciation; and he detained her as pleadingly as if
he had already--and notably under pressure of the visions of the
night--learned to be unable to do without her.  she must teach him at
all events, before she went, to order breakfast as breakfast was
ordered in europe, and she must especially sustain him in the problem
of ordering for waymarsh.  the latter had laid upon his friend, by
desperate sounds through the door of his room, dreadful divined
responsibilities in respect to beefsteak and oranges--responsibilities
which miss gostrey took over with an alertness of action that matched
her quick intelligence.  she had before this weaned the expatriated
from traditions compared with which the matutinal beefsteak was but the
creature of an hour, and it was not for her, with some of her memories,
to falter in the path though she freely 
 
 ___________________________
 
n she wasn't "due" somewhere, there
was yet scarce a perfidy to others of which she wasn't capable for his
sake.  she explained moreover that wherever she happened to be she
found a dropped thread to pick up, a ragged edge to repair, some
familiar appetite in ambush, jumping out as she approached, yet
appeasable with a temporary biscuit.  it became, on her taking the risk
of the deviation imposed on him by her insidious arrangement of his
morning meal, a point of honour for her not to fail with waymarsh of
the larger success too; and her subsequent boast to strether was that
she had made their friend fare--and quite without his knowing what was
the matter--as major pendennis would have fared at the megatherium. she
had made him breakfast like a gentleman, and it was nothing, she
forcibly asserted, to what she would yet make him do.  she made him
participate in the slow reiterated ramble with which, for strether, the
new day amply filled itself; and it was by her art that he somehow had
the air
 
 ___________________________
 
 and in the rows, of carrying a point of his
own.

the three strolled and stared and gossiped, or at least the two did;
the case really yielding for their comrade, if analysed, but the
element of stricken silence.  this element indeed affected strether as
charged with audible rumblings, but he was conscious of the care of
taking it explicitly as a sign of pleasant peace.  he wouldn't appeal
too much, for that provoked stiffness; yet he wouldn't be too freely
tacit, for that suggested giving up. waymarsh himself adhered to an
ambiguous dumbness that might have represented either the growth of a
perception or the despair of one; and at times and in places--where the
low-browed galleries were darkest, the opposite gables queerest, the
solicitations of every kind densest--the others caught him fixing hard
some object of minor interest, fixing even at moments nothing
discernible, as if he were indulging it with a truce.  when he met
strether's eye on such occasions he looked guilty and furtive, fel
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and there
were others when he found himself feeling as if his passages of
interchange with the lady at his side might fall upon the third member
of their party very much as mr. burchell, at dr. primrose's fireside,
was influenced by the high flights of the visitors from london.  the
smallest things so arrested and amused him that he repeatedly almost
apologised--brought up afresh in explanation his plea of a previous
grind.  he was aware at the same time that his grind had been as
nothing to waymarsh's, and he repeatedly confessed that, to cover his
frivolity, he was doing his best for his previous virtue.  do what he
might, in any case, his previous virtue was still there, and it seemed
fairly to stare at him out of the windows of shops that were not as the
shops of woollett, fairly to make him want things that he shouldn't
know what to do with.  it was by the oddest, the least admissible of
laws demoralising him now; and the way it boldly took was to make him
want more wants. these first 
 
 ___________________________
 
walks in europe were in fact a kind of
finely lurid intimation of what one might find at the end of that
process.  had he come back after long years, in something already so
like the evening of life, only to be exposed to it?  it was at all
events over the shop-windows that he made, with waymarsh, most free;
though it would have been easier had not the latter most sensibly
yielded to the appeal of the merely useful trades.  he pierced with his
sombre detachment the plate-glass of ironmongers and saddlers, while
strether flaunted an affinity with the dealers in stamped letter-paper
and in smart neckties.  strether was in fact recurrently shameless in
the presence of the tailors, though it was just over the heads of the
tailors that his countryman most loftily looked.  this gave miss
gost
 
 ___________________________
 
rey a grasped opportunity to back up waymarsh at his expense.  the
weary lawyer--it was unmistakeable--had a conception of dress; but
that, in view of some of the features of the effect produced, was just
what made the danger of insistence on it.  strether wondered if he by
this time thought miss gostrey less fashionable or lambert strether
more so; and it appeared probable that most of the remarks exchanged
between this latter pair about passers, figures, faces, personal types,
exemplified in their degree the disposition to talk as "socie
 
 ___________________________
 
 an appointment for the burlington arcade.  mere
discriminations about a pair of gloves could thus at any rate
represent--always for such sensitive ears as were in
question--possibilities of something that strether could make a mark
against only as the peril of apparent wantonness.  he had quite the
consciousness of his new friend, for their companion, that he might
have had of a jesuit in petticoats, a representative of the recruiting
interests of the catholic church.  the catholic church, for
waymarsh-that was to say the enemy, the monster of bulging eyes and
far-reaching quivering groping tentacles--was exactly society, exactly
the multiplication of shibboleths, exactly the discrimination of types
and tones, exactly the wicked old rows of chester, rank with feudalism;
exactly in short europe.

there was light for observation, however, in an incident that occurred
just before they turned back to luncheon.  waymarsh had been for a
quarter of an hour exceptionally mute and distant, and somethi
 
 ___________________________
 
 leaned on an old balustrade that guarded the edge of the
row, a particularly crooked and huddled street-view.  "he thinks us
sophisticated, he thinks us worldly, he thinks us wicked, he thinks us
all sorts of queer things," strether reflected; for wondrous were the
vague quantities our friend had within a couple of short days acquired
the habit of conveniently and conclusively lumping together. there
seemed moreover a direct connexion between some such inference and a
sudden grim dash taken by waymarsh to the opposite side.  this movement
was startlingly sudden, and his companions at first supposed him to
have espied, to be pursuing, the glimpse of an acquaintance. they next
made out, however, that an open door had instantly received him, and
they then recognised him as engulfed in the establishment of a
jeweller, behind whose glittering front he was lost to view.  the fact
had somehow the note of a demonstration, and it left each of the others
to show a face almost of fear.  but miss gostrey
 
 ___________________________
 
ear."  then as to justify himself:
"am i not in my way trying it?  it's this."

"being here, you mean, with me?"

"yes, and talking to you as i do.  i've known you a few hours, and i've
known him all my life; so that if the ease i thus take with you about
him isn't magnificent"--and the thought of it held him a moment--"why
it's rather base."

"it's magnificent!" said miss gostrey to make an end of it.  "and you
should hear," she added, "the ease i take--and i above all intend to
take--with mr. waymarsh."

strether thought.  "about me?  ah that's no equivalent. the equivalent
would be waymarsh's himself serving me up--his remorseless analysis of
me.  and he'll never do that"--he was sadly clear.  "he'll never
remorselessly analyse me." he quite held her with the authority of
this.  "he'll never say a word to you about me."

she took it in; she did it justice; yet after an instant her reason,
her restless irony, disposed of it.  "of course he won't. for what do
you take people, that they're abl
 
 ___________________________
 
e to say words about anything, able
remorselessly to analyse?  there are not many like you and me.  it will
be only because he's too stupid."

it stirred in her friend a sceptical echo which was at the same time
the protest of the faith of years.  "waymarsh stupid?"

"compared with you."

strether had still his eyes on the jeweller's front, and he waited a
moment to answer.  "he's a success of a kind that i haven't approached."

"do you mean he has made money?"

"he makes it--to my belief.  and i," said strether, "though with a back
quite as bent, have never made anything.  i'm a perfectly equipped
failure."

he feared an instant she'd ask him if he meant he was poor; and he was
glad she didn't, for he really didn't know to what the truth on this

 
 ___________________________
 
futility.  if you knew," she sighed, "the dreams of my youth! but our
realities are what has brought us together.  we're beaten brothers in
arms."

he smiled at her kindly enough, but he shook his head.  "it doesn't
alter the fact that you're expensive.  you've cost me already--!"

but he had hung fire.  "cost you what?"

"well, my past--in one great lump.  but no matter," he laughed: "i'll
pay with my last penny."

her attention had unfortunately now been engaged by their comrade's
return, for waymarsh met their view as he came out of his shop.  "i
hope he hasn't paid," she said, "with his last; though i'm convinced he
has been splendid, and has been so for you."

"ah no--not that!"

"then for me?"

"quite as little."  waymarsh was by this time near enough to show signs
his friend could read, though he seemed to look almost carefully at
nothing in particular.

"then for himself?"

"for nobody.  for nothing.  for freedom."

"but what has freedom to do with it?"

strether's answer was indirect.
 
 ___________________________
 
  "to be as good as you and me.  but
different."

she had had time to take in their companion's face; and with it, as
such things were easy for her, she took in all.  "different--yes. but
better!"

if waymarsh was sombre he was also indeed almost sublime.  he told them
nothing, left his absence unexplained, and though they were convinced
he had made some extraordinary purchase they were never to learn its
nature.  he only glowered grandly at the tops of the old gables.  "it's
the sacred rage," strether had had further time to say; and this sacred
rage was to become between them, for convenient comprehension, the
description of one of his periodical necessities.  it was strether who
eventually contend
 
 ___________________________
 
ent by miss gostrey's side at one of the
theatres, to which he had found himself transported, without his own
hand raised, on the mere expression of a conscientious wonder.  she
knew her theatre, she knew her play, as she had triumphantly known,
three days running, everything else, and the moment filled to the brim,
for her companion, that apprehension of the interesting which, whether
or no the interesting happened to filter through his guide, strained
now to its limits his brief opportunity.  waymarsh hadn't come with
them; he had seen plays enough, he signified, before strether had
joined him--an affirmation that had its full force when his friend
ascertained by questions that he had seen two and a circus. questions
as to what he had seen had on him indeed an effect only less favourable
than questions as to what he hadn't.  he liked the former to be
discriminated; but how could it be done, strether asked of their
constant counsellor, without discriminating the latter?

miss gostrey had dine
 
 ___________________________
 
eating her question. "what do
you stand to lose?"

why the question now affected him as other he couldn't have said; he
could only this time meet it otherwise.  "everything."

"so i thought.  then you shall succeed.  and to that end i'm yours--"

"ah, dear lady!" he kindly breathed.

"till death!" said maria gostrey.  "good-night."



ii


strether called, his second morning in paris, on the bankers of the rue
scribe to whom his letter of credit was addressed, and he made this
visit attended by waymarsh, in whose company he had crossed from london
two days before.  they had hastened to the rue scribe on the morrow of
their arrival, but strether had not then found the letters the hope of
which prompted this errand.  he had had as yet none at all; hadn't
expected them in london, but had counted on several in paris, and,
disconcerted now, had presently strolled back to the boulevard with a
sense of injury that he felt himself taking for as good a start as any
other.  it would serve, this spur to 
 
 ___________________________
 
et--he had felt them as yet only at chester and in london--was he
could consider, none too much; and having, as he had often privately
expressed it, paris to reckon with, he threw these hours of freshness
consciously into the reckoning.  they made it continually greater, but
that was what it had best be if it was to be anything at all, and he
gave himself up till far into the evening, at the theatre and on the
return, after the theatre, along the bright congested boulevard, to
feeling it grow.  waymarsh had accompanied him this time to the play,
and the two men had walked together, as a first stage, from the gymnase
to the cafe riche, into the crowded "terrace" of which
establishment--the night, or rather the morning, for midnight had
struck, being bland and populous--they had wedged themselves for
refreshment. waymarsh, as a result of some discussion with his friend,
had made a marked virtue of his having now let himself go; and there
had been elements of impression in their half-hour over th
 
 ___________________________
 
their
nocturnal progress.

this morning there were letters--letters which had reached london,
apparently all together, the day of strether's journey, and had taken
their time to follow him; so that, after a controlled impulse to go
into them in the reception-room of the bank, which, reminding him of
the post-office at woollett, affected him as the abutment of some
transatlantic bridge, he slipped them into the pocket of his loose grey
overcoat with a sense of the felicity of carrying them off.  waymarsh,
who had had letters yesterday, had had them again to-day, and waymarsh
suggested in this particular no controlled impulses.  the last one he
was at all events likely to be observed to struggle with was clearly
that of bringing to a premature close any visit to the rue scribe.
strether had left him there yesterday; he wanted to see the papers, and
he had spent, by what his friend could make out, a succession of hours
with the papers.  he spoke of the establishment, with emphasis, as a
post of s
 
 ___________________________
 
it, might have made, might still make, for an empty present; but it
stood solidly for a crowded past.  it had not been, so much achievement
missed, a light yoke nor a short load.  it was at present as if
the backward picture had hung there, the long crooked course, grey in
the shadow of his solitude.  it had been a dreadful cheerful sociable
solitude, a solitude of life or choice, of community; but though there
had been people enough all round it there had been but three or four
persons in it.  waymarsh was one of these, and the fact struck him just
now as marking the record.  mrs. newsome was another, and miss gostrey
had of a sudden shown signs of becoming a third.  beyond, behind them
was the pale figure of his real youth, which held against its breast
the two presences paler than itself--the young wife he had early lost
and the young son he had stupidly sacrificed.  he had again and again
made out for himself that he might have kept his little boy, his little
dull boy who had died at schoo
 
 ___________________________
 
ey, with the fun of them, already spent?  there were sequences he had
missed and great gaps in the procession:  he might have been watching
it all recede in a golden cloud of dust.  if the playhouse wasn't
closed his seat had at least fallen to somebody else.  he had had an
uneasy feeling the night before that if he was at the theatre at
all--though he indeed justified the theatre, in the specific sense, and
with a grotesqueness to which his imagination did all honour, as
something he owed poor waymarsh--he should have been there with, and as
might have been said, for chad.

this suggested the question of whether he could properly have taken him
to such a play, and what effect--it was a point that suddenly rose--his
peculiar responsibility might be held in general to have on his choice
of entertainment.  it had literally been present to him at the
gymnase--where one was held moreover comparatively safe--that having
his young friend at his side would have been an odd feature of the work
of rede
 
 ___________________________
 
ireside; she had told him of it, and it was something that
doubtless awaited him; but miss gostrey hadn't yet arrived--she
mightn't arrive for days; and the sole attenuation of his excluded
state was his vision of the small, the admittedly secondary hotel in
the bye-street from the rue de la paix, in which her solicitude for his
purse had placed him, which affected him somehow as all indoor chill,
glass-roofed court and slippery staircase, and which, by the same
token, expressed the presence of waymarsh even at times when waymarsh
might have been certain to be round at the bank.  it came to pass
before he moved that waymarsh, and waymarsh alone, waymarsh not only
undiluted but positively strengthened, struck him as the present
alternative to the young man in the balcony.  when he did move it was
fairly to escape that alternative.  taking his way over the street at
last and passing through the porte-cochere of the house was like
consciously leaving waymarsh out.  however, he would tell him all 
 
 ___________________________
 
about
it.





book third




i


strether told waymarsh all about it that very evening, on their dining
together at the hotel; which needn't have happened, he was all the
while aware, hadn't he chosen to sacrifice to this occasion a rarer
opportunity.  the mention to his companion of the sacrifice was
moreover exactly what introduced his recital--or, as he would have
called it with more confidence in his interlocutor, his confession. his
confession was that he had been captured and that one of the features
of the affair had just failed to be his eng
 
 ___________________________
 
aging himself on the spot to
dinner.  as by such a freedom waymarsh would have lost him he had
obeyed his scruple; and he had likewise obeyed another scruple--which
bore on the question of his himself bringing a guest.

waymarsh looked gravely ardent, over the finished soup, at this array
of scruples; strether hadn't yet got quite used to being so unprepared
for the consequences of the impression he produced.  it was
comparatively easy to explain, however, that he hadn't felt sure his
guest would please.  the person was a young man whose acquaintance he
had made but that afternoon in the course of rather a hindered enquiry
for another person--an enquiry his new friend had just prevented in
fact from being vain.  "oh," 
 
 ___________________________
 
said strether, "i've all sorts of things
to tell you!"--and he put it in a way that was a virtual hint to
waymarsh to help him to enjoy the telling.  he waited for his fish, he
drank of his wine, he wiped his long moustache, he leaned back in his
chair, he took in the two english ladies who had just creaked past them
and whom he would even have articulately greeted if they hadn't rather
chilled the impulse; so that all he could do was--by way of doing
something--to say "merci, francois!" out quite loud when his fish was
brought. everything was there that he wanted, everything that could
make the moment an o
 
 ___________________________
 
ccasion, that would do beautifully--everything but
what waymarsh might give.  the little waxed salle-a-manger was sallow
and sociable; francois, dancing over it, all smiles, was a man and a
brother; the high-shouldered patronne, with her high-held, much-rubbed
hands, seemed always assenting exuberantly to something unsaid; the
paris evening in short was, for strether, in the very taste of the
soup, in the goodness, as he was innocently pleased to think it, of the
wine, in the pleasant coarse texture of the napkin and the crunch of
the thick-crusted bread.  t
 
 ___________________________
 
hese all were things congruous with his
confession, and his confession was that he had--it would come out
properly just there if waymarsh would only take it properly--agreed to
breakfast out, at twelve literally, the next day.  he didn't quite know
where; the delicacy of the case came straight up in the remembrance of
his new friend's "we'll see; i'll take you somewhere!"--for it had
required little more than that, after all, to let him right in.  he was
affected after a minute, face to face with his actual comrade, by the
impulse to overcolour. there had already been things in respect to
which he knew himself tempted by this per
 
 ___________________________
 
versity.  if waymarsh thought
them bad he should at least have his reason for his discomfort; so
strether showed them as worse.  still, he was now, in his way,
sincerely perplexed.

chad had been absent from the boulevard malesherbes--was absent from
paris altogether; he had learned that from the concierge, but had
nevertheless gone up, and gone up--there were no two ways about
it--from an uncontrollable, a really, if one would, depraved curiosity.
the concierge had mentioned to him that a friend of the tenant of th
 
 ___________________________
 
s
appears, in the south.  he went a month ago to cannes and though his
return begins to be looked for it can't be for some days.  i might, you
see, perfectly have waited a week; might have beaten a retreat as soon
as i got this essential knowledge.  but i beat no retreat; i did the
opposite; i stayed, i dawdled, i trifled; above all i looked round.  i
saw, in fine; and--i don't know what to call it--i sniffed.  it's a
detail, but it's as if there were something--something very good--to
sniff."

waymarsh's face had shown his friend an attention apparently so remote
that the latter was slightly surprised to find it at this point abreast
with him.  "do you mean a smell? what of?"

"a charming scent.  but i don't know."

waymarsh gave an inferential grunt.  "does he live there with a woman?"

"i don't know."

waymarsh waited an instant for more, then resumed.  "has he taken her
off with him?"

"and will he bring her back?"--strether fell into the enquiry.  but he
wound it up as before.  "i don't k
 
 ___________________________
 
moustache and
another good word for francois, seemed to produce in his companion a
slight irritation.  "then what the devil do you know?"

"well," said strether almost gaily, "i guess i don't know anything!"
his gaiety might have been a tribute to the fact that the state he had
been reduced to did for him again what had been done by his talk of the
matter with miss gostrey at the london theatre.  it was somehow
enlarging; and the air of that amplitude was now doubtless more or
less--and all for waymarsh to feel--in his further response.  "that's
what i found out from the young man."

"but i thought you said you found out nothing."

"nothing but that--that i don't know anything."

"and what good does that do you?"

"it's just," said strether, "what i've come to you to help me to
discover.  i mean anything about anything over here.  i felt that, up
there.  it regularly rose before me in its might.  the young man
moreover--chad's friend--as good as told me so."

"as good as told you you know noth
 
 ___________________________
 
ing about anything?"  waymarsh
appeared to look at some one who might have as good as told him. "how
old is he?"

"well, i guess not thirty."

"yet you had to take that from him?"

"oh i took a good deal more--since, as i tell you, i took an invitation
to dejeuner."

"and are you going to that unholy meal?"

"if you'll come with me.  he wants you too, you know.  i told him about
you.  he gave me his card," strether pursued, "and his name's rather
funny.  it's john little bilham, and he says his two surnames are, on
account o
 
 ___________________________
 
f his being small, inevitably used together."

"well," waymarsh asked with due detachment from these details, "what's
he doing up there?"

"his account of himself is that he's 'only a little artist-man.' that
seemed to me perfectly to describe him.  but he's yet in the phase of
study; this, you know, is the great art-school--to pass a certain
number of years in which he came over.  and he's a great friend of
chad's, and occupying chad's rooms just now because they're so
pleasant.  he's very pleasant and curious too," strether added--"though
he's not from bo
 
 ___________________________
 
ston."

waymarsh looked already rather sick of him.  "where is he from?"

strether thought.  "i don't know that, either.  but he's 'notoriously,'
as he put it himself, not from boston."

"well," waymarsh moralised from dry depths, "every one can't
notoriously be from boston.  why," he continued, "is he curious?"

"perhaps just for that--for one thing! but really," strether added,
"for everything.  when you meet him you'll see."

"oh i don't want to meet him," waymarsh impatiently growled.  "why
don't he go home?"

strether hesitated.  "well, because he likes it over here."

this appeared in particular more than waymarsh could bear.  "he ought
then to be ashamed of himself, and, as you admit that you think so too,
why drag him in?"

strether's reply again took time.  "perhaps i do think so
myself--though i don't quite yet admit it.  i'm not a bit sure--it's
again one of the things i want to find out.  i liked him, and can you
like people--? but no matter."  h
 
 ___________________________
 
e pulled himself up.  "there's no
doubt i want you to come down on me and squash me."

waymarsh helped himself to the next course, which, however proving not
the dish he had just noted as supplied to the english ladies, had the
effect of causing his imagination temporarily to wander. but it
presently broke out at a softer spot.  "have they got a handsome place
up there?"

"oh a charming place; full of beautiful and valuable things.  i never
saw such a place"--and strether's thought went back to it. "for a
little artist-man--!"  he could in fact scarce express it.

but his companion, who a
 
 ___________________________
 
ppeared now to have a view, insisted. "well?"

"well, life can hold nothing better.  besides, they're things of which
he's in charge."

"so that he does doorkeeper for your precious pair? can life," waymarsh
enquired, "hold nothing better than that?"  then as strether, silent,
seemed even yet to wonder, "doesn't he know what she is?" he went on.

"i don't know.  i didn't ask him.  i couldn't.  it was impossible.  you
wouldn't either.  besides i didn't want to.  no more would you."
strether in short explained it at a stroke.  "you can't make out over
here what people do know."

"then what did you come over for?"

"well, i suppose exactly to see for myself--without their aid."

"then what do you want
 
 ___________________________
 
 mine for?"

"oh," strether laughed, "you're not one of them!  i do know what you
know."

as, however, this last assertion caused waymarsh again to look at him
hard--such being the latter's doubt of its implications--he felt his
justification lame.  which was still more the case when waymarsh
presently said:  "look here, strether.  quit this."

our friend smiled with a doubt of his own.  "do you mean my tone?"

"no--damn your tone.  i mean your nosing round.  quit the whole job.
let them stew in their juice.  you're being used for a thing you ain't
fit for.  people don't take a fine-tooth comb to groom a horse."

"am i a fine-tooth comb?" strether laughed.  "it's something i never
called myself!"

"it's what you are, all the same.  you ain't so young as you were, but
you've kept you
 
 ___________________________
 
r teeth."

he acknowledged his friend's humour.  "take care i don't get them into
you! you'd like them, my friends at home, waymarsh," he declared;
"you'd really particularly like them.  and i know"--it was slightly
irrelevant, but he gave it sudden and singular force--"i know they'd
like you!"

"oh don't work them off on me!" waymarsh groaned.

yet strether still lingered with his hands in his pockets.  "it's
really quite as indispensable as i say that chad should be got back."

"indispensable to whom? to you?"

"yes," strether presently said.

"because if you get him you also get mrs. newsome?"

strether faced it.  "yes."

"and if you don't get him you don't get her?"

it might be merciless, but he continued not to flinch.  "i think it
might have some effect on our personal understanding.  chad's of real
importance--or can 
 
 ___________________________
 
easily become so if he will--to the business."

"and the business is of real importance to his mother's husband?"

"well, i naturally want what my future wife wants.  and the thing will
be much better if we have our own man in it."

"if you have your own man in it, in other words," waymarsh said,
"you'll marry--you personally--more money.  she's already rich, as i
understand you, but she'll be richer still if the business can be made
to boom on certain lines that you've laid down."

"i haven't laid them down," strether promptly returned.  "mr.
newsome--who knew extraordinarily well what he was about--laid them
down ten years ago."

oh well, waymarsh seemed to indicate with a shake of his mane, that
didn't matter! "you're fierce for the boom anyway."

his friend weighed a moment in
 
 ___________________________
 
 silence the justice of the charge. "i
can scarcely be called fierce, i think, when i so freely take my chance
of the possibility, the danger, of being influenced in a sense counter
to mrs. newsome's own feelings."

waymarsh gave this proposition a long hard look.  "i see.  you're
afraid yourself of being squared.  but you're a humbug," he added, "all
the same."

"oh!" strether quickly protested.

"yes, you ask me for protection--which makes you very interesting; and
then you won't take it.  you say you want to be squashed--"

"ah but not so easily! don't you see," strether demanded "where my
interest, as already shown you, lies? it lies in my not being squared.
if i'm squared where's my marriage? if i miss my erra
 
 ___________________________
 
nd i miss that;
and if i miss that i miss everything--i'm nowhere."

waymarsh--but all relentlessly--took this in.  "what do i care where
you are if you're spoiled?"

their eyes met on it an instant.  "thank you awfully," strether at last
said.  "but don't you think her judgement of that--?"

"ought to content me? no."

it kept them again face to face, and the end of this was that strether
again laughed.  "you do her injustice.  you really must know her.
good-night."

he breakfasted with mr. bilham on the morrow, and, as inconsequently
befell, with waymarsh massively of 
 
 ___________________________
 
s so rich a consciousness of time--a bag of gold into which he
constantly dipped for a handful.  it was present to him that when the
little business with mr. bilham should be over he would still have
shining hours to use absolutely as he liked.  there was no great pulse
of haste yet in this process of saving chad; nor was that effect a bit
more marked as he sat, half an hour later, with his legs under chad's
mahogany, with mr. bilham on one side, with a friend of mr. bilham's on
the other, with waymarsh stupendously opposite, and with the great hum
of paris coming up in softness, vagueness-for strether himself indeed
already positive sweetness--through the sunny windows toward which, the
day before, his curiosity had raised its wings from below.  the feeling
strongest with him at that moment had borne fruit almost faster than he
could taste it, and strether literally felt at the present hour that
there was a precipitation in his fate.  he had known nothing and nobody
as he stood in the street;
 
 ___________________________
 
 but hadn't his view now taken a bound in the
direction of every one and of every thing?

"what's he up to, what's he up to?"--something like that was at the
back of his head all the while in respect to little bilham; but
meanwhile, till he should make out, every one and every thing were as
good as represented for him by the combination of his host and the lady
on his left.  the lady on his left, the lady thus promptly and
ingeniously invited to "meet" mr. strether and mr. waymarsh--it was the
way she herself expressed her case--was a very marked person, a person
who had much to do with our friend's asking himself if the occasion
weren't in its essence the most baited, the most gilded of traps.
baited it could properly be called when the repast was of so wise a
savour, and gilded surrounding objects seemed inevitably to need to be
when miss barrace--which was the lady's name--looked at them with
convex parisian eyes and through a glass with a remarkably long
tortoise-shel
 
 ___________________________
 
w friends; since the young man, chad's
intimate and deputy, had, in thus constituting the scene, practised so
much more subtly than he had been prepared for, and since in especial
miss barrace, surrounded clearly by every consideration, hadn't
scrupled to figure as a familiar object.  it was interesting to him to
feel that he was in the presence of new measures, other standards, a
different scale of relations, and that evidently here were a happy pair
who didn't think of things at all as he and waymarsh thought.  nothing
was less to have been calculated in the business than that it should
now be for him as if he and waymarsh were comparatively quite at one.

the latter was magnificent--this at least was an assurance privately
given him by miss barrace.  "oh your friend's a type, the grand old
american--what shall one call it? the hebrew prophet, ezekiel,
jeremiah, who used when i was a little girl in the rue montaigne to
come to see my father and who was usually the american minister to the
tu
 
 ___________________________
 
 be, much as
he required his presence of mind to meet such a change in their scheme.
"oh the artist-quarter and that kind of thing; here already, for
instance, as you see."  he had been on the point of echoing
"'here'?--is this the artist-quarter?" but she had already disposed of
the question with a wave of all her tortoise-shell and an easy "bring
him to me!"  he knew on the spot how little he should be able to bring
him, for the very air was by this time, to his sense, thick and hot
with poor waymarsh's judgement of it. he was in the trap still more
than his companion and, unlike his companion, not making the best of
it; which was precisely what doubtless gave him his admirable sombre
glow.  little did miss barrace know that what was behind it was his
grave estimate of her own laxity. the general assumption with which our
two friends had arrived had been that of finding mr. bilham ready to
conduct them to one or other of those resorts of the earnest, the
aesthetic fraternity which were shown
 
 ___________________________
 
 among the sights of paris.  in
this character it would have justified them in a proper insistence on
discharging their score.  waymarsh's only proviso at the last had been
that nobody should pay for him; but he found himself, as the occasion
developed, paid for on a scale as to which strether privately made out
that he already nursed retribution.  strether was conscious across the
table of what worked in him, conscious when they passed back to the
small salon to which, the previous evening, he himself had made so rich
a reference; conscious most of all as they stepped out to the balcony
in which one would have had to be an ogre
 
 ___________________________
 
not to recognise the perfect
place for easy aftertastes.  these things were enhanced for miss
barrace by a succession of excellent cigarettes--acknowledged,
acclaimed, as a part of the wonderful supply left behind him by
chad--in an almost equal absorption of which strether found himself
blindly, almost wildly pushing forward.  he might perish by the sword
as well as by famine, and he knew that his having abetted the lady by
an excess that was rare with him would count for little in the sum--as
waymarsh might so easily add it up--of her licence.  waymarsh had
smoked of old, smoked hugely; but waymarsh did nothing now, and that
gave him his advantage over people who took things up lightly just when
others had laid them heavily down.  strether had never smoked, and he
felt as if he flaunted at his friend that this had been only because of
a reason.  the reason, it now began to appear even to himself, was that
he had never had a lady to smoke with.

it was this lady's being there at all, however,
 
 ___________________________
 
 that was the strange
free thing; perhaps, since she was there, her smoking was the least of
her freedoms.  if strether had been sure at each juncture of what--with
bilham in especial--she talked about, he might have traced others and
winced at them and felt waymarsh wince; but he was in fact so often at
sea that his sense of the range of reference was merely general and
that he on several different occasions guessed and interpreted only to
doubt.  he wondered what they meant, but there were things he scarce
thought they could be supposed to mean, and "oh no--not that!" was at
the end of most of his ventures.  this was the very beginning with him
of a condition as to which, later on, it will be seen, he found cause
to pull himself up; and he was to remember
 
 ___________________________
 
spoke of him repeatedly, invoking his
good name and good nature, and the worst confusion of mind for strether
was that all their mention of him was of a kind to do him honour. they
commended his munificence and approved his taste, and in doing so sat
down, as it seemed to strether, in the very soil out of which these
things flowered.  our friend's final predicament was that he himself
was sitting down, for the time, with them, and there was a supreme
moment at which, compared with his collapse, waymarsh's erectness
affected him as really high.  one thing was certain--he saw he must
make up his mind.  he must approach chad, must wait for him, deal with
him, master him, but he mustn't dispossess himself of the faculty of
seeing things as they were.  he must bring him to him--not go himself,
as it were, so much of the way.  he must at any rate be clearer as to
what--should he continue to do that for convenience--he was still
condoning.  it was on the detail of this quantity--and what could the
fa
 
 ___________________________
 
by the effect
on her of his joke.  he saw now how he meant it as a joke. she saw,
however, still other things, though in an instant she had hidden them.
"you've got at no facts at all?"

he tried to muster them.  "well, he has a lovely home."

"ah that, in paris," she quickly returned, "proves nothing.  that is
rather it disproves nothing.  they may very well, you see, the people
your mission is concerned with, have done it for him."

"exactly.  and it was on the scene of their doings then that waymarsh
and i sat guzzling."

"oh if you forbore to guzzle here on scenes of doings," she replied,
"you might easily die of starvation."  with which she smiled at him.
"you've worse before you."

"ah i've everything before me.  but on our hypothesis, you know, they
must be wonderful."

"they are!" said miss gostrey.  "you're not therefore, you see," she
added, "wholly without facts.  they've been, in effect, wonderful."

to have got at something comparatively definite appeared at last a
little to help-
 
 ___________________________
 
had for that matter her community with
little bilham:  she too always, on the great issues, showed as having
known in time. it made her constantly beforehand with him and gave him
mainly the chance to ask himself how on the day of their settlement
their account would stand.  he endeavoured even now to keep it a little
straight by arranging that if he accepted her invitation she should
dine with him first; but the upshot of this scruple was that at eight
o'clock on the morrow he awaited her with waymarsh under the pillared
portico.  she hadn't dined with him, and it was characteristic of their
relation that she had made him embrace her refusal without in the least
understanding it.  she ever caused her rearrangements to affect him as
her tenderest touches.  it was on that principle for instance that,
giving him the opportunity to be amiable again to little bilham, she
had suggested his offering the young man a seat in their box.  strether
had dispatched for this purpose a small blue missive to 
 
 ___________________________
 
wever, even after
they had been for some time conveniently seated, that their friend, who
knew his way about, would come in at his own right moment.  his
temporary absence moreover seemed, as never yet, to make the right
moment for miss gostrey.  strether had been waiting till tonight to get
back from her in some mirrored form her impressions and conclusions.
she had elected, as they said, to see little bilham once; but now she
had seen him twice and had nevertheless not said more than a word.

waymarsh meanwhile sat opposite him with their hostess between; and
miss gostrey spoke of herself as an instructor of youth introducing her
little charges to a work that was one of the glories of literature. the
glory was happily unobjectionable, and the little charges were candid;
for herself she had travelled that road and she merely waited on their
innocence.  but she referred in due time to their absent friend, whom
it was clear they should have to give up.  "he either won't have got
your note," she
 
 ___________________________
 
 said, "or you won't have got his:  he has had some kind
of hindrance, and, of course, for that matter, you know, a man never
writes about coming to a box."  she spoke as if, with her look, it
might have been waymarsh who had written to the youth, and the latter's
face showed a mixture of austerity and anguish.  she went on however as
if to meet this.  "he's far and away, you know, the best of them."

"the best of whom, ma'am?"

"why of all the long procession--the boys, the girls, or the old men
and old women as they sometimes really are; the hope, as one may say,
of our country.  they've all passed, year after year; but there has
been no one in particular i've ever wanted to stop.  i feel--don't
you?--that
 
 ___________________________
 
 i want to stop little bilham; he's so exactly right as he
is."  she continued to talk to waymarsh.  "he's too delightful.  if
he'll only not spoil it! but they always will; they always do; they
always have."

"i don't think waymarsh knows," strether said after a moment, "quite
what it's open to bilham to spoil."

"it can't be a good american," waymarsh lucidly enough replied; "for it
didn't strike me the young man had developed much in that shape."

"ah," miss gostrey sighed, "the name of the good american is as easily
given as taken away! what is it, to begin with, to be one, and what's
the extraordinary hurry?  surely nothing that's so pressing was ever so
little defined.  it's such an order, really, that before we cook you
the dish we must at least have your receipt.  besides the poor chicks
have time! what i've seen so often spoiled," she
 
 ___________________________
 
 pursued, "is the happy
attitude itself, the state of faith and--what shall i call it?--the
sense of beauty. you're right about him"--she now took in strether;
"little bilham has them to a charm, we must keep little bilham along."
then she was all again for waymarsh.  "the others have all wanted so
dreadfully to do something, and they've gone and done it in too many
cases indeed.  it leaves them never the same afterwards; the charm's
always somehow broken.  now he, i think, you know, really won't.  he
won't do the least dreadful little thing.  we shall continue to enjoy
him just as he is.  no--he's quite beautiful.  he sees everything.  he
isn't a bit ashamed.  he has every scrap of the courage of it that one
could ask.  only think what he might do. one wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ident--to keep him in view. at this very moment perhaps what
mayn't he be up to?  i've had my disappointments--the poor things are
never really safe; or only at least when you have them under your eye.
one can never completely trust them.  one's uneasy, and i think that's
why i most miss him now."

she had wound up with a laugh of enjoyment over her embroidery of her
idea--an enjoyment that her face communicated to strether, who almost
wished none the less at this moment that she would let poor waymarsh
alone.  he knew more or less what she meant; but the fact wasn't a
reason for her not pretending to waymarsh that he didn't.  it was
craven of him perhaps, but he would, for the high amenity of the
occasion, have liked waymarsh not to be so sure of his wit.  her
recognition of it gave him away and, before she had done with him or
with that article, would give him worse.  what was he, all the same, to
do?  he looked across the box at his friend; their eyes met; something
queer and stiff, somethi
 
 ___________________________
 
 it.  this was, before i met him, what i wondered
whether i was to see.  but as soon as i met him i ceased to wonder, and
our second meeting made me sure.  i took him all in. he was acting--he
is still--on his daily instructions."

"so that chad has done the whole thing?"

"oh no--not the whole.  we've done some of it.  you and i and 'europe.'"

"europe--yes," strether mused.

"dear old paris," she seemed to explain.  but there was more, and, with
one of her turns, she risked it.  "and dear old waymarsh. you," she
declared, "have been a good bit of it."

he sat massive.  "a good bit of what, ma'am?"

"why of the wonderful consciousness of our friend here.  you've helped
too in your way to float him to where he is."

"and where the devil is he?"

she passed it on with a laugh.  "where the devil, strether, are you?"

he spoke as if he had just been thinking it out.  "well, quite already
in chad's hands, it would seem."  and he had had with this another
thought.  "will that be--just all through b
 
 ___________________________
 
etting you.  he couldn't
absolutely not know, for you couldn't absolutely not let him.  it was a
case then simply, a strong case, as people nowadays called such
things,' a case of transformation unsurpassed, and the hope was but in
the general law that strong cases were liable to control from without.
perhaps he, strether himself, was the only person after all aware of
it. even miss gostrey, with all her science, wouldn't be, would
she?--and he had never seen any one less aware of anything than
waymarsh as he glowered at chad.  the social sightlessness of his old
friend's survey marked for him afresh, and almost in an humiliating
way, the inevitable limits of direct aid from this source.  he was not
certain, however, of not drawing a shade of compensation from the
privilege, as yet untasted, of knowing more about something in
particular than miss gostrey did.  his situation too was a case, for
that matter, and he was now so interested, quite so privately agog,
about it, that he had already an 
 
 ___________________________
 
 fun it would be to open up
to her afterwards.  he derived during his half-hour no assistance from
her, and just this fact of her not meeting his eyes played a little, it
must be confessed, into his predicament.

he had introduced chad, in the first minutes, under his breath, and
there was never the primness in her of the person unacquainted; but she
had none the less betrayed at first no vision but of the stage, where
she occasionally found a pretext for an appreciative moment that she
invited waymarsh to share.  the latter's faculty of participation had
never had, all round, such an assault to meet; the pressure on him
being the sharper for this chosen attitude in her, as strether judged
it, of isolating, for their natural intercourse, chad and himself. this
intercourse was meanwhile restricted to a frank friendly look from the
young man, something markedly like a smile, but falling far short of a
grin, and to the vivacity of strether's private speculation as to
whether he carried himself li
 
 ___________________________
 
ion of chadwick's true time of life was, doubtless, what came
up quickest after the adjournment of the two, when the play was over,
to a cafe in the avenue de l'opera.  miss gostrey had in due course
been perfect for such a step; she had known exactly what they
wanted--to go straight somewhere and talk; and strether had even felt
she had known what he wished to say and that he was arranging
immediately to begin.  she hadn't pretended this, as she had pretended
on the other hand, to have divined waymarsh's wish to extend to her an
independent protection homeward; but strether nevertheless found how,
after he had chad opposite to him at a small table in the brilliant
halls that his companion straightway selected, sharply and easily
discriminated from others, it was quite, to his mind, as if she heard
him speak; as if, sitting up, a mile away, in the little apartment he
knew, she would listen hard enough to catch.  he found too that he
liked that idea, and he wished that, by the same token, mrs. 
 
 ___________________________
 
sn't as bad.  there was
a succession of days at all events when contact with him--and in its
immediate effect, as if it could produce no other--elbowed out of
strether's consciousness everything but itself.  little bilham once
more pervaded the scene, but little bilham became even in a higher
degree than he had originally been one of the numerous forms of the
inclusive relation; a consequence promoted, to our friend's sense, by
two or three incidents with which we have yet to make acquaintance.
waymarsh himself, for the occasion, was drawn into the eddy; it
absolutely, though but temporarily, swallowed him down, and there were
days when strether seemed to bump against him as a sinking swimmer
might brush a submarine object.  the fathomless medium held
them--chad's manner was the fathomless medium; and our friend felt as
if they passed each other, in their deep immersion, with the round
impersonal eye of silent fish.  it was practically produced between
them that waymarsh was giving him then hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s chance; and the shade of
discomfort that strether drew from the allowance resembled not a little
the embarrassment he had known at school, as a boy, when members of his
family had been present at exhibitions.  he could perform before
strangers, but relatives were fatal, and it was now as if,
comparatively, waymarsh were a relative.  he seemed to hear him say
"strike up then!" and to enjoy a foretaste of conscientious domestic
criticism.  he had struck up, so far as he actually could; chad knew by
this time in profusion what he wanted; and what vulgar violence did his
fellow pilgrim expect of him when he had really emptied his mind?  it
went somehow to and fro that what poor waymarsh meant was "i told you
so--that you'd lose your immortal soul!" but it was also fairly
explicit that strether had his own cha
 
 ___________________________
 
llenge and that, since they must
go to the bottom of things, he wasted no more virtue in watching chad
than chad wasted in watching him.  his dip for duty's sake--where was
it worse than waymarsh's own?  for he needn't have stopped resisting
and refusing, needn't have parleyed, at that rate, with the foe.

the strolls over paris to see something or call somewhere were
accordingly inevitable and natural, and the late sessions in the
wondrous troisieme, the lovely home, when men dropped in and the
picture composed more suggestively through the haze of tobacco, of
music more or less good and of talk more or less polyglot, were on a
principle not to be distinguished from that of the morning
 
 ___________________________
 
little bilham's
way this afternoon was not strether's, but he had none the less kindly
come with him, and it was somehow a part of his kindness that as it had
sadly begun to rain they suddenly found themselves seated for
conversation at a cafe in which they had taken refuge.  he had passed
no more crowded hour in chad's society than the one just ended; he had
talked with miss barrace, who had reproached him with not having come
to see her, and he had above all hit on a happy thought for causing
waymarsh's tension to relax.  something might possibly be extracted for
the latter from the idea of his success with that lady, whose quick
apprehension of what might amuse her had given strether a free hand.
what had she meant if not to ask whether she couldn't help him with his
splendid encumbrance, and mightn't the sacred rage at any rate be kept
a little in abeyance by thus creating for his comrade's mind even in a
world of irrelevance the possibility of a relation?  what was it but a
relation to be
 
 ___________________________
 
ou must see about?"

it had brought them, as she caught the last words, into relation with
miss barrace, whom strether had already observed--as he had never
before seen a lady at a party--moving about alone.  coming within sound
of them she had already spoken, and she took again, through her
long-handled glass, all her amused and amusing possession.  "how much,
poor mr. strether, you seem to have to see about! but you can't say,"
she gaily declared, "that i don't do what i can to help you.  mr.
waymarsh is placed.  i've left him in the house with miss gostrey."

"the way," little bilham exclaimed, "mr. strether gets the ladies to
work for him! he's just preparing to draw in another; to pounce--don't
you see him?--on madame de vionnet."

"madame de vionnet?  oh, oh, oh!" miss barrace cried in a wonderful
crescendo.  there was more in it, our friend made out, than met the
ear.  was it after all a joke that he should be serious about anything?
he envied miss barrace at any rate her power of not b
 
 ___________________________
 
" the young man woefully confessed:  "they haven't gone
through that form.  they've simply--the cannibals!--eaten me; converted
me if you like, but converted me into food.  i'm but the bleached bones
of a christian."

"well then there we are!  only"--and miss barrace appealed again to
strether--"don't let it discourage you.  you'll break down soon enough,
but you'll meanwhile have had your moments.  il faut en avoir.  i
always like to see you while you last.  and i'll tell you who will
last."

"waymarsh?"--he had already taken her up.

she laughed out as at the alarm of it.  "he'll resist even miss
gostrey:  so grand is it not to understand.  he's wonderful."

"he is indeed," strether conceded.  "he wouldn't tell me of this
affair--only said he had an engagement; but with such a gloom, you must
let me insist, as if it had been an engagement to be hanged. then
silently and secretly he turns up here with you.  do you call that
'lasting'?"

"oh i hope it's lasting!" miss barrace said.  "but he on
 
 ___________________________
 
n, as
it happened, even before he was down, turned up at his hotel. strether
took his coffee, by habit, in the public room; but on his descending
for this purpose chad instantly proposed an adjournment to what he
called greater privacy.  he had himself as yet had nothing--they would
sit down somewhere together; and when after a few steps and a turn into
the boulevard they had, for their greater privacy, sat down among
twenty others, our friend saw in his companion's move a fear of the
advent of waymarsh.  it was the first time chad had to that extent
given this personage "away"; and strether found himself wondering of
what it was symptomatic.  he made out in a moment that the youth was in
earnest as he hadn't yet seen him; which in its turn threw a ray
perhaps a trifle startling on what they had each up to that time been
treating as earnestness. it was sufficiently flattering however that
the real thing--if this was at last the real thing--should have been
determined, as appeared, precisely by
 
 ___________________________
 
dern--she had always the air of
taking up some joke that one had already had out with her.  the point
itself, no doubt, was what was antique, and the use she made of it what
was modern.  he felt just now that her good-natured irony did bear on
something, and it troubled him a little that she wouldn't be more
explicit only assuring him, with the pleasure of observation so visible
in her, that she wouldn't tell him more for the world.  he could take
refuge but in asking her what she had done with waymarsh, though it
must be added that he felt himself a little on the way to a clue after
she had answered that this personage was, in the other room, engaged in
conversation with madame de vionnet.  he stared a moment at the image
of such a conjunction; then, for miss barrace's benefit, he wondered.
"is she too then under the charm--?"

"no, not a bit"--miss barrace was prompt.  "she makes nothing of him.
she's bored.  she won't help you with him."

"oh," strether laughed, "she can't do everything.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
he was now, however, suddenly tired of the question.  "yes then--call
it that.  besides, she'll never divorce.  don't, moreover," she added,
"believe everything you hear about her husband."

"he's not then," strether asked, "a wretch?"

"oh yes.  but charming."

"do you know him?"

"i've met him.  he's bien aimable."

"to every one but his wife?"

"oh for all i know, to her too--to any, to every woman.  i hope you at
any rate," she pursued with a quick change, "appreciate the care i take
of mr. waymarsh."

"oh immensely." but strether was not yet in line.  "at all events," he
roundly brought out, "the attachment's an innocent one."

"mine and his?  ah," she laughed, "don't rob it of all interest!"

"i mean our friend's here--to the lady we've been speaking of." that
was what he had settled to as an indirect but none the less closely
involved consequence of his impression of jeanne.  that was where he
meant to stay.  "it's innocent," he repeated--"i see the whole thing."

mystified by his abrup
 
 ___________________________
 
hundreds and hundreds.  i only take flowers."

"flowers?" strether echoed again with a rueful reflexion.  how many
nosegays had her present converser sent?

"innocent flowers," she pursued, "as much as he likes.  and he sends me
splendours; he knows all the best places--he has found them for
himself; he's wonderful."

"he hasn't told them to me," her friend smiled, "he has a life of his
own."  but strether had swung back to the consciousness that for
himself after all it never would have done.  waymarsh hadn't mrs.
waymarsh in the least to consider, whereas lambert strether had
constantly, in the inmost honour of his thoughts, to consider mrs.
newsome.  he liked moreover to feel how much his friend was in the real
tradition.  yet he had his conclusion.  "what a rage it is!" he had
worked it out.  "it's an opposition."

she followed, but at a distance.  "that's what i feel.  yet to what?"

"well, he thinks, you know, that i've a life of my own.  and i haven't!"

"you haven't?"  she showed doubt
 
 ___________________________
 
am looked at him indeed.  "you mean that after all he
shouldn't go back?"

"i mean that if he gives her up--!"

"yes?"

"well, he ought to be ashamed of himself."  but strether spoke with a
sound that might have passed for a laugh.





volume ii

book seventh




i


it wasn't the first time strether had sat alone in the great dim
church--still less was it the first of his giving himself up, so far as
conditions permitted, to its beneficent action on his nerves.  he had
been to notre dame with waymarsh, he had been there with miss gostrey,
he had been there with chad newsome, and had found the place, even in
company, such a refuge from the obsession of his problem that, with
renewed pressure from that source, he had not unnaturally recurred to a
remedy meeting the case, for the moment, so indirectly, no doubt, but
so relievingly.  he was conscious enough that it was only for the
moment, but good moments--if he could call them good--still had their
value for a man who by this time struck himse
 
 ___________________________
 
made certain of him--certain of not wholly missing him on
her return--before her disappearance.  if furthermore she didn't burden
him with letters it was frankly because of her sense of the other great
commerce he had to carry on.  he himself, at the end of a fortnight,
had written twice, to show how his generosity could be trusted; but he
reminded himself in each case of mrs. newsome's epistolary manner at
the times when mrs. newsome kept off delicate ground.  he sank his
problem, he talked of waymarsh and miss barrace, of little bilham and
the set over the river, with whom he had again had tea, and he was
easy, for convenience, about chad and madame de vionnet and jeanne.  he
admitted that he continued to see them, he was decidedly so confirmed a
haunter of chad's premises and that young man's practical intimacy with
them was so undeniably great; but he had his reason for not attempting
to render for miss gostrey's benefit the impression of these last days.
that would be to tell her too much
 
 ___________________________
 
ppear at
times to rock--he would do his best to be one.

the end of it was that half an hour later they were seated together for
an early luncheon at a wonderful, a delightful house of entertainment
on the left bank--a place of pilgrimage for the knowing, they were both
aware, the knowing who came, for its great renown, the homage of
restless days, from the other end of the town.  strether had already
been there three times--first with miss gostrey, then with chad, then
with chad again and with waymarsh and little bilham, all of whom he had
himself sagaciously entertained; and his pleasure was deep now on
learning that madame de vionnet hadn't yet been initiated.  when he had
said as they strolled round the church, by the river, acting at last on
what, within, he had made up his mind to, "will you, if you have time,
come to dejeuner with me somewhere?  for instance, if you know it, over
there on the other side, which is so easy a walk"--and then had named
the place; when he had done this she s
 
 ___________________________
 
 ever penetrating.  the scent
of flowers was in the streets, he had the whiff of violets perpetually
in his nose; and he had attached himself to sounds and suggestions,
vibrations of the air, human and dramatic, he imagined, as they were
not in other places, that came out for him more and more as the mild
afternoons deepened--a far-off hum, a sharp near click on the asphalt,
a voice calling, replying, somewhere and as full of tone as an actor's
in a play.  he was to dine at home, as usual, with waymarsh--they had
settled to that for thrift and simplicity; and he now hung about before
his friend came down.

he read his telegram in the court, standing still a long time where he
had opened it and giving five minutes afterwards to the renewed study
of it.  at last, quickly, he crumpled it up as if to get it out of the
way; in spite of which, however, he kept it there--still kept it when,
at the end of another turn, he had dropped into a chair placed near a
small table.  here, with his scrap of pap
 
 ___________________________
 
er compressed in his fist and
further concealed by his folding his arms tight, he sat for some time
in thought, gazed before him so straight that waymarsh appeared and
approached him without catching his eye.  the latter in fact, struck
with his appearance, looked at him hard for a single instant and then,
as if determined to that course by some special vividness in it,
dropped back into the salon de lecture without addressing him.  but the
pilgrim from milrose permitted himself still to observe the scene from
behind the clear glass plate of that retreat.  strether ended, as he
sat, by a fresh scrutiny of his compressed missive, which he smoothed
 
 ___________________________
 

out carefully again as he placed it on his table.  there it remained
for some minutes, until, at last looking up, he saw waymarsh watching
him from within.  it was on this that their eyes met--met for a moment
during which neither moved.  but strether then got up, folding his
telegram more carefully and putting it into his waistcoat pocket.

a few minutes later the friends were seated together at dinner; but
strether had meanwhile said nothing about it, and they eventually
parted, after coffee in the court, with nothing said on either side.
our friend had moreover the consciousness that even less than usual was
on this oc
 
 ___________________________
 
casion said between them, so that it was almost as if each
had been waiting for something from the other.  waymarsh had always
more or less the air of sitting at the door of his tent, and silence,
after so many weeks, had come to play its part in their concert.  this
note indeed, to strether's sense, had lately taken a fuller tone, and
it was his fancy to-night that they had never quite so drawn it out.
yet it befell, none the less that he closed the door to confidence when
his companion finally asked him if there were anything particular the
matter with him.  "nothing," he replied, "more than usual."

on th
 
 ___________________________
 
e morrow, however, at an early hour, he found occasion to give an
answer more in consonance with the facts.  what was the matter had
continued to be so all the previous evening, the first hours of which,
after dinner, in his room, he had devoted to the copious composition of
a letter.  he had quitted waymarsh for this purpose, leaving him to his
own resources with less ceremony than their wont, but finally coming
down again with his letter unconcluded and going forth into the streets
without enquiry for his comrade.  he had taken a long vague walk, and
one o'clock had struck before his return and his re-ascent to his room
by the aid of the glimmering candle-end left for him on the shelf
outside the porter's lodge.  he had possessed himself, on closing his
door, of the numerous loose sheets of his un
 
 ___________________________
 
onsonance with this he spoke.  "you see then all the more what you owe
me."

"well, if i do see, how can i pay?"

"by not deserting me.  by standing by me."

"oh i say--!"  but chad, as they went downstairs, clapped a firm hand,
in the manner of a pledge, upon his shoulder.  they descended slowly
together and had, in the court of the hotel, some further talk, of
which the upshot was that they presently separated.  chad newsome
departed, and strether, left alone, looked about, superficially, for
waymarsh.  but waymarsh hadn't yet, it appeared, come down, and our
friend finally went forth without sight of him.



iii


at four o'clock that afternoon he had still not seen him, but he was
then, as to make up for this, engaged in talk about him with miss
gostrey.  strether had kept away from home all day, given himself up to
the town and to his thoughts, wandered and mused, been at once restless
and absorbed--and all with the present climax of a rich little welcome
in the quartier marboeuf.  "wayma
 
 ___________________________
 
my
calculation, and i'm justified.  you're not where you were.  and the
thing," she smiled, "was for me not to be there either.  you can go of
yourself."

"oh but i feel to-day," he comfortably declared, "that i shall want you
yet."

she took him all in again.  "well, i promise you not again to leave
you, but it will only be to follow you.  you've got your momentum and
can toddle alone."

he intelligently accepted it.  "yes--i suppose i can toddle.  it's the
sight of that in fact that has upset waymarsh.  he can bear it--the way
i strike him as going--no longer.  that's only the climax of his
original feeling.  he wants me to quit; and he must have written to
woollett that i'm in peril of perdition."

"ah good!" she murmured.  "but is it only your supposition?"

"i make it out--it explains."

"then he denies?--or you haven't asked him?"

"i've not had time," strether said; "i made it out but last night,
putting various things together, and i've not been since then face to
face with him."

she 
 
 ___________________________
 
wondered.  "because you're too disgusted?  you can't trust
yourself?"

he settled his glasses on his nose.  "do i look in a great rage?"

"you look divine!"

"there's nothing," he went on, "to be angry about.  he has done me on
the contrary a service."

she made it out.  "by bringing things to a head?"

"how well you understand!" he almost groaned.  "waymarsh won't in the
least, at any rate, when i have it out with him, deny or extenuate.  he
has acted from the deepest conviction, with the best conscience and
after wakeful nights.  he'll recognise that he's fully responsible, and
will consider that he has been highly successful; so that any
discussion we may have will bring us quite together again--bridge the
dark stream that has kept us so thoroughly apart.  we shall have at
last, in the consequences of his act, something we can definitely talk
abo
 
 ___________________________
 
 you take it! but you're
always wonderful."

he had a pause that matched her own; then he had, with an adequate
spirit, a complete admission.  "it's quite true.  i'm extremely
wonderful just now.  i dare say in fact i'm quite fantastic, and i
shouldn't be at all surprised if i were mad."

"then tell me!" she earnestly pressed.  as he, however, for the time
answered nothing, only returning the look with which she watched him,
she presented herself where it was easier to meet her.  "what will mr.
waymarsh exactly have done?"

"simply have written a letter.  one will have been quite enough.  he
has told them i want looking after."

"and do you?"--she was all interest.

"immensely.  and i shall get it."

"by which you mean you don't budge?"

"i don't budge."

"you've cabled?"

"no--i've made chad do it."

"that you decline to come?"

"that he declines.  we had it out this morning and i brought him round.
he had come in, before i was down, to tell me he was ready--ready, i
mean, to return.  and he 
 
 ___________________________
 
haviour in the face.  if he was by an inexorable
logic to pay for it he was literally impatient to know the cost, and he
held himself ready to pay in instalments.  the first instalment would
be precisely this entertainment of sarah; as a consequence of which
moreover, he should know vastly better how he stood.





book eighth




i


strether rambled alone during these few days, the effect of the
incident of the previous week having been to simplify in a marked
fashion his mixed relations with waymarsh.  nothing had passed between
them in reference to mrs. newsome's summons but that our friend had
mentioned to his own the departure of the deputation actually at
sea--giving him thus an opportunity to confess to the occult
intervention he imputed to him.  waymarsh however in the event
confessed to nothing; and though this falsified in some degree
strether's forecast the latter amusedly saw in it the same depth of
good conscience out of which the dear man's impertinence had originally
sprung.  h
 
 ___________________________
 
e was patient with the dear man now and delighted to observe
how unmistakeably he had put on flesh; he felt his own holiday so
successfully large and free that he was full of allowances and
charities in respect to those cabined and confined' his instinct toward
a spirit so strapped down as waymarsh's was to walk round it on tiptoe
for fear of waking it up to a sense of losses by this time
irretrievable.  it was all very funny he knew, and but the difference,
as he often said to himself, of tweedledum and tweedledee--an
emancipation so purely comparative that it was like the advance of the
door-mat on the scraper; yet the present crisis was happily to profit
by it and the pilgrim from milrose to know himself more than ever in
the right.

strether felt that when he heard of the approach of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the pococks the
impulse of pity quite sprang up in him beside the impulse of triumph.
that was exactly why waymarsh had looked at him with eyes in which the
heat of justice was measured and shaded.  he had looked very hard, as
if affectionately sorry for the friend--the friend of fifty-five--whose
frivolity had had thus to be recorded; becoming, however, but obscurely
sententious and leaving his companion to formulate a charge.  it was in
this general attitude that he had of late altogether taken refuge; with
the drop of discussion they were solemnly sadly superficial; strether
recognised in him the mere por
 
 ___________________________
 
 system, all the height of his consistency, all the
depth of his good faith.  explicit resentment of his course would have
made him take the floor, and the thump of his fist on the table would
have affirmed him as consciously incorruptible.  had what now really
prevailed with strether been but a dread of that thump--a dread of
wincing a little painfully at what it might invidiously demonstrate?
however this might be, at any rate, one of the marks of the crisis was
a visible, a studied lapse, in waymarsh, of betrayed concern.  as if to
make up to his comrade for the stroke by which he had played providence
he now conspicuously ignored his movements, withdrew himself from the
pretension to share them, stiffened up his sensibility to neglect, and,
clasping his large empty hands and swinging his large restless foot,
clearly looked to another quarter for justice.

this made for independence on strether's part, and he had in truth at
no moment of his stay been so free to go and come.  the early summ
 
 ___________________________
 
 from new york to that port, and having also, thanks to a happy
voyage, made land with a promptitude that left chad newsome, who had
meant to meet them at the dock, belated.  he had received their
telegram, with the announcement of their immediate further advance,
just as he was taking the train for havre, so that nothing had remained
for him but to await them in paris.  he hastily picked up strether, at
the hotel, for this purpose, and he even, with easy pleasantry,
suggested the attendance of waymarsh as well--waymarsh, at the moment
his cab rattled up, being engaged, under strether's contemplative
range, in a grave perambulation of the familiar court.  waymarsh had
learned from his companion, who had already had a note, delivered by
hand, from chad, that the pococks were due, and had ambiguously,
though, as always, impressively, glowered at him over the circumstance;
carrying himself in a manner in which strether was now expert enough to
recognise his uncertainty, in the premises, as to the
 
 ___________________________
 
knowledge.  the pococks
were a quantity as yet unmeasured, and, as he had practically brought
them over, so this witness had to that extent exposed himself.  he
wanted to feel right about it, but could only, at the best, for the
time, feel vague. "i shall look to you, you know, immensely," our
friend had said, "to help me with them," and he had been quite
conscious of the effect of the remark, and of others of the same sort,
on his comrade's sombre sensibility.  he had insisted on the fact that
waymarsh would quite like mrs. pocock--one could be certain he would:
he would be with her about everything, and she would also be with him,
and miss barrace's nose, in short, would find itself out of joint.

strether had woven this web of cheerfulness while they waited in the
court for chad; he had sat smoking cigarettes to keep himself quiet
while, caged and leonine, his fellow traveller paced and turned before
him.  chad newsome was doubtless to be struck, when he arrived, with
the sharpness of their
 
 ___________________________
 
 opposition at this particular hour; he was to
remember, as a part of it, how waymarsh came with him and with strether
to the street and stood there with a face half-wistful and half-rueful.
they talked of him, the two others, as they drove, and strether put
chad in possession of much of his own strained sense of things.  he had
already, a few days before, named to him the wire he was convinced
their friend had pulled--a confidence that had made on the young man's
part quite hugely for curiosity and diversion.  the action of the
matter, moreover, strether could see, was to penetr
 
 ___________________________
 
ate; he saw that is,
how chad judged a system of influence in which waymarsh had served as a
determinant--an impression just now quickened again; with the whole
bearing of such a fact on the youth's view of his relatives.  as it
came up between them that they might now take their friend for a
feature of the control of these latter now sought to be exerted from
woollett, strether felt indeed how it would be stamped all over him,
half an hour later for sarah pocock's eyes, that he was as much on
chad's "side" as waymarsh had probably described him.  he was letting
himself
 
 ___________________________
 
 at present, go; there was no denying it; it might be
desperation, it might be confidence; he should offer himself to the
arriving travellers bristling with all the lucidity he had cultivated.

he repeated to chad what he had been saying in the court to waymarsh;
how there was no doubt whatever that his sister would find the latter a
kindred spirit, no doubt of the alliance, based on an exchange of
views, that the pair would successfully strike up.  they would become
as thick as thieves--which moreover was but a development of what
strether remembered to have said in one of his first discussions with
his mate, struck as he had then already been with the elements of
affinity between that personage and mrs. newsome herself.  "i told him,
one day, when he
 
 ___________________________
 
her unpleasant, even
though he had never known her not affable.  she had forms of affability
that were in a high degree assertive; nothing for instance had ever
been more striking than that she was affable to jim.

what had told in any case at the window of the train was her high clear
forehead, that forehead which her friends, for some reason, always
thought of as a "brow"; the long reach of her eyes--it came out at this
juncture in such a manner as to remind him, oddly enough, also of that
of waymarsh's; and the unusual gloss of her dark hair, dressed and
hatted, after her mother's refined example, with such an avoidance of
extremes that it was always spoken of at woollett as "their own."
though this analogy dropped as soon as she was on the platform it had
lasted long enough to make him feel all the advantage, as it were, of
his relief.  the woman at home, the woman to whom he was attached, was
before him just long enough to give him again the measure of the
wretchedness, in fact really of 
 
 ___________________________
 
d
come, as a good friend of chad's, on purpose to say. "there isn't
anything at all--?  i should be so delighted."

it was clear enough, when they were there before him, how she had been
received.  he saw this, as sarah got up to greet him, from something
fairly hectic in sarah's face.  he saw furthermore that they weren't,
as had first come to him, alone together; he was at no loss as to the
identity of the broad high back presented to him in the embrasure of
the window furthest from the door. waymarsh, whom he had to-day not yet
seen,  whom he only knew to have left the hotel before him,  and who
had taken part, the night previous, on mrs.  pocock's kind invitation,
conveyed by chad, in the entertainment, informal but cordial, promptly
offered by that lady--waymarsh had anticipated him even as madame de
vionnet had done, and, with his hands in his pockets and his attitude
unaffected by strether's entrance, was looking out, in marked
detachment, at the rue de rivoli.  the latter felt it in th
 
 ___________________________
 
e air--it
was immense how waymarsh could mark things---that he had remained
deeply dissociated from the overture to their hostess that we have
recorded on madame de vionnet's side.  he had, conspicuously, tact,
besides a stiff general view; and this was why he had left mrs. pocock
to struggle alone.  he would outstay the visitor; he would
unmistakeably wait; to what had he been doomed for months past but
waiting?  therefore she was to feel that she had him in reserve. what
support she drew from this was still to be seen, for, al
 
 ___________________________
 
 her boat she produced in him
such a silent agitation as he was not to fail afterwards to denounce as
pusillanimous.  "ah don't be so charming to me!--for it makes us
intimate, and after all what is between us when i've been so
tremendously on my guard and have seen you but half a dozen times?"  he
recognised once more the perverse law that so inveterately governed his
poor personal aspects:  it would be exactly like the way things always
turned out for him that he should affect mrs. pocock and waymarsh as
launched in a relation in which he had really never been launched at
all. they were at this very moment--they could only be--attributing to
him the full licence of it, and all by the operation of her own tone
with him; whereas his sole licence had been to cling with intensity to
the brink, not to dip so much as a toe into the flood. but the flicker
of his fear on this occasion was not, as may be added, to repeat
itself; it sprang up, for its moment, only to die down and then go out
for ever.
 
 ___________________________
 
e might take as engaging, and he made, under madame de
vionnet's protection, as it were, his first personal point.  "what has
really happened has been that, all the while, i've done what i came out
for."

yet it only at first gave madame de vionnet a chance immediately to
take him up.  "you've renewed acquaintance with your friend--you've
learnt to know him again." she spoke with such cheerful helpfulness
that they might, in a common cause, have been calling together and
pledged to mutual aid.

waymarsh, at this, as if he had been in question, straightway turned
from the window.  "oh yes, countess--he has renewed acquaintance with
me, and he has, i guess, learnt something about me, though i don't know
how much he has liked it.  it's for strether himself to say whether he
has felt it justifies his course."

"oh but you," said the countess gaily, "are not in the least what he
came out for--is he really, strether? and i hadn't you at all in my
mind.  i was thinking of mr. newsome, of whom we thin
 
 ___________________________
 
piercingly,
"for everything we do"--and in short she wouldn't give herself the
least little scrap away.  but she added as one who was always bland and
who could afford a concession:  "i've come because--well, because we do
come."

"ah then fortunately!"--madame de vionnet breathed it to the air. five
minutes later they were on their feet for her to take leave, standing
together in an affability that had succeeded in surviving a further
exchange of remarks; only with the emphasised appearance on waymarsh's
part of a tendency to revert, in a ruminating manner and as with an
instinctive or a precautionary lightening of his tread, to an open
window and his point of vantage.  the glazed and gilded room, all red
damask, ormolu, mirrors, clocks, looked south, and the shutters were
bowed upon the summer morning; but the tuileries garden and what was
beyond it, over which the whole place hung, were things visible through
gaps; so that the far-spreading presence of paris came up in coolness,
dimness and
 
 ___________________________
 
 because no occasion
had hitherto laid so effective a trap for it. but something admonished
him now that it was too late--unless indeed it were possibly too early;
and that he at any rate shouldn't have pleased mrs. pocock the more by
it.  "well, mr. strether--!" she murmured with vagueness, yet with
sharpness, while her crimson spot burned a trifle brighter and he was
aware that this must be for the present the limit of her response.
madame de vionnet had already, however, come to his aid, and waymarsh,
as if for further participation, moved again back to them.  it was true
that the aid rendered by madame de vionnet was questionable; it was a
sign that, for all one might confess to with her, and for all she might
complain of not enjoying, she could still insidiously show how much of
the material of conversation had accumulated between them.

"the real truth is, you know, that you sacrifice one without mercy to
dear old maria.  she leaves no room in your life for anybody else.  do
you know," s
 
 ___________________________
 
thing to do with the
matter!" sarah pocock promptly protested; "and i'm by no means sure i
have--from my mother or from any one else--a notion of whom you're
talking about."

"well, he won't let you see her, you know," madame de vionnet
sympathetically threw in.  "he never lets me--old friends as we are: i
mean as i am with maria.  he reserves her for his best hours; keeps her
consummately to himself; only gives us others the crumbs of the feast."

"well, countess, i've had some of the crumbs," waymarsh observed with
weight and covering her with his large look; which led her to break in
before he could go on.

"comment donc, he shares her with you?" she exclaimed in droll
stupefaction.  "take care you don't have, before you go much further,
rather more of all ces dames than you may know what to do with!"

but he only continued in his massive way.  "i can post you about the
lady, mrs. pocock, so far as you may care to hear.  i've seen her quite
a number of times, and i was practically present w
 
 ___________________________
 
hen they made
acquaintance.  i've kept my eye on her right along, but i don't know as
there's any real harm in her."

"'harm'?" madame de vionnet quickly echoed.  "why she's the dearest and
cleverest of all the clever and dear."

"well, you run her pretty close, countess," waymarsh returned with
spirit; "though there's no doubt she's pretty well up in things. she
knows her way round europe.  above all there's no doubt she does love
strether."

"ah but we all do that--we all love strether:  it isn't a merit!" their
fellow visitor laughed, keeping to her idea with a good conscience at
which our friend was aware that he marvelled, though he trusted also
for it, as he met her exquisitely expressive eyes, to some later light.

the prime effect of her tone, however--and it was 
 
 ___________________________
 
ld only be to make him
feel that, to say such things to a man in public, a woman must
practically think of him as ninety years old.  he had turned awkwardly,
responsively red, he knew, at her mention of maria gostrey; sarah
pocock's presence--the particular quality of it--had made this
inevitable; and then he had grown still redder in proportion as he
hated to have shown anything at all.  he felt indeed that he was
showing much, as, uncomfortably and almost in pain, he offered up his
redness to waymarsh, who, strangely enough, seemed now to be looking at
him with a certain explanatory yearning.  something deep--something
built on their old old relation--passed, in this complexity, between
them; he got the side-wind of a loyalty that stood behind all actual
queer questions.  waymarsh's dry bare humour--as it gave itself to be
taken--gloomed out to demand justice.  "well, if you talk of miss
barrace i've my chance too," it appeared stiffly to nod, and it granted
that it was giving him away, but 
 
 ___________________________
 
struggled to add that it did so only
to save him.  the sombre glow stared it at him till it fairly sounded
out--"to save you, poor old man, to save you; to save you in spite of
yourself." yet it was somehow just this communication that showed him
to himself as more than ever lost. still another result of it was to
put before him as never yet that between his comrade and the interest
represented by sarah there was already a basis.  beyond all question
now, yes:  waymarsh had been in occult relation with mrs. newsome--out,
out it all came in the very effort of his face.  "yes, you're feeling
my hand"--he as good as proclaimed it; "but only because this at least
i shall have got out of the damned old world:  that i shall have picked
up the pieces into which it has caused you to crumble." it was as if in
short, after an instant, strether had not only had it from him, but had
recognised that so far as this went the instant had cleared the air.
our friend understood
 
 ___________________________
 
 and approved; he had the sense that they wouldn't
otherwise speak of it.  this would be all, and it would mark in himself
a kind of intelligent generosity.  it was with grim sarah then--sarah
grim for all her grace--that waymarsh had begun at ten o'clock in the
morning to save him.  well--if he could, poor dear man, with his big
bleak kindness!  the upshot of which crowded perception was that
strether, on his own side, still showed no more than he absolutely had
to.  he showed the least possible by saying to mrs. pocock after an
interval much briefer than our glance at the picture reflected in him:
"oh it's as true as they please!--there's no miss gostrey for any one
but me--not the least little peep.  i keep her to mys
 
 ___________________________
 
t that he's ashamed of her. she's
really--in a way--extremely good-looking."

"ah but extremely!" strether laughed while he wondered at the odd part
he found thus imposed on him.

it continued to be so by every touch from madame de vionnet.  "well, as
i say, you know, i wish you would keep me a little more to yourself.
couldn't you name some day for me, some hour--and better soon than
late?  i'll be at home whenever it best suits you. there--i can't say
fairer."

strether thought a moment while waymarsh and mrs. pocock affected him
as standing attentive.  "i did lately call on you.  last week--while
chad was out of town."

"yes--and i was away, as it happened, too.  you choose your moments
well.  but don't wait for my next absence, for i shan't make another,"
madame de vionnet declared, "while mrs. pocock's here."

"that vow needn't keep you long, fortunately," sarah observed with
reasserted suavity.  "i shall be at present but a short time in paris.
i have my plans for other countries.  i mee
 
 ___________________________
 
t a number of charming
friends"--and her voice seemed to caress that description of these
persons.

"ah then," her visitor cheerfully replied, "all the more reason!
to-morrow, for instance, or next day?" she continued to strether.
"tuesday would do for me beautifully."

"tuesday then with pleasure."

"and at half-past five?--or at six?"

it was ridiculous, but mrs. pocock and waymarsh struck him as fairly
waiting for his answer.  it was indeed as if they were arranged,
gathered for a performance, the performance of "europe" by his
confederate and himself.  well, the performance could only go on.  "say
five forty-five."

"five forty-five--good." and now at last madame de vionnet must leave
them, though it carried, for herself, the performance a little further.
"i did hope so much also to see miss pocock. mayn't i still?"

sarah hesitated, but she rose equal.  "she'll return y
 
 ___________________________
 
which the charming woman risked a
more intense appeal.  "it wouldn't suit you also to mention some near
time, so that we shall be sure not to lose you?"  strether on his side
waited, for sarah likewise had, after all, to perform; and it occupied
him to have been thus reminded that she had stayed at home--and on her
first morning of paris--while chad led the others forth.  oh she was up
to her eyes; if she had stayed at home she had stayed by an
understanding, arrived at the evening before, that waymarsh would come
and find her alone.  this was beginning well--for a first day in paris;
and the thing might be amusing yet.  but madame de vionnet's
earnestness was meanwhile beautiful.  "you may think me indiscreet, but
i've such a desire my jeanne shall know an american girl of the really
delightful kind.  you see i throw myself for it on your charity."

the manner of this speech gave strether such a sense of depths below it
and behind it as he hadn't yet had--ministered in a way that almost
frigh
 
 ___________________________
 
tened him to his dim divinations of reasons; but if sarah still,
in spite of it, faltered, this was why he had time for a sign of
sympathy with her petitioner.  "let me say then, dear lady, to back
your plea, that miss mamie is of the most delightful kind of all--is
charming among the charming."

even waymarsh, though with more to produce on the subject, could get
into motion in time.  "yes, countess, the american girl's a thing that
your country must at least allow ours the privilege to say we can show
you.  but her full beauty is only for those who know how to make use of
her."

"ah then," smiled madame de vionnet, "that's exactly what i want to do.
i'm sure she has much to teach us."

it was wonderful, but what was scarce less so was that strether found
himself, by the quick effect of it, moved an
 
 ___________________________
 
other way.  "oh that may
be!  but don't speak of your own exquisite daughter, you know, as if
she weren't pure perfection.  i at least won't take that from you.
mademoiselle de vionnet," he explained, in considerable form, to mrs.
pocock, "is pure perfection.  mademoiselle de vionnet is exquisite."

it had been perhaps a little portentous, but "ah?" sarah simply
glittered.

waymarsh himself, for that matter, apparently recognised, in respect to
the facts, the need of a larger justice, and he had with it an
inclination to sarah.  "miss jane's strikingly handsome--in the regular
french style."

it somehow made both strether and madame de vionnet laugh out, though
at the very moment he caught in sarah's eyes, as glancing at the
speaker, a vague but unmistakeable "you too?"  it made waymarsh in fact
look consciously over her head.  madame de vionnet meanwhile, however,
made he
 
 ___________________________
 

gaze at the possibility, he completed his statement.  "but it is too
late.  thanks to you!"

it drew from her again one of her indefinite reflexions.  "oh
'me'--after all!"

he stood before her so exhilarated by his demonstration that he could
fairly be jocular.  "everything's comparative.  you're better than
that."

"you"--she could but answer him--"are better than anything." but she
had another thought.  "will mrs. pocock come to me?"

"oh yes--she'll do that.  as soon, that is, as my friend waymarsh--her
friend now--leaves her leisure."

she showed an interest.  "is he so much her friend as that?"

"why, didn't you see it all at the hotel?"

"oh"--she was amused--"'all' is a good deal to say.  i don't know--i
forget.  i lost myself in her."

"you were splendid," strether returned--"but 'all' isn't a good deal to
say:  it's only a little.  yet it's charming so far as it goes.  she
wants a man to herself."

"and hasn't she got you?"

"do you think she looked at me--or even at you--as if she 
 
 ___________________________
 
had?"
strether easily dismissed that irony.  "every one, you see, must strike
her as having somebody.  you've got chad--and chad has got you."

"i see"--she made of it what she could.  "and you've got maria."

well, he on his side accepted that.  "i've got maria.  and maria has
got me.  so it goes."

"but mr. jim--whom has he got?"

"oh he has got--or it's as if he had--the whole place."

"but for mr. waymarsh"--she recalled--"isn't miss barrace before any
one else?"

he shook his head.  "miss barrace is a raffinee, and her amusement
won't lose by mrs. pocock.  it will gain rather--especially if sarah
triumphs and she comes in for a view of it."

"how well you know us!" madame de vionnet, at this, frankly sighed.

"no--it seems to me it's we that i know.  i know sarah--it's perhaps on
that ground only that my feet are firm.  waymarsh will take her round
while chad takes jim--and i shall be, i assure 
 
 ___________________________
 
unded on a vieille sagesse.  there will be much more, if all
goes well, for you to hear and to know, and everything, believe me, for
you to like.  don't be afraid; you'll be satisfied." thus she could
talk to him of what, of her innermost life--for that was what it came
to--he must "accept"; thus she could extraordinarily speak as if in
such an affair his being satisfied had an importance.  it was all a
wonder and made the whole case larger.  he had struck himself at the
hotel, before sarah and waymarsh, as being in her boat; but where on
earth was he now?  this question was in the air till her own lips
quenched it with another.  "and do you suppose he--who loves her
so--would do anything reckless or cruel?"

he wondered what he supposed.  "do you mean your young man--?"

"i mean yours.  i mean mr. newsome." it flashed for strether the next
moment a finer light, and the light deepened as she went on. "he takes,
thank god, the truest tenderest interest in her."

it deepened indeed.  "oh i'm sur
 
 ___________________________
 
 him in; but she had
fortunately always her appetite for news.  the pure flame of the
disinterested burned in her cave of treasures as a lamp in a byzantine
vault.  it was just now, as happened, that for so fine a sense as hers
a near view would have begun to pay.  within three days, precisely, the
situation on which he was to report had shown signs of an equilibrium;
the effect of his look in at the hotel was to confirm this appearance.
if the equilibrium might only prevail! sarah was out with waymarsh,
mamie was out with chad, and jim was out alone.  later on indeed he
himself was booked to jim, was to take him that evening to the
varieties--which strether was careful to pronounce as jim pronounced
them.

miss gostrey drank it in.  "what then to-night do the others do?"

"well, it has been arranged.  waymarsh takes sarah to dine at bignons."

she wondered.  "and what do they do after?  they can't come straight
home."

"no, they can't come straight home--at least sarah can't. it's their
secre
 
 ___________________________
 
t, but i think i've guessed it." then as she waited: "the circus."

it made her stare a moment longer, then laugh almost to extravagance.
"there's no one like you!"

"like me?"--he only wanted to understand.

"like all of you together--like all of us:  woollett, milrose and their
products.  we're abysmal--but may we never be less so! mr. newsome,"
she continued, "meanwhile takes miss pocock--?"

"precisely--to the francais:  to see what you took waymarsh and me to,
a family-bill."

"ah then may mr. chad enjoy it as i did!"  but she saw so much in
things.  "do they spend their evenings, your young people, like that,
alone together?"

"well, they're young people--but they're old friends."

"i see, i see.  and do they dine--for a difference--at brebant's?"

"oh where they dine is their secret too.  but i've my idea that it will
be, very quietly, at chad's own place."

"she'll come to him there alone?"

they looked at each other a moment.  "he has 
 
 ___________________________
 
e
ideal--we each have our own.  it's her romance--and it seems to me
better on the whole than mine.  to have it in paris too," he
explained--"on this classic ground, in this charged infectious air,
with so sudden an intensity:  well, it's more than she expected.  she
has had in short to recognise the breaking out for her of a real
affinity--and with everything to enhance the drama."

miss gostrey followed.  "jim for instance?"

"jim.  jim hugely enhances.  jim was made to enhance.  and then mr.
waymarsh.  it's the crowning touch--it supplies the colour. he's
positively separated."

"and she herself unfortunately isn't--that supplies the colour too."
miss gostrey was all there.  but somehow--!  "is he in love?"

strether looked at her a long time; then looked all about the room;
then came a little nearer.  "will you never tell any one in the world
as long as ever you live?"

"never." it was charming.

"he thinks sarah really is.  but he has no fear," strether hastened to
add.

"of her being aff
 
 ___________________________
 
rancs' worth of food and drink, which
they'll scarcely touch--all that's the dear man's own romance; the
expensive kind, expensive in francs and centimes, in which he abounds.
and the circus afterwards--which is cheaper, but which he'll find some
means of making as dear as possible--that's also his tribute to the
ideal.  it does for him.  he'll see her through.  they won't talk of
anything worse than you and me."

"well, we're bad enough perhaps, thank heaven," she laughed, "to upset
them!  mr. waymarsh at any rate is a hideous old coquette." and the
next moment she had dropped everything for a different pursuit.  "what
you don't appear to know is that jeanne de vionnet has become engaged.
she's to marry--it has been definitely arranged--young monsieur de
montbron."

he fairly blushed.  "then--if you know it--it's 'out'?"

"don't i often know things that are not out?  however," she said, "this
will be out to-morrow.  but i see i've counted too much on your
possible ignorance.  you've been befo
 
 ___________________________
 
ok himself up.  "well, he is good too, in his way. it
depends on what you want him for."

miss gostrey, however, wouldn't let it depend on anything--wouldn't
have it, and wouldn't want him, at any price.  "it suits my book," she
said, "that he should be impossible; and it suits it still better," she
more imaginatively added, "that mrs. newsome doesn't know he is."

strether, in consequence, had to take it from her, but he fell back on
something else.  "i'll tell you who does really know."

"mr. waymarsh?  never!"

"never indeed.  i'm not always thinking of mr. waymarsh; in fact i find
now i never am." then he mentioned the person as if there were a good
deal in it.  "mamie."

"his own sister?"  oddly enough it but let her down.  "what good will
that do?"

"none perhaps.  but there--as usual--we are!"



iii


there they were yet again, accordingly, for two days more; when
strether, on being, at mrs. pocock's hotel, ushered into that lady's
salon, found himself at first assuming a mistake on th
 
 ___________________________
 
ng new
to think of and as if the bearings of the possibility of sarah had been
superseded.  for frankly, yes, it had bearings thus to find the girl in
solitary possession.  there was something in it that touched him to a
point not to have been reckoned beforehand, something that softly but
quite pressingly spoke to him, and that spoke the more each time he
paused again at the edge of the balcony and saw her still unaware.  her
companions were plainly scattered; sarah would be off somewhere with
waymarsh and chad off somewhere with jim.  strether didn't at all
mentally impute to chad that he was with his "good friend"; he gave him
the benefit of supposing him involved in appearances that, had he had
to describe them--for instance to maria--he would have conveniently
qualified as more subtle.  it came to him indeed the next thing that
there was perhaps almost an excess of refinement in having left mamie
in such weather up there alone; however she might in fact have
extemporised, under the charm 
 
 ___________________________
 
 really all this time happening to
me?--through the beauty of music, the gaiety of voices, the uproar in
short of our revel and the felicity of your wit?  the sound of mrs.
pocock's respiration drowns for me, i assure you, every other. it's
literally all i hear."

she focussed him with her clink of chains.  "well--!" she breathed ever
so kindly.

"well, what?"

"she is free from her chin up," she mused; "and that will be enough for
her."

"it will be enough for me!" strether ruefully laughed.  "waymarsh has
really," he then asked, "brought her to see you?"

"yes--but that's the worst of it.  i could do you no good.  and yet i
tried hard."

strether wondered.  "and how did you try?"

"why i didn't speak of you."

"i see.  that was better."

"then what would have been worse?  for speaking or silent," she lightly
wailed, "i somehow 'compromise.' and it has never been any one but you."

"that shows"--he was magnanimous--"that it's something not in you, but
in one's self.  it's my fault."

she was 
 
 ___________________________
 
silent a little.  "no, it's mr. waymarsh's.  it's the fault of
his having brought her."

"ah then," said strether good-naturedly, "why did he bring her?"

"he couldn't afford not to."

"oh you were a trophy--one of the spoils of conquest?  but why in that
case, since you do 'compromise'--"

"don't i compromise him as well?  i do compromise him as well," miss
barrace smiled.  "i compromise him as hard as i can.  but for mr.
waymarsh it isn't fatal.  it's--so far as his wonderful relation with
mrs. pocock is concerned--favourable." and then, as he still seemed
slightly at sea:  "the man who had succeeded with me, don't you see?
for her to get him from me was such an added incentive."

strether saw, but as if his path was still strewn with surprises. "it's
'from' you then that she has got him?"

she was amused at his momentary muddle.  "you can fancy my fight! she
believes in her triumph.  i think it has been part of her joy
 
 ___________________________
 
t with it.

but it brought them back.  "how indeed then she must care!" in answer to
which strether's entertainer dropped a comprehensive "ah!" expressive
perhaps of some impatience for the time he took to get used to it.  she
herself had got used to it long before.



ii


when one morning within the week he perceived the whole thing to be
really at last upon him strether's immediate feeling was all relief. he
had known this morning that something was about to happen--known it, in
a moment, by waymarsh's manner when waymarsh appeared before him during
his brief consumption of coffee and a roll in the small slippery
salle-a-manger so associated with rich rumination.  strether had taken
there of late various lonely and absent-minded meals; he communed
there, even at the end of june, with a suspected chill, the air of old
shivers mixed with old savours, the air in which so many of his
impressions had perversely matured; the place meanwhile renewing its
message to him by the very circumstance of 
 
 ___________________________
 
his single state.  he now
sat there, for the most part, to sigh softly, while he vaguely tilted
his carafe, over the vision of how much better waymarsh was occupied.
that was really his success by the common measure--to have led this
companion so on and on.  he remembered how at first there had been
scarce a squatting-place he could beguile him into passing; the actual
outcome of which at last was that there was scarce one that could
arrest him in his rush.  his rush--as strether vividly and amusedly
figured it--continued to be all with sarah, and contained perhaps
moreover the word of the whole enigma, whipping up in its fine
full-flavoured f
 
 ___________________________
 
roth the very principle, for good or for ill, of his
own, of strether's destiny.  it might after all, to the end, only be
that they had united to save him, and indeed, so far as waymarsh was
concerned, that had to be the spring of action. strether was glad at
all events, in connexion with the case, that the saving he required was
not more scant; so constituted a luxury was it in certain lights just
to lurk there out of the full glare. he had moments of quite seriously
wondering whether waymarsh wouldn't in fact, thanks to old friendship
and a conceivable indulgence, make about as good terms for him as he
might make for himself. they wouldn't be the same terms of course; but
they might have the advantage that he himself probably should be able
to make none at all.

he was never in the morning very late, but waymarsh had already been
out, and, after a peep into the dim refectory, he presented himself
with much less than usual of his large looseness.  he had made sure,
through the expans
 
 ___________________________
 
our, the sprinkled newness of the
day, so pleasant at that season in paris, he was fairly panting with
the pulse of adventure and had been with mrs. pocock, unmistakeably, to
the marche aux fleurs. strether really knew in this vision of him a joy
that was akin to envy; so reversed as he stood there did their old
positions seem; so comparatively doleful now showed, by the sharp turn
of the wheel, the posture of the pilgrim from woollett.  he wondered,
this pilgrim, if he had originally looked to waymarsh so brave and
well, so remarkably launched, as it was at present the latter's
privilege to appear.  he recalled that his friend had remarked to him
even at chester that his aspect belied his plea of prostration; but
there certainly couldn't have been, for an issue, an aspect less
concerned than waymarsh's with the menace of decay.  strether had at
any rate never resembled a southern planter of the great days--which
was the image picturesquely suggested by the happy relation between the
fuliginou
 
 ___________________________
 
s face and the wide panama of his visitor. this type, it
further amused him to guess, had been, on waymarsh's part, the object
of sarah's care; he was convinced that her taste had not been a
stranger to the conception and purchase of the hat, any more than her
fine fingers had been guiltless of the bestowal of the rose.  it came
to him in the current of thought, as things so oddly did come, that he
had never risen with the lark to attend a brilliant woman to the marche
aux fleurs; this could be fastened on him in connexion neither with
miss gostrey nor with madame de vionnet; the practice of getting 
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs through his general genius for missing them, while
others were for ever picking them up through a contrary bent.  and it
was others who looked abstemious and he who looked greedy; it was he
somehow who finally paid, and it was others who mainly partook.  yes,
he should go to the scaffold yet for he wouldn't know quite whom.  he
almost, for that matter, felt on the scaffold now and really quite
enjoying it.  it worked out as because he was anxious there--it worked
out as for this reason that waymarsh was so blooming.  it was his trip
for health, for a change, that proved the success--which was just what
strether, planning and exerting himself, had desired it should be. that
truth already sat full-blown on his companion's lips; benevolence
breathed from them as with the warmth of active exercise, and also a
little as with the bustle of haste.

"mrs. pocock, whom i left a quarter of an hour ago at her hotel, has
asked me to mention to you that she would like to find you at home here
in about 
 
 ___________________________
 
another hour.  she wants to see you; she has something to
say--or considers, i believe, that you may have:  so that i asked her
myself why she shouldn't come right round.  she hasn't been round
yet--to see our place; and i took upon myself to say that i was sure
you'd be glad to have her.  the thing's therefore, you see, to keep
right here till she comes."

the announcement was sociably, even though, after waymarsh's wont,
somewhat solemnly made; but strether quickly felt other things in it
than these light features.  it was the first approach, from that
quarter, to admitted consciousness; it quickened his pulse; it simply
meant at last that he should have but himself to thank if he didn't
know where he was.  he had finished his breakfast; he pushed it away
and was on his feet.  there were plenty of elements of surprise, but
only one of doubt.  "the thing's for you to keep here too?"  waymarsh
had been sl
 
 ___________________________
 
the next five minutes. it was no part of
his friend's wish, as appeared, to help to receive mrs. pocock; he
quite understood the spirit in which she was to present herself, but
his connexion with her visit was limited to his having--well, as he
might say--perhaps a little promoted it.  he had thought, and had let
her know it, that strether possibly would think she might have been
round before.  at any rate, as turned out, she had been wanting
herself, quite a while, to come.  "i told her," said waymarsh, "that it
would have been a bright idea if she had only carried it out before."

strether pronounced it so bright as to be almost dazzling.  "but why
hasn't she carried it out before?  she has seen me every day--she had
only to name her hour.  i've been waiting and waiting."

"well, i told her you had.  and she has been waiting too."  it was, in
the oddest way in the world, on the showing of this tone, a genial new
pressing coaxing waymarsh; a waymarsh conscious with a different
consciousness f
 
 ___________________________
 
ming now."

considering how many pieces had to fit themselves, it all fell, in
strether's brain, into a close rapid order.  he saw on the spot what
had happened, and what probably would yet; and it was all funny enough.
it was perhaps just this freedom of appreciation that wound him up to
his flare of high spirits.  "what is she coming for?--to kill me?"

"she's coming to be very very kind to you, and you must let me say that
i greatly hope you'll not be less so to herself."

this was spoken by waymarsh with much gravity of admonition, and as
strether stood there he knew he had but to make a movement to take the
attitude of a man gracefully receiving a present.  the present was that
of the opportunity dear old waymarsh had flattered himself he had
divined in him the slight soreness of not having yet thoroughly
enjoyed; so he had brought it to him thus, as on a little silver
breakfast-tray, familiarly though delicately--without oppressive pomp;
and he was to bend and smile and acknowledge, was 
 
 ___________________________
 
is dignity.  no wonder the old boy bloomed in
this bland air of his own distillation. strether felt for a moment as
if sarah were actually walking up and down outside.  wasn't she hanging
about the porte-cochere while her friend thus summarily opened a way?
strether would meet her but to take it, and everything would be for the
best in the best of possible worlds.  he had never so much known what
any one meant as, in the light of this demonstration, he knew what mrs.
newsome did. it had reached waymarsh from sarah, but it had reached
sarah from her mother, and there was no break in the chain by which it
reached him.  "has anything particular happened," he asked after a
minute--"so suddenly to determine her?  has she heard anything
unexpected from home?"

waymarsh, on this, it seemed to him, looked at him harder than ever.
"'unexpected'?"  he had a brief hesitation; then, however, he was firm.
"we're leaving paris."

"leaving?  that is sudden."

waymarsh showed a different opinion.  "less so th
 
 ___________________________
 
great pleasure, i assure you, in any explanation.  i shall be
delighted to receive sarah."

the sombre glow just darkened in his comrade's eyes; but he was struck
with the way it died out again.  it was too mixed with another
consciousness--it was too smothered, as might be said, in flowers.  he
really for the time regretted it--poor dear old sombre glow! something
straight and simple, something heavy and empty, had been eclipsed in
its company; something by which he had best known his friend.  waymarsh
wouldn't be his friend, somehow, without the occasional ornament of the
sacred rage, and the right to the sacred rage--inestimably precious for
strether's charity--he also seemed in a manner, and at mrs. pocock's
elbow, to have forfeited. strether remembered the occasion early in
their stay when on that very spot he had come out with his earnest, his
ominous "quit it!"--and, so remembering, felt it hang by a hair that he
didn't himself now utter the same note.  waymarsh was having a good
time--
 
 ___________________________
 
certain connexions. "is what
mrs. newsome had cabled her daughter an injunction to break off short?"

the grand manner indeed at this just raised its head a little. "i know
nothing about mrs. newsome's cables."

their eyes met on it with some intensity--during the few seconds of
which something happened quite out of proportion to the time. it
happened that strether, looking thus at his friend, didn't take his
answer for truth--and that something more again occurred in consequence
of that.  yes--waymarsh just did know about mrs. newsome's cables:  to
what other end than that had they dined together at bignon's?  strether
almost felt for the instant that it was to mrs. newsome herself the
dinner had been given; and, for that matter, quite felt how she must
have known about it and, as he might think, protected and consecrated
it.  he had a quick blurred view of daily cables, questions, answers,
signals:  clear enough was his vision of the expense that, when so
wound up, the lady at home was prepa
 
 ___________________________
 
red to incur.  vivid not less was
his memory of what, during his long observation of her, some of her
attainments of that high pitch had cost her.  distinctly she was at the
highest now, and waymarsh, who imagined himself an independent
performer, was really, forcing his fine old natural voice, an
overstrained accompanist.  the whole reference of his errand seemed to
mark her for strether as by this time consentingly familiar to him, and
nothing yet had so despoiled her of a special shade of consideration.
"you don't know," he asked, "whether sarah has been directed from home
to try me on the matter of my also going to switzerland?"

"i know," said waymarsh as manfully as possible, "nothing
 
 ___________________________
 
t.  he knew everything, strether more and more felt,
that he thus disclaimed, and his little punishment was just in this
doom to a second fib.  what falser position--given the man--could the
most vindictive mind impose? he ended by squeezing through a passage in
which three months before he would certainly have stuck fast.  "mrs
pocock will probably be ready herself to answer any enquiry you may put
to her.  but," he continued, "but--!"  he faltered on it.

"but what?  don't put her too many?"

waymarsh looked large, but the harm was done; he couldn't, do what he
would, help looking rosy.  "don't do anything you'll be sorry for."

it was an attenuation, strether guessed, of something else that had
been on his lips; it was a sudden drop to directness, and was thereby
the voice of sincerity.  he had fallen to the supplicating note, and
that immediately, for our friend, made a difference and reinstated him.
they were in communication as they had been, that first morning, in
sarah's salon and in h
 
 ___________________________
 
er presence and madame de vionnet's; and the same
recognition of a great good will was again, after all, possible.  only
the amount of response waymarsh had then taken for granted was doubled,
decupled now.  this came out when he presently said:  "of course i
needn't assure you i hope you'll come with us."  then it was that his
implications and expectations loomed up for strether as almost
pathetically gross.

the latter patted his shoulder while he thanked him, giving the go-by
to the question of joining the pococks; he expressed the joy he felt at
seeing him go forth again so brave and free, and he in fact almost took
leave of him on the spot
 
 ___________________________
 
 without fear," he laughed; "i assure you i
shan't hurt her.  i don't think either she'll hurt me:  i'm in a
situation in which damage was some time ago discounted.  besides, that
isn't what worries you--but don't, don't explain! we're all right as we
are:  which was the degree of success our adventure was pledged to for
each of us.  we weren't, it seemed, all right as we were before; and
we've got over the ground, all things considered, quickly.  i hope
you'll have a lovely time in the alps."

waymarsh fairly looked up at him as from the foot of them.  "i don't
know as i ought really to go."

it was the conscience of milrose in the very voice of milrose, but, oh
it was feeble and flat! strether suddenly felt quite ashamed for him;
he breathed a greater boldness.  "let yourself, on the contrary, go--in
all agreeable directions.  these are precious hours--at our age they
mayn't recur.  don't have it to say to yourself at milrose, next
winter, that you hadn't courage for them."  and then as his 
 
 ___________________________
 
comrade
queerly stared:  "live up to mrs. pocock."

"live up to her?"

"you're a great help to her."

waymarsh looked at it as at one of the uncomfortable things that were
certainly true and that it was yet ironical to say.  "it's more then
than you are."

"that's exactly your own chance and advantage.  besides," said
strether, "i do in my way contribute.  i know what i'm about."

waymarsh had kept on his great panama, and, as he now stood nearer the
door, his last look beneath the shade of it had turned again to
darkness and warning.  "so do i!  see here, strether."

"i know what you're going to say.  'quit this'?"

"quit this!"  but it lacked its old intensity; nothing of it remained;
it went out of the room with him.



iii


almost the first thing, strangely enough, that, about an hour later,
strether found himself doing in sarah's presence was to remark
articulately on this 
 
 ___________________________
 
nce was, in the
conditions, "funny," and made funnier still by sarah's attitude, by the
turn the occasion had, with her appearance, so sensibly taken. her
appearance was really indeed funnier than anything else--the spirit in
which he felt her to be there as soon as she was there, the shade of
obscurity that cleared up for him as soon as he was seated with her in
the small salon de lecture that had, for the most part, in all the
weeks, witnessed the wane of his early vivacity of discussion with
waymarsh.  it was an immense thing, quite a tremendous thing, for her
to have come:  this truth opened out to him in spite of his having
already arrived for himself at a fairly vivid view of it.  he had done
exactly what he had given waymarsh his word for--had walked and
re-walked the court while he awaited her advent; acquiring in this
exercise an amount of light that affected him at the time as flooding
the scene.  she had decided upon the step in order to give him the
benefit of a doubt, in order to 
 
 ___________________________
 
be able to say to her mother that she
had, even to abjectness, smoothed the way for him.  the doubt had been
as to whether he mightn't take her as not having smoothed it--and the
admonition had possibly come from waymarsh's more detached spirit.
waymarsh had at any rate, certainly, thrown his weight into the
scale--he had pointed to the importance of depriving their friend of a
grievance.  she had done justice to the plea, and it was to set herself
right with a high ideal that she actually sat there in her state.  her
calculation was sharp in the immobility with which she held her tall
parasol-stick upright and at arm's length, quite as if she had struck
the place to plant her flag; in the separate precautions she took not
to show as nervous; i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the aggressive repose in which she did quite
nothing but wait for him.  doubt ceased to be possible from the moment
he had taken in that she had arrived with no proposal whatever; that
her concern was simply to show what she had come to receive.  she had
come to receive his submission, and waymarsh was to have made it plain
to him that she would expect nothing less.  he saw fifty things, her
host, at this convenient stage; but one of those he most saw was that
their anxious friend hadn't quite had the hand required of him.
waymarsh had, however, uttered the request that she might find him
mild, and while hanging about the court before her arrival he had
turned over with zeal the different ways in which he could be so. the
difficulty was that if he was mild he wasn't, for her purpose,
cons
 
 ___________________________
 
cious.  if she wished him conscious--as everything about her cried
aloud that she did--she must accordingly be at costs to make him so.
conscious he was, for himself--but only of too many things; so she must
choose the one she required.

practically, however, it at last got itself named, and when once that
had happened they were quite at the centre of their situation. one
thing had really done as well as another; when strether had spoken of
waymarsh's leaving him, and that had necessarily brought on a reference
to mrs. pocock's similar intention, the jump was but short to supreme
lucidity.  light became indeed after that so intense that strether
would doubtless have but half made out, in the prodigious glare, by
which of the two the issue had been in fact precipitated.  it was, in
their contracted quarters, as much there between them as if it had been
something suddenly spilled with a crash and a splash on the floor.  the
form of his submi
 
 ___________________________
 
e so faithfully awaited
him.  none of these excursions had on the whole been livelier than the
pair of incidents--the fruit of the short interval since his previous
visit--on which he had now to report to her.  he had seen chad newsome
late the night before, and he had had that morning, as a sequel to this
conversation, a second interview with sarah.  "but they're all off," he
said, "at last."

it puzzled her a moment.  "all?--mr. newsome with them?"

"ah not yet!  sarah and jim and mamie.  but waymarsh with them--for
sarah.  it's too beautiful," strether continued; "i find i don't get
over that--it's always a fresh joy.  but it's a fresh joy too," he
added, "that--well, what do you think?  little bilham also goes. but he
of course goes for mamie."

miss gostrey wondered.  "'for' her?  do you mean they're already
engaged?"

"well," said strether, "say then for me.  he'll do anything for me;
just as i will, for that matter--anything i can--for him.  or for mamie
either.  she'll do anything for 
 
 ___________________________
 
iff clean blouse, of a knitted nightcap and of the
genius of response--who, in fine, would sit on the shafts, tell him
what the french people were thinking, and remind him, as indeed the
whole episode would incidentally do, of maupassant.  strether heard his
lips, for the first time in french air, as this vision assumed
consistency, emit sounds of expressive intention without fear of his
company. he had been afraid of chad and of maria and of madame de
vionnet; he had been most of all afraid of waymarsh, in whose presence,
so far as they had mixed together in the light of the town, he had
never without somehow paying for it aired either his vocabulary or his
accent.  he usually paid for it by meeting immediately afterwards
waymarsh's eye.

such were the liberties with which his fancy played after he had turned
off to the hillside that did really and truly, as well as most amiably,
await him beneath the poplars, the hillside that made him feel, for a
murmurous couple of hours, how happy had bee
 
 ___________________________
 
he had the
sense of success, of a finer harmony in things; nothing but what had
turned out as yet according to his plan. it most of all came home to
him, as he lay on his back on the grass, that sarah had really gone,
that his tension was really relaxed; the peace diffused in these ideas
might be delusive, but it hung about him none the less for the time. it
fairly, for half an hour, sent him to sleep; he pulled his straw hat
over his eyes--he had bought it the day before with a reminiscence of
waymarsh's--and lost himself anew in lambinet.  it was as if he had
found out he was tired--tired not from his walk, but from that inward
exercise which had known, on the whole, for three months, so little
intermission.  that was it--when once they were off he had dropped;
this moreover was what he had dropped to, and now he was touching
bottom.  he was kept luxuriously quiet, soothed and amused by the
consciousness of what he had found at the end of his descent.  it was
very much what he had told maria
 
 ___________________________
 
o see chad the next day, and he had prefigured
seeing him by an early call; having in general never stood on ceremony
in respect to visits at the boulevard malesherbes.  it had been more
often natural for him to go there than for chad to come to the small
hotel, the attractions of which were scant; yet it nevertheless, just
now, at the eleventh hour, did suggest itself to strether to begin by
giving the young man a chance.  it struck him that, in the inevitable
course, chad would be "round," as waymarsh used to say--waymarsh who
already, somehow, seemed long ago.  he hadn't come the day before,
because it had been arranged between them that madame de vionnet should
see their friend first; but now that this passage had taken place he
would present himself, and their friend wouldn't have long to wait.
strether assumed, he became aware, on this reasoning, that the
interesting parties to the arrangement would have met betimes, and that
the more interesting of the two--as she was after all--would h