minutes all went on well, and she was just saying, ‘i really
shall do it this time--’ when the path gave a sudden twist and shook
itself (as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she found
herself actually walking in at the door.

‘oh, it’s too bad!’ she cried. ‘i never saw such a house for getting in
the way! never!’

however, there was the hill full in sight, so there was nothing to be
done but start again. this time she came upon a large flower-bed, with a
border of daisies, and a willow-tree growing in the middle.

‘o tiger-lily,’ said alice, addressing herself to one that was waving
gracefully about in the wind, ‘i wish you could talk!’

‘we can talk,’ said the tiger-lily: ‘when there’s anybody worth talking
to.’

alice was so astonished that she could not speak for a minute: it quite
seemed to take her breath away. at length, as the tiger-lily only went
on waving about, she spoke again, in a timid voice--almost in a whisper.
‘and can all the
 
 ___________________________
 
oughs!’

‘didn’t you know that?’ cried another daisy, and here they all began
shouting together, till the air seemed quite full of little shrill
voices. ‘silence, every one of you!’ cried the tiger-lily, waving itself
passionately from side to side, and trembling with excitement. ‘they
know i can’t get at them!’ it panted, bending its quivering head towards
alice, ‘or they wouldn’t dare to do it!’

‘never mind!’ alice said in a soothing tone, and stooping down to the
daisies, who were just beginning again, she whispered, ‘if you don’t
hold your tongues, i’ll pick you!’

there was silence in a moment, and several of the pink daisies turned
white.

‘that’s right!’ said the tiger-lily. ‘the daisies are worst of all. when
one speaks, they all begin together, and it’s enough to make one wither
to hear the way they go on!’

‘how is it you can all talk so nicely?’ alice said, hoping to get it
into a better temper by a compliment. ‘i’ve been in 