ade--had early induced matthew maule to build a
hut, shaggy with thatch, at this point, although somewhat too remote
from what was then the centre of the village.  in the growth of the
town, however, after some thirty or forty years, the site covered by
this rude hovel had become exceedingly desirable in the eyes of a
prominent and powerful personage, who asserted plausible claims to the
proprietorship of this and a large adjacent tract of land, on the
strength of a grant from the legislature.  colonel pyncheon, the
claimant, as we gather from whatever traits of him are preserved, was
characterized by an iron energy of purpose.  matthew maule, on the
other hand, though an obscure man, was stubborn in the defence of what
he considered his right; and, for several years, he succeeded in
protecting the acre or two of earth which, with his own toil, he had
hewn out of the primeval forest, to be his garden ground and homestead.
no written record of this dispute is known to be in existence.  our
acquaintance
 
 ___________________________
 
 with the whole subject is derived chiefly from tradition.
it would be bold, therefore, and possibly unjust, to venture a decisive
opinion as to its merits; although it appears to have been at least a
matter of doubt, whether colonel pyncheon's claim were not unduly
stretched, in order to make it cover the small metes and bounds of
matthew maule.  what greatly strengthens such a suspicion is the fact
that this controversy between two ill-matched antagonists--at a period,
moreover, laud it as we may, when personal influence had far more
weight than now--remained for years undecided, and came to a close only
with the death of the party occupying the disputed soil.  the mode of
his death, too, affects the mind differently, in our day, 
 
 ___________________________
 
indiscrimination with
which they persecuted, not merely the poor and aged, as in former
judicial massacres, but people of all ranks; their own equals,
brethren, and wives.  amid the disorder of such various ruin, it is not
strange that a man of inconsiderable note, like maule, should have
trodden the martyr's path to the hill of execution almost unremarked in
the throng of his fellow sufferers.  but, in after days, when the
frenzy of that hideous epoch had subsided, it was remembered how loudly
colonel pyncheon had joined in the general cry, to purge the land from
witchcraft; nor did it fail to be whispered, that there was an
invidious acrimony in the zeal with which he had sought the
condemnation of matthew maule.  it was well known that the victim had
recognized the bitterness of personal enmity in his persecutor's
conduct towards him, and that he declared himself hunted to death for
his spoil.  at the moment of execution--with the halter about his neck,
and while colonel pyncheon sat on horseback, 
 
 ___________________________
 
grimly gazing at the scene
maule had addressed him from the scaffold, and uttered a prophecy, of
which history, as well as fireside tradition, has preserved the very
words.  "god," said the dying man, pointing his finger, with a ghastly
look, at the undismayed countenance of his enemy,--"god will give him
blood to drink!"  after the reputed wizard's death, his humble
homestead had fallen an easy spoil into colonel pyncheon's grasp.  when
it was understood, however, that the colonel intended to erect a family
mansion-spacious, ponderously framed of oaken timber, and calculated to
endure for many generations of his posterity over the spot first
covered by the log-built hut of matthew maule, there was much shaking
of the head among the village gossips.  without absolutely expressing a
doubt whether the stalwart puritan had acted as a man of conscience and
integrity throughout the proceedings which have been sketched
 
 ___________________________
 
host of the latter a kind of
privilege to haunt its new apartments, and the chambers into which
future bridegrooms were to lead their brides, and where children of the
pyncheon blood were to be born.  the terror and ugliness of maule's
crime, and the wretchedness of his punishment, would darken the freshly
plastered walls, and infect them early with the scent of an old and
melancholy house.  why, then,--while so much of the soil around him was
bestrewn with the virgin forest leaves,--why should colonel pyncheon
prefer a site that had already been accurst?

but the puritan soldier and magistrate was not a man to be turned aside
from his well-considered scheme, either by dread of the wizard's ghost,
or by flimsy sentimentalities of any kind, however specious.  had he
been told of a bad air, it might have moved him somewhat; but he was
ready to encounter an evil spirit on his own ground.  endowed with
commonsense, as massive and hard as blocks of granite, fastened
together by stern rigidity of purpose, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 there was, which awakened a hardly
concealed displeasure in the breasts of a few of the more punctilious
visitors.  the founder of this stately mansion--a gentleman noted for
the square and ponderous courtesy of his demeanor, ought surely to have
stood in his own hall, and to have offered the first welcome to so many
eminent personages as here presented themselves in honor of his solemn
festival.  he was as yet invisible; the most favored of the guests had
not beheld him.  this sluggishness on colonel pyncheon's part became
still more unaccountable, when the second dignitary of the province
made his appearance, and found no more ceremonious a reception.  the
lieutenant-governor, although his visit was one of the anticipated
glories of the day, had alighted from his horse, and assisted his lady
from her side-saddle, and crossed the colonel's threshold, without
other greeting than that of the principal domestic.

this person--a gray-headed man, of quiet and most respectful
deportment--found it necessar
 
 ___________________________
 
y to explain that his master still
remained in his study, or private apartment; on entering which, an hour
before, he had expressed a wish on no account to be disturbed.

"do not you see, fellow," said the high-sheriff of the county, taking
the servant aside, "that this is no less a man than the
lieutenant-governor? summon colonel pyncheon at once! i know that he
received letters from england this morning; and, in the perusal and
consideration of them, an hour may have passed away without his
noticing it.  but he will be ill-pleased, i judge, if you suffer him to
neglect the courtesy due to one of our chief rulers, and who may be
said to represent king william, in the absence of the governor himself.
call your master instantly."

"nay, please your worship," answered the man, in much perplexity, but
with a backwardness that striki
 
 ___________________________
 
ngly indicated the hard and severe
character of colonel pyncheon's domestic rule; "my master's orders were
exceeding strict; and, as your worship knows, he permits of no
discretion in the obedience of those who owe him service.  let who list
open yonder door; i dare not, though the governor's own voice should
bid me do it!"

"pooh, pooh, master high sheriff!" cried the lieutenant-governor, who
had overheard the foregoing discussion, and felt himself high enough in
station to play a little with his dignity.  "i will take the matter
into my own hands.  it is t
 
 ___________________________
 
 free knock.  then, looking round, with a
smile, to the spectators, he awaited a response.  as none came,
however, he knocked again, but with the same unsatisfactory result as
at first.  and now, being a trifle choleric in his temperament, the
lieutenant-governor uplifted the heavy hilt of his sword, wherewith he
so beat and banged upon the door, that, as some of the bystanders
whispered, the racket might have disturbed the dead.  be that as it
might, it seemed to produce no awakening effect on colonel pyncheon.
when the sound subsided, the silence through the house was deep,
dreary, and oppressive, notwithstanding that the tongues of many of the
guests had already been loosened by a surreptitious cup or two of wine
or spirits.

"strange, forsooth!--very strange!" cried the lieutenant-governor,
whose smile was changed to a frown.  "but seeing that our host sets us
the good example of forgetting ceremony, i shall likewise throw it
aside, and make free to intrude on his privacy."

he tried the door, whi
 
 ___________________________
 
a hush.  a shadow of awe and half-fearful
anticipation--nobody knew wherefore, nor of what--had all at once
fallen over the company.

they thronged, however, to the now open door, pressing the
lieutenant-governor, in the eagerness of their curiosity, into the room
in advance of them.  at the first glimpse they beheld nothing
extraordinary:  a handsomely furnished room, of moderate size, somewhat
darkened by curtains; books arranged on shelves; a large map on the
wall, and likewise a portrait of colonel pyncheon, beneath which sat
the original colonel himself, in an oaken elbow-chair, with a pen in
his hand.  letters, parchments, and blank sheets of paper were on the
table before him.  he appeared to gaze at the curious crowd, in front
of which stood the lieutenant-governor; and there was a frown on his
dark and massive countenance, as if sternly resentful of the boldness
that had impelled them into his private retirement.

a little boy--the colonel's grandchild, and the only human being that
ever dare
 
 ___________________________
 
d to be familiar with him--now made his way among the guests,
and ran towards the seated figure; then pausing halfway, he began to
shriek with terror.  the company, tremulous as the leaves of a tree,
when all are shaking together, drew nearer, and perceived that there
was an unnatural distortion in the fixedness of colonel pyncheon's
stare; that there was blood on his ruff, and that his hoary beard was
saturated with it.  it was too late to give assistance.  the
iron-hearted puritan, the relentless persecutor, the grasping and
strong-willed man was dead! dead, in his new house! there is a
tradition, only worth alluding to as lending a tinge of superstitious
awe to a scene perhaps gloomy enough without it, that a voice spoke
loudly among the guests, the tones of which were like those of old
matthew maule, the executed wiza
 
 ___________________________
 
rd,--"god hath given him blood to
drink!"

thus early had that one guest,--the only guest who is certain, at one
time or another, to find his way into every human dwelling,--thus early
had death stepped across the threshold of the house of the seven gables!

colonel pyncheon's sudden and mysterious end made a vast deal of noise
in its day.  there were many rumors, some of which have vaguely drifted
down to the present time, how that appearances indicated violence; that
there were the marks of fingers on his throat, and the print of a
bloody hand on his plaited ruff; and that his peaked beard was
dishevelled, as if it had been fiercely clutched and pulled.  it was
averred, likewise, that the lattice window, near the colonel's chair,
was open; and that, only a few mi
 
 ___________________________
 
g any
particular individual as the perpetrator.  the rank, wealth, and
eminent character of the deceased must have insured the strictest
scrutiny into every ambiguous circumstance.  as none such is on record,
it is safe to assume that none existed. tradition,--which sometimes
brings down truth that history has let slip, but is oftener the wild
babble of the time, such as was formerly spoken at the fireside and now
congeals in newspapers,--tradition is responsible for all contrary
averments.  in colonel pyncheon's funeral sermon, which was printed,
and is still extant, the rev. mr. higginson enumerates, among the many
felicities of his distinguished parishioner's earthly career, the happy
seasonableness of his death.  his duties all performed,--the highest
prosperity attained,--his race and future generations fixed on a stable
basis, and with a stately roof to shelter them for centuries to
come,--what other upward step remained for this good man to take, save
the final step from earth to the golden gat
 
 ___________________________
 
e of heaven! the pious
clergyman surely would not have uttered words like these had he in the
least suspected that the colonel had been thrust into the other world
with the clutch of violence upon his throat.

the family of colonel pyncheon, at the epoch of his death, seemed
destined to as fortunate a permanence as can anywise consist with the
inherent instability of human affairs.  it might fairly be anticipated
that the progress of time would rather increase and ripen their
prosperity, than wear away and destroy it.  for, not only had his son
and heir come into immediate enjoyment of a rich estate, but there was
a claim through an indian deed, confirmed by a subsequent grant of the
general court, to a vast and as yet unexplored 
 
 ___________________________
 
--as it inevitably must, though perhaps
not till ages hence--to the golden fertility of human culture, it would
be the source of incalculable wealth to the pyncheon blood.  had the
colonel survived only a few weeks longer, it is probable that his great
political influence, and powerful connections at home and abroad, would
have consummated all that was necessary to render the claim available.
but, in spite of good mr. higginson's congratulatory eloquence, this
appeared to be the one thing which colonel pyncheon, provident and
sagacious as he was, had allowed to go at loose ends.  so far as the
prospective territory was concerned, he unquestionably died too soon.
his son lacked not merely the father's eminent position, but the talent
and force of character to achieve it: he could, therefore, effect
nothing by dint of political interest; and the bare justice or legality
of the claim was not so apparent, after the colonel's decease, as it
had been pronounced in his lifetime.  some connecting link had sli
 
 ___________________________
 
und in a modern chair.

as for ornamental articles of furniture, we recollect but two, if such
they may be called.  one was a map of the pyncheon territory at the
eastward, not engraved, but the handiwork of some skilful old
draughtsman, and grotesquely illuminated with pictures of indians and
wild beasts, among which was seen a lion; the natural history of the
region being as little known as its geography, which was put down most
fantastically awry.  the other adornment was the portrait of old
colonel pyncheon, at two thirds length, representing the stern features
of a puritanic-looking personage, in a skull-cap, with a laced band and
a grizzly beard; holding a bible with one hand, and in the other
uplifting an iron sword-hilt.  the latter object, being more
successfully depicted by the artist, stood out in far greater
prominence than the sacred volume.  face to face with this picture, on
entering the apartment, miss hepzibah pyncheon came to a pause;
regarding it with a singular scowl, a strange con
 
 ___________________________
 
fability, on being
absolutely cornered, and brought to the point of personal intercourse;
like the angel whom jacob wrestled with, she is ready to bless you when
once overcome.

the old gentlewoman took a dreary and proud satisfaction in leading
phoebe from room to room of the house, and recounting the traditions
with which, as we may say, the walls were lugubriously frescoed.  she
showed the indentations made by the lieutenant-governor's sword-hilt in
the door-panels of the apartment where old colonel pyncheon, a dead
host, had received his affrighted visitors with an awful frown.  the
dusky terror of that frown, hepzibah observed, was thought to be
lingering ever since in the passageway.  she bade phoebe step into one
of the tall chairs, and inspect the ancient map of the pyncheon
territory at the eastward.  in a tract of land on which she laid her
finger, there existed a silver mine, the locality of which was
precisely pointed out in some memoranda of colonel pyncheon himself,
but only to be made k
 
 ___________________________
 
r must not be forgotten,--butter which phoebe
herself had churned, in her own rural home, and brought it to her
cousin as a propitiatory gift,--smelling of clover-blossoms, and
diffusing the charm of pastoral scenery through the dark-panelled
parlor.  all this, with the quaint gorgeousness of the old china cups
and saucers, and the crested spoons, and a silver cream-jug (hepzibah's
only other article of plate, and shaped like the rudest porringer), set
out a board at which the stateliest of old colonel pyncheon's guests
need not have scorned to take his place.  but the puritan's face
scowled down out of the picture, as if nothing on the table pleased his
appetite.

by way of contributing what grace she could, phoebe gathered some roses
and a few other flowers, possessing either scent or beauty, and
arranged them in a glass pitcher, which, having long ago lost its
handle, was so much the fitter for a flower-vase.  the early
sunshine--as fresh as that which peeped into eve's bower while she and
adam sat
 
 ___________________________
 
ed.  on his arrival from the other world, he had merely
found it necessary to spend a quarter of an hour at a barber's, who had
trimmed down the puritan's full beard into a pair of grizzled whiskers,
then, patronizing a ready-made clothing establishment, he had exchanged
his velvet doublet and sable cloak, with the richly worked band under
his chin, for a white collar and cravat, coat, vest, and pantaloons;
and lastly, putting aside his steel-hilted broadsword to take up a
gold-headed cane, the colonel pyncheon of two centuries ago steps
forward as the judge of the passing moment!

of course, phoebe was far too sensible a girl to entertain this idea in
any other way than as matter for a smile.  possibly, also, could the
two personages have stood together before her eye, many points of
difference would have been perceptible, and perhaps only a general
resemblance.  the long lapse of intervening years, in a climate so
unlike that which had fostered the ancestral englishman, must
inevitably have wrought 
 
 ___________________________
 
how.

scarcely any of the items in the above-drawn parallel occurred to
phoebe, whose country birth and residence, in truth, had left her
pitifully ignorant of most of the family traditions, which lingered,
like cobwebs and incrustations of smoke, about the rooms and
chimney-corners of the house of the seven gables.  yet there was a
circumstance, very trifling in itself, which impressed her with an odd
degree of horror.  she had heard of the anathema flung by maule, the
executed wizard, against colonel pyncheon and his posterity,--that god
would give them blood to drink,--and likewise of the popular notion,
that this miraculous blood might now and then be heard gurgling in
their throats.  the latter scandal--as became a person of sense, and,
more especially, a member of the pyncheon family--phoebe had set down
for the absurdity which it unquestionably was.  but ancient
superstitions, after being steeped in human hearts and embodied in
human breath, and passing from lip to ear in manifold repetition,
t
 
 ___________________________
 
calamities of the pyncheons
began from that quarrel with the wizard, as you call him.  and you, mr.
holgrave look as if you thought so too!  how singular that you should
believe what is so very absurd, when you reject many things that are a
great deal worthier of credit!"

"i do believe it," said the artist seriously; "not as a superstition,
however, but as proved by unquestionable facts, and as exemplifying a
theory.  now, see:  under those seven gables, at which we now look
up,--and which old colonel pyncheon meant to be the house of his
descendants, in prosperity and happiness, down to an epoch far beyond
the present,--under that roof, through a portion of three centuries,
there has been perpetual remorse of conscience, a constantly defeated
hope, strife amongst kindred, various misery, a strange form of death,
dark suspicion, unspeakable disgrace,--all, or most of which calamity i
have the means of tracing to the old puritan's inordinate desire to
plant and endow a family.  to plant a family! this
 
 ___________________________
 
 what does your master want with me?" said the carpenter to mr.
pyncheon's black servant.  "does the house need any repair?  well it
may, by this time; and no blame to my father who built it, neither! i
was reading the old colonel's tombstone, no longer ago than last
sabbath; and, reckoning from that date, the house has stood
seven-and-thirty years.  no wonder if there should be a job to do on
the roof."

"don't know what massa wants," answered scipio.  "the house is a berry
good house, and old colonel pyncheon think so too, i reckon;--else why
the old man haunt it so, and frighten a poor nigga, as he does?"

"well, well, friend scipio; let your master know that i'm coming," said
the carpenter with a laugh.  "for a fair, workmanlike job, he'll find
me his man.  and so the house is haunted, is it? it will take a tighter
workman than i am to keep the spirits out of the seven gables.  even if
the colonel would be quiet," he added, muttering to himself, "my old
grandfather, the wizard, will be pretty sure
 
 ___________________________
 
mall job, which he happened to have in hand, and then took
his way towards the house of the seven gables.  this noted edifice,
though its style might be getting a little out of fashion, was still as
respectable a family residence as that of any gentleman in town.  the
present owner, gervayse pyncheon, was said to have contracted a dislike
to the house, in consequence of a shock to his sensibility, in early
childhood, from the sudden death of his grandfather.  in the very act
of running to climb colonel pyncheon's knee, the boy had discovered the
old puritan to be a corpse.  on arriving at manhood, mr. pyncheon had
visited england, where he married a lady of fortune, and had
subsequently spent many years, partly in the mother country, and partly
in various cities on the continent of europe.  during this period, the
family mansion had been consigned to the charge of a kinsman, who was
allowed to make it his home for the time being, in consideration of
keeping the premises in thorough repair.  so faithfu
 
 ___________________________
 
ietor
of the seven gables, on the subject which the latter had thus broached.
it seems (although mr. pyncheon had some hesitation in referring to
stories so exceedingly absurd in their aspect) that the popular belief
pointed to some mysterious connection and dependence, existing between
the family of the maules and these vast unrealized possessions of the
pyncheons.  it was an ordinary saying that the old wizard, hanged
though he was, had obtained the best end of the bargain in his contest
with colonel pyncheon; inasmuch as he had got possession of the great
eastern claim, in exchange for an acre or two of garden-ground.  a very
aged woman, recently dead, had often used the metaphorical expression,
in her fireside talk, that miles and miles of the pyncheon lands had
been shovelled into maule's grave; which, by the bye, was but a very
shallow nook, between two rocks, near the summit of gallows hill.
again, when the lawyers were making inquiry for the missing document,
it was a by-word that it would nev
 
 ___________________________
 
ndistinctly, to
chance words and obscure hints of the executed wizard's son, and the
father of this present matthew maule.  and here mr. pyncheon could
bring an item of his own personal evidence into play.  though but a
child at the time, he either remembered or fancied that matthew's
father had had some job to perform on the day before, or possibly the
very morning of the colonel's decease, in the private room where he and
the carpenter were at this moment talking.  certain papers belonging to
colonel pyncheon, as his grandson distinctly recollected, had been
spread out on the table.

matthew maule understood the insinuated suspicion.

"my father," he said,--but still there was that dark smile, making a
riddle of his countenance,--"my father was an honester man than the
bloody old colonel! not to get his rights back again would he have
carried off one of those papers!"

"i shall not bandy words with you," observed the foreign-bred mr.
pyncheon, with haughty composure.  "nor will it become me to resen
 
 ___________________________
 
aid to have turned a
cold ear to these propositions. at last, however, with a strange kind
of laugh, he inquired whether mr. pyncheon would make over to him the
old wizard's homestead-ground, together with the house of the seven
gables, now standing on it, in requital of the documentary evidence so
urgently required.

the wild, chimney-corner legend (which, without copying all its
extravagances, my narrative essentially follows) here gives an account
of some very strange behavior on the part of colonel pyncheon's
portrait.  this picture, it must be understood, was supposed to be so
intimately connected with the fate of the house, and so magically built
into its walls, that, if once it should be removed, that very instant
the whole edifice would come thundering down in a heap of dusty ruin.
all through the foregoing conversation between mr. pyncheon and the
carpenter, the portrait had been frowning, clenching its fist, and
giving many such proofs of excessive discomposure, but without
attracting the no
 
 ___________________________
 
cealment, the
machinery had been eaten through with rust; so that at holgrave's
pressure, the portrait, frame and all, tumbled suddenly from its
position, and lay face downward on the floor.  a recess in the wall was
thus brought to light, in which lay an object so covered with a
century's dust that it could not immediately be recognized as a folded
sheet of parchment.  holgrave opened it, and displayed an ancient deed,
signed with the hieroglyphics of several indian sagamores, and
conveying to colonel pyncheon and his heirs, forever, a vast extent of
territory at the eastward.

"this is the very parchment, the attempt to recover which cost the
beautiful alice pyncheon her happiness and life," said the artist,
alluding to his legend.  "it is what the pyncheons sought in vain,
while it was valuable; and now that they find the treasure, it has long
been worthless."

"poor cousin jaffrey! this is what deceived him," exclaimed hepzibah.
"when they were young together, clifford probably made a kind of
fair