."

people in difficulty and distress, or in any manner at odds with the
world, can endure a vast amount of harsh treatment, and perhaps be only
the stronger for it; whereas they give way at once before the simplest
expression of what they perceive to be genuine sympathy.  so it proved
with poor hepzibah; for, when she saw the young man's smile,--looking
so much the brighter on a thoughtful face,--and heard his kindly tone,
she broke first into a hysteric giggle and then began to sob.

"ah, mr. holgrave," cried she, as soon as she could speak, "i never can
go through with it! never, never, never! i wish i were dead, and in the
old family tomb, with all my forefathers! with my father, and my
mother, and my sister!  yes, and with my brother, who had far better
find me there than here! the world is too chill and hard,--and i am too
old, and too feeble, and too hopeless!"

"oh, believe me, miss hepzibah," said the young man quietly, "these
feelings will not trouble you any longer, after you are on
 
 ___________________________
 
poch and begins one.
hitherto, the life-blood has been gradually chilling in your veins as
you sat aloof, within your circle of gentility, while the rest of the
world was fighting out its battle with one kind of necessity or
another.  henceforth, you will at least have the sense of healthy and
natural effort for a purpose, and of lending your strength be it great
or small--to the united struggle of mankind.  this is success,--all the
success that anybody meets with!"

"it is natural enough, mr. holgrave, that you should have ideas like
these," rejoined hepzibah, drawing up her gaunt figure with slightly
offended dignity.  "you are a man, a young man, and brought up, i
suppose, as almost everybody is nowadays, with a view to seeking your
fortune.  but i was born a lady, and have always lived one; no matter
in what narrowness of means, always a lady."

"but i was not born a gentleman; neither have i lived like one," said
holgrave, slightly smiling; "so, my dear madam, you will hardly expect
me t
 
 ___________________________
 
forming in it
to-day? never; and if the pyncheons had always acted so nobly, i doubt
whether an old wizard maule's anathema, of which you told me once,
would have had much weight with providence against them."

"ah!--no, no!" said hepzibah, not displeased at this allusion to the
sombre dignity of an inherited curse.  "if old maule's ghost, or a
descendant of his, could see me behind the counter to-day, he would
call it the fulfillment of his worst wishes.  but i thank you for your
kindness, mr. holgrave, and will do my utmost to be a good shop-keeper."

"pray do" said holgrave, "and let me have the pleasure of being your
first customer.  i am about taking a walk to the seashore, before going
to my rooms, where i misuse heaven's blessed sunshine by tracing out
human features through its agency.  a few of those biscuits, dipt in
sea-water, will be just what i need for breakfast.  what is the price
of half a dozen?"

"let me be a lady a moment longer," replied hepzibah, with a manner of
antique s
 
 ___________________________
 
tateliness to which a melancholy smile lent a kind of grace.
she put the biscuits into his hand, but rejected the compensation.  "a
pyncheon must not, at all events under her forefathers' roof, receive
money for a morsel of bread from her only friend!"

holgrave took his departure, leaving her, for the moment, with spirits
not quite so much depressed.  soon, however, they had subsided nearly
to their former dead level.  with a beating heart, she listened to the
footsteps of early passengers, which now began to be frequent along the
street.  once or twice they seemed to linger; these strangers, or
neighbors, as the case might be, were looking at the display of toys
and petty commodities in hepzibah's shop-window.  she was doubly
tortured; in part, with 
 
 ___________________________
 
ry same," said hepzibah.  "it was alice pyncheon's harpsichord.
when i was learning music, my father would never let me open it.  so,
as i could only play on my teacher's instrument, i have forgotten all
my music long ago."

leaving these antique themes, the old lady began to talk about the
daguerreotypist, whom, as he seemed to be a well-meaning and orderly
young man, and in narrow circumstances, she had permitted to take up
his residence in one of the seven gables.  but, on seeing more of mr.
holgrave, she hardly knew what to make of him.  he had the strangest
companions imaginable; men with long beards, and dressed in linen
blouses, and other such new-fangled and ill-fitting garments;
reformers, temperance lecturers, and all manner of cross-looking
philanthropists; community-men, and come-outers, as hepzibah believed,
who acknowledged no law, and ate no solid food, but lived on the scent
of other people's cookery, and turned up their noses at the fare.  as
for the daguerreotypist, she had r
 
 ___________________________
 
 if he does nothing worse, he may set the house on
fire!"

"why, sometimes," answered hepzibah, "i have seriously made it a
question, whether i ought not to send him away.  but, with all his
oddities, he is a quiet kind of a person, and has such a way of taking
hold of one's mind, that, without exactly liking him (for i don't know
enough of the young man), i should be sorry to lose sight of him
entirely.  a woman clings to slight acquaintances when she lives so
much alone as i do."

"but if mr. holgrave is a lawless person!" remonstrated phoebe, a part
of whose essence it was to keep within the limits of law.

"oh!" said hepzibah carelessly,--for, formal as she was, still, in her
life's experience, she had gnashed her teeth against human law,--"i
suppose he has a law of his own!"




                            vi maule's well


after an early tea, the little country-girl strayed into the garden.
the enclosure had formerly been very extensive, but was now contracted
within small compass, and h
 
 ___________________________
 
rstand the vulgar language of a
barn-yard fowl.  i prefer to think--and so would miss hepzibah--that
they recognize the family tone.  for you are a pyncheon?"

"my name is phoebe pyncheon," said the girl, with  a manner of some
reserve; for she was aware that her new acquaintance could be no other
than the daguerreotypist, of whose lawless propensities the old maid
had given her a disagreeable idea.  "i did not know that my cousin
hepzibah's garden was under another person's care."

"yes," said holgrave, "i dig, and hoe, and weed, in this black old
earth, for the sake of refreshing myself with what little nature and
simplicity may be left in it, after men have so long sown and reaped
here.  i turn up the earth by way of pastime.  my sober occupation, so
far as i have any, is with a lighter material.  in short, i make
pictures out of sunshine; and, not to be too much dazzled with my own
trade, i have prevailed with miss hepzibah to let me lodge in one of
these dusky gables.  it is like a bandag
 
 ___________________________
 
y glanced at it, and gave it back.

"i know the face," she replied; "for its stern eye has been following
me about all day.  it is my puritan ancestor, who hangs yonder in the
parlor.  to be sure, you have found some way of copying the portrait
without its black velvet cap and gray beard, and have given him a
modern coat and satin cravat, instead of his cloak and band.  i don't
think him improved by your alterations."

"you would have seen other differences had you looked a little longer,"
said holgrave, laughing, yet apparently much struck.  "i can assure you
that this is a modern face, and one which you will very probably meet.
now, the remarkable point is, that the original wears, to the world's
eye,--and, for aught i know, to his most intimate friends,--an
exceedingly pleasant countenance, indicative of benevolence, openness
of heart, sunny good-humor, and other praiseworthy qualities of that
cast.  the sun, as you see, tells quite another story, and will not be
coaxed out of it, after hal
 
 ___________________________
 
trait.  but my cousin
hepzibah has another picture,--a miniature.  if the original is still
in the world, i think he might defy the sun to make him look stern and
hard."

"you have seen that picture, then!" exclaimed the artist, with an
expression of much interest.  "i never did, but have a great curiosity
to do so.  and you judge favorably of the face?"

"there never was a sweeter one," said phoebe.  "it is almost too soft
and gentle for a man's."

"is there nothing wild in the eye?" continued holgrave, so earnestly
that it embarrassed phoebe, as did also the quiet freedom with which he
presumed on their so recent acquaintance.  "is there nothing dark or
sinister anywhere? could you not conceive the original to have been
guilty of a great crime?"

"it is nonsense," said phoebe a little impatiently, "for us to talk
about a picture which you have never seen.  you mistake it for some
other.  a crime, indeed! since you are a friend of my cousin
hepzibah's, you should ask her to show you the pictu
 
 ___________________________
 
r; for, while the
tone of his conversation had generally been playful, the impression
left on her mind was that of gravity, and, except as his youth modified
it, almost sternness.  she rebelled, as it were, against a certain
magnetic element in the artist's nature, which he exercised towards
her, possibly without being conscious of it.

after a little while, the twilight, deepened by the shadows of the
fruit-trees and the surrounding buildings, threw an obscurity over the
garden.

"there," said holgrave, "it is time to give over work! that last stroke
of the hoe has cut off a beanstalk.  good-night, miss phoebe pyncheon!
any bright day, if you will put one of those rosebuds in your hair, and
come to my rooms in central street, i will seize the purest ray of
sunshine, and make a picture of the flower and its wearer."  he retired
towards his own solitary gable, but turned his head, on reaching the
door, and called to phoebe, with a tone which certainly had laughter in
it, yet which seemed to be 
 
 ___________________________
 
ital of a little honey.

when the bean-vines began to flower on the poles, there was one
particular variety which bore a vivid scarlet blossom.  the
daguerreotypist had found these beans in a garret, over one of the
seven gables, treasured up in an old chest of drawers by some
horticultural pyncheon of days gone by, who doubtless meant to sow them
the next summer, but was himself first sown in death's garden-ground.
by way of testing whether there were still a living germ in such
ancient seeds, holgrave had planted some of them; and the result of his
experiment was a splendid row of bean-vines, clambering, early, to the
full height of the poles, and arraying them, from top to bottom, in a
spiral profusion of red blossoms.  and, ever since the unfolding of the
first bud, a multitude of humming-birds had been attracted thither.  at
times, it seemed as if for every one of the hundred blossoms there was
one of these tiniest fowls of the air,--a thumb's bigness of burnished
plumage, hovering and vi
 
 ___________________________
 
iness
that were symbolic of his native character, and now and then a stern
and dreadful shape that typified his fate.

on sundays, after phoebe had been at church,--for the girl had a
church-going conscience, and would hardly have been at ease had she
missed either prayer, singing, sermon, or benediction,--after
church-time, therefore, there was, ordinarily, a sober little festival
in the garden.  in addition to clifford, hepzibah, and phoebe, two
guests made up the company.  one was the artist holgrave, who, in spite
of his consociation with reformers, and his other queer and
questionable traits, continued to hold an elevated place in hepzibah's
regard.  the other, we are almost ashamed to say, was the venerable
uncle venner, in a clean shirt, and a broadcloth coat, more respectable
than his ordinary wear, inasmuch as it was neatly patched on each
elbow, and might be called an entire garment, except for a slight
inequality in the length of its skirts.   clifford, on several
occasions, had see
 
 ___________________________
 
 so much distinctness in his mind as in that of the
systematizing frenchman."

"come, phoebe," said hepzibah, "it is time to bring the currants."

and then, while the yellow richness of the declining sunshine still
fell into the open space of the garden, phoebe brought out a loaf of
bread and a china bowl of currants, freshly gathered from the bushes,
and crushed with sugar.  these, with water,--but not from the fountain
of ill omen, close at hand,--constituted all the entertainment.
meanwhile, holgrave took some pains to establish an intercourse with
clifford, actuated, it might seem, entirely by an impulse of
kindliness, in order that the present hour might be cheerfuller than
most which the poor recluse had spent, or was destined yet to spend.
nevertheless, in the artist's deep, thoughtful, all-observant eyes,
there was, now and then, an expression, not sinister, but questionable;
as if he had some other interest in the scene than a stranger, a
youthful and unconnected adventurer, might be 
 
 ___________________________
 
 so much success, that even dark-hued
hepzibah threw off one tint of melancholy, and made what shift she
could with the remaining portion.  phoebe said to herself,--"how
pleasant he can be!"  as for uncle venner, as a mark of friendship and
approbation, he readily consented to afford the young man his
countenance in the way of his profession,--not metaphorically, be it
understood, but literally, by allowing a daguerreotype of his face, so
familiar to the town, to be exhibited at the entrance of holgrave's
studio.

clifford, as the company partook of their little banquet, grew to be
the gayest of them all.  either it was one of those up-quivering
flashes of the spirit, to which minds in an abnormal state are liable,
or else the artist had subtly touched some chord that made musical
vibration.  indeed, what with the pleasant summer evening, and the
sympathy of this little circle of not unkindly souls, it was perhaps
natural that a character so susceptible as clifford's should become
animated, an
 
 ___________________________
 
t upon the other, unless, indeed, their extreme dissimilarity
should have proved a principle of mutual attraction.  both, it is true,
were characters proper to new england life, and possessing a common
ground, therefore, in their more external developments; but as unlike,
in their respective interiors, as if their native climes had been at
world-wide distance.  during the early part of their acquaintance,
phoebe had held back rather more than was customary with her frank and
simple manners from holgrave's not very marked advances.  nor was she
yet satisfied that she knew him well, although they almost daily met
and talked together, in a kind, friendly, and what seemed to be a
familiar way.

the artist, in a desultory manner, had imparted to phoebe something of
his history.  young as he was, and had his career terminated at the
point already attained, there had been enough of incident to fill, very
creditably, an autobiographic volume.  a romance on the plan of gil
blas, adapted to american soc
 
 ___________________________
 
iety and manners, would cease to be a
romance.  the experience of many individuals among us, who think it
hardly worth the telling, would equal the vicissitudes of the
spaniard's earlier life; while their ultimate success, or the point
whither they tend, may be incomparably higher than any that a novelist
would imagine for his hero.  holgrave, as he told phoebe somewhat
proudly, could not boast of his origin, unless as being exceedingly
humble, nor of his education, except that it had been the scantiest
possible, and obtained by a few winter-months' attendance at a district
school.  left early to his own guidance, he had begun to be
self-dependent while yet a boy; and it was a condition aptly suited to
his natural force of will.  though now but twenty-two years old
(lacking some months, which are years in such a life), he had alread
 
 ___________________________
 
arkable, and, perhaps,
showed a more than common poise in the young man, was the fact that,
amid all these personal vicissitudes, he had never lost his identity.
homeless as he had been,--continually changing his whereabout, and,
therefore, responsible neither to public opinion nor to
individuals,--putting off one exterior, and snatching up another, to be
soon shifted for a third,--he had never violated the innermost man, but
had carried his conscience along with him.  it was impossible to know
holgrave without recognizing this to be the fact.   hepzibah had seen
it.  phoebe soon saw it likewise, and gave him the sort of confidence
which such a certainty inspires.  she was startled, however, and
sometimes repelled,--not by any doubt of his integrity to whatever law
he acknowledged, but by a sense that his law differed from her own.  he
made her uneasy, and seemed to unsettle everything around her, by his
lack of reverence for what was fixed, unless, at a moment's warning, it
could establish it
 
 ___________________________
 
 not conceive what interested him so
much in her friends and herself, intellectually, since he cared nothing
for them, or, comparatively, so little, as objects of human affection.

always, in his interviews with phoebe, the artist made especial inquiry
as to the welfare of clifford, whom, except at the sunday festival, he
seldom saw.

"does he still seem happy?" he asked one day.

"as happy as a child," answered phoebe; "but--like a child, too--very
easily disturbed."

"how disturbed?" inquired holgrave.  "by things without, or by thoughts
within?"

"i cannot see his thoughts! how should i?" replied phoebe with simple
piquancy.  "very often his humor changes without any reason that can be
guessed at, just as a cloud comes over the sun.  latterly, since i have
begun to know him better, i feel it to be not quite right to look
closely into his moods.  he has had such a great sorrow, that his heart
is made all solemn and sacred by it.  when he is cheerful,--when the
sun shines into his mind,--then
 
 ___________________________
 
venture to peep in, just as far as
the light reaches, but no further.  it is holy ground where the shadow
falls!"

"how prettily you express this sentiment!" said the artist.  "i can
understand the feeling, without possessing it.  had i your
opportunities, no scruples would prevent me from fathoming clifford to
the full depth of my plummet-line!"

"how strange that you should wish it!" remarked phoebe involuntarily.
"what is cousin clifford to you?"

"oh, nothing,--of course, nothing!" answered holgrave with a smile.
"only this is such an odd and incomprehensible world! the more i look
at it, the more it puzzles me, and i begin to suspect that a man's
bewilderment is the measure of his wisdom.  men and women, and
children, too, are such strange creatures, that one never can be
certain that he really knows them; nor ever guess what they have been
from what he sees them to be now.  judge pyncheon! clifford! what a
complex riddle--a complexity of complexities--do they present! it
requires intuiti
 
 ___________________________
 
ve sympathy, like a young girl's, to solve it.  a mere
observer, like myself (who never have any intuitions, and am, at best,
only subtile and acute), is pretty certain to go astray."

the artist now turned the conversation to themes less dark than that
which they had touched upon.  phoebe and he were young together; nor
had holgrave, in his premature experience of life, wasted entirely that
beautiful spirit of youth, which, gushing forth from one small heart
and fancy, may diffuse itself over the universe, making it all as
bright as on the first day of creation.  man's own youth is the world's
youth; at least, he feels as if it were, and imagines that the earth's
granite substance is something not yet hardened, and which he can mould
into whatever shape he likes.  so it was with holgrave.  he could talk
sagely about the wo
 
 ___________________________
 
er stripling, capable of being improved into
all that it ought to be, but scarcely yet had shown the remotest
promise of becoming.  he had that sense, or inward prophecy,--which a
young man had better never have been born than not to have, and a
mature man had better die at once than utterly to relinquish,--that we
are not doomed to creep on forever in the old bad way, but that, this
very now, there are the harbingers abroad of a golden era, to be
accomplished in his own lifetime.  it seemed to holgrave,--as doubtless
it has seemed to the hopeful of every century since the epoch of adam's
grandchildren,--that in this age, more than ever before, the moss-grown
and rotten past is to be torn down, and lifeless institutions to be
thrust out of the way, and their dead corpses buried, and everything to
begin anew.

as to the main point,--may we never live to doubt it!--as to the better
centuries that are coming, the artist was surely right.  his error lay
in supposing that this age, more than any pa
 
 ___________________________
 
 faith should be modified by
inevitable experience, it would be with no harsh and sudden revolution
of his sentiments.  he would still have faith in man's brightening
destiny, and perhaps love him all the better, as he should recognize
his helplessness in his own behalf; and the haughty faith, with which
he began life, would be well bartered for a far humbler one at its
close, in discerning that man's best directed effort accomplishes a
kind of dream, while god is the sole worker of realities.

holgrave had read very little, and that little in passing through the
thoroughfare of life, where the mystic language of his books was
necessarily mixed up with the babble of the multitude, so that both one
and the other were apt to lose any sense that might have been properly
their own.  he considered himself a thinker, and was certainly of a
thoughtful turn, but, with his own path to discover, had perhaps hardly
yet reached the point where an educated man begins to think.  the true
value of his charac
 
 ___________________________
 
lture,--in his crude, wild, and misty philosophy, and the
practical experience that counteracted some of its tendencies; in his
magnanimous zeal for man's welfare, and his recklessness of whatever
the ages had established in man's behalf; in his faith, and in his
infidelity; in what he had, and in what he lacked,--the artist might
fitly enough stand forth as the representative of many compeers in his
native land.

his career it would be difficult to prefigure.  there appeared to be
qualities in holgrave, such as, in a country where everything is free
to the hand that can grasp it, could hardly fail to put some of the
world's prizes within his reach.  but these matters are delightfully
uncertain.  at almost every step in life, we meet with young men of
just about holgrave's age, for whom we anticipate wonderful things, but
of whom, even after much and careful inquiry, we never happen to hear
another word.  the effervescence of youth and passion, and the fresh
gloss of the intellect and imaginat
 
 ___________________________
 
ion, endow them with a false
brilliancy, which makes fools of themselves and other people.  like
certain chintzes, calicoes, and ginghams, they show finely in their
first newness, but cannot stand the sun and rain, and assume a very
sober aspect after washing-day.

but our business is with holgrave as we find him on this particular
afternoon, and in the arbor of the pyncheon garden.  in that point of
view, it was a pleasant sight to behold this young man, with so much
faith in himself, and so fair an appearance of admirable powers,--so
little harmed, too, by the many tests that had tried his metal,--it was
pleasant to see him in his kindly intercourse with phoebe.  her thought
had scarcely done him justice when it pronounced him cold; or, if so,
he had grown warmer now.  without such purp
 
 ___________________________
 
e world.  he poured himself out as to
another self.   very possibly, he forgot phoebe while he talked to her,
and was moved only by the inevitable tendency of thought, when rendered
sympathetic by enthusiasm and emotion, to flow into the first safe
reservoir which it finds.  but, had you peeped at them through the
chinks of the garden-fence, the young man's earnestness and heightened
color might have led you to suppose that he was making love to the
young girl!

at length, something was said by holgrave that made it apposite for
phoebe to inquire what had first brought him acquainted with her cousin
hepzibah, and why he now chose to lodge in the desolate old pyncheon
house.  without directly answering her, he turned from the future,
which had heretofore been the theme of his discourse, and began to
speak of the influences of the past.  one subject, indeed, is but the
reverberation of the other.

"shall we never, never get rid of this past?" cried he, keeping up the
earnest tone of his precedin
 
 ___________________________
 
g conversation.  "it lies upon the present
like a giant's dead body in fact, the case is just as if a young giant
were compelled to waste all his strength in carrying about the corpse
of the old giant, his grandfather, who died a long while ago, and only
needs to be decently buried.  just think a moment, and it will startle
you to see what slaves we are to bygone times,--to death, if we give
the matter the right word!"

"but i do not see it," observed phoebe.

"for example, then," continued holgrave:  "a dead man, if he happens to
have made a will, disposes of wealth no longer his own; or, if he die
intestate, it is distributed in accordance with the notions of men much
longer dead than he.  a dead man sits on all our judgment-seats; and
living judges do but search out and repeat his decisions.  we read in
dead men's books! we laugh at dead men's jokes, and cry at dead men's
pathos! we are sick of dead men's diseases, physical and moral, and die
of the same remedies with which dead doctors
 
 ___________________________
 
hether even our public
edifices--our capitols, state-houses, court-houses, city-hall, and
churches,--ought to be built of such permanent materials as stone or
brick.  it were better that they should crumble to ruin once in twenty
years, or thereabouts, as a hint to the people to examine into and
reform the institutions which they symbolize."

"how you hate everything old!" said phoebe in dismay.  "it makes me
dizzy to think of such a shifting world!"

"i certainly love nothing mouldy," answered holgrave.  "now, this old
pyncheon house! is it a wholesome place to live in, with its black
shingles, and the green moss that shows how damp they are?--its dark,
low-studded rooms--its grime and sordidness, which are the
crystallization on its walls of the human breath, that has been drawn
and exhaled here in discontent and anguish? the house ought to be
purified with fire,--purified till only its ashes remain!"

"then why do you live in it?" asked phoebe, a little piqued.

"oh, i am pursuing my studie
 
 ___________________________
 
s here; not in books, however," replied
holgrave.  "the house, in my view, is expressive of that odious and
abominable past, with all its bad influences, against which i have just
been declaiming.  i dwell in it for a while, that i may know the better
how to hate it.  by the bye, did you ever hear the story of maule, the
wizard, and what happened between him and your immeasurably
great-grandfather?"

"yes, indeed!" said phoebe; "i heard it long ago, from my father, and
two or three times from my cousin hepzibah, in the month that i have
been 
 
 ___________________________
 
here.  she seems to think that all the calamities of the pyncheons
began from that quarrel with the wizard, as you call him.  and you, mr.
holgrave look as if you thought so too!  how singular that you should
believe what is so very absurd, when you reject many things that are a
great deal worthier of credit!"

"i do believe it," said the artist seriously; "not as a superstition,
however, but as proved by unquestionable facts, and as exemplifying a
theory.  now, see:  under those seven gables, at which we now look
up,--and which old colonel pyncheon meant to be the house of his
descendants, in prosperity and happiness, down to an epoch far
 
 ___________________________
 
ld run in
hidden streams, as the water of an aqueduct is conveyed in subterranean
pipes.  in the family existence of these pyncheons, for
instance,--forgive me phoebe, but i cannot think of you as one of
them,--in their brief new england pedigree, there has been time enough
to infect them all with one kind of lunacy or another."

"you speak very unceremoniously of my kindred," said phoebe, debating
with herself whether she ought to take offence.

"i speak true thoughts to a true mind!" answered holgrave, with a
vehemence which phoebe had not before witnessed in him.   "the truth is
as i say! furthermore, the original perpetrator and father of this
mischief appears to have perpetuated himself, and still walks the
street,--at least, his very image, in mind and body,--with the fairest
prospect of transmitting to posterity as rich and as wretched an
inheritance as he has received! do you remember the daguerreotype, and
its resemblance to the old portrait?"

"how strangely in earnest you are!" excl
 
 ___________________________
 
"i understand you!" said the artist, coloring and laughing.  "i believe
i am a little mad.  this subject has taken hold of my mind with the
strangest tenacity of clutch since i have lodged in yonder old gable.
as one method of throwing it off, i have put an incident of the
pyncheon family history, with which i happen to be acquainted, into the
form of a legend, and mean to publish it in a magazine."

"do you write for the magazines?" inquired phoebe.

"is it possible you did not know it?" cried holgrave.  "well, such is
literary fame! yes.  miss phoebe pyncheon, among the multitude of my
marvellous gifts i have that of writing stories; and my name has
figured, i can assure you, on the covers of graham and godey, making as
respectable an appearance, for aught i could see, as any of the
canonized bead-roll with which it was associated.  in the humorous
line, i am thought to have a very pretty way with me; and as for
pathos, i am as provocative of tears as an onion.  but shall i read you
my story
 
 ___________________________
 
yncheons made a great funeral for alice.  the kith and kin were
there, and the whole respectability of the town besides.  but, last in
the procession, came matthew maule, gnashing his teeth, as if he would
have bitten his own heart in twain,--the darkest and wofullest man that
ever walked behind a corpse! he meant to humble alice, not to kill her;
but he had taken a woman's delicate soul into his rude gripe, to play
with--and she was dead!




                            xiv phoebe's good-bye


holgrave, plunging into his tale with the energy and absorption natural
to a young author, had given a good deal of action to the parts capable
of being developed and exemplified in that manner.  he now observed
that a certain remarkable drowsiness (wholly unlike that with which the
reader possibly feels himself affected) had been flung over the senses
of his auditress.  it was the effect, unquestionably, of the mystic
gesticulations by which he had sought to bring bodily before phoebe's
perception the 
 
 ___________________________
 
figure of the mesmerizing carpenter.  with the lids
drooping over her eyes,--now lifted for an instant, and drawn down
again as with leaden weights,--she leaned slightly towards him, and
seemed almost to regulate her breath by his.  holgrave gazed at her, as
he rolled up his manuscript, and recognized an incipient stage of that
curious psychological condition which, as he had himself told phoebe,
he possessed more than an ordinary faculty of producing.  a veil was
beginning to be muffled about her, in which she could behold only him,
and live only in his thoughts and emotions.  his glance, as he fastened
it on the young girl, grew involuntarily more concentrated; in his
attitude there was the consciousness of power, investing his h
 
 ___________________________
 
ardly
mature figure with a dignity that did not belong to its physical
manifestation.  it was evident, that, with but one wave of his hand and
a corresponding effort of his will, he could complete his mastery over
phoebe's yet free and virgin spirit:  he could establish an influence
over this good, pure, and simple child, as dangerous, and perhaps as
disastrous, as that which the carpenter of his legend had acquired and
exercised over the ill-fated alice.

to a disposition like holgrave's, at once speculative and active, there
is no temptation so great as the opportunity of acquiring empire over
the human spirit; nor any idea more seductive to a young man than to
become the arbiter of a young girl's destiny.  let us,
therefore,--whatever his defects of nature and education, and in spite
of his scorn for creeds and institutions,--concede to the
daguerreotypist the rare and high quality of reverence for another's
individuality.  let us allow him integrity, also, forever after to
 
 ___________________________
 
gh.  "i shall never be so merry as before i knew
cousin hepzibah and poor cousin clifford.  i have grown a great deal
older, in this little time.  older, and, i hope, wiser, and,--not
exactly sadder,--but, certainly, with not half so much lightness in my
spirits! i have given them my sunshine, and have been glad to give it;
but, of course, i cannot both give and keep it.  they are welcome,
notwithstanding!"

"you have lost nothing, phoebe, worth keeping, nor which it was
possible to keep," said holgrave after a pause.  "our first youth is of
no value; for we are never conscious of it until after it is gone.  but
sometimes--always, i suspect, unless one is exceedingly
unfortunate--there comes a sense of second youth, gushing out of the
heart's joy at being in love; or, possibly, it may come to crown some
other grand festival in life, if any other such there be.  this
bemoaning of one's self (as you do now) over the first, careless,
shallow gayety of youth departed, and this profound happiness a
 
 ___________________________
 
t youth
regained,--so much deeper and richer than that we lost,--are essential
to the soul's development.  in some cases, the two states come almost
simultaneously, and mingle the sadness and the rapture in one
mysterious emotion."

"i hardly think i understand you," said phoebe.

"no wonder," replied holgrave, smiling; "for i have told you a secret
which i hardly began to know before i found myself giving it utterance.
remember it, however; and when the truth becomes clear to you, then
think of this moonlight scene!"

"it is entirely moonlight now, except only a little flush of faint
crimson, upward from the west, between those buildings," remarked
phoebe.  "i must go in.  cousin hepzibah is not quick at figures, and
will give herself a headache over the day's accounts, unless i help
her."

but holg
 
 ___________________________
 
ere to
crumble away, some morning, after you are gone, and nothing be seen of
him more, except a heap of dust.  miss hepzibah, at any rate, will lose
what little flexibility she has.  they both exist by you."

"i should be very sorry to think so," answered phoebe gravely.  "but it
is true that my small abilities were precisely what they needed; and i
have a real interest in their welfare,--an odd kind of motherly
sentiment,--which i wish you would not laugh at!  and let me tell you
frankly, mr. holgrave, i am sometimes puzzled to know whether you wish
them well or ill."

"undoubtedly," said the daguerreotypist, "i do feel an interest in this
antiquated, poverty-stricken old maiden lady, and this degraded and
shattered gentleman,--this abortive lover of the beautiful.  a kindly
interest, too, helpless old children that they are! but you have no
conception what a different kind of heart mine is from your own.  it is
not my impulse, as regards these two individuals, either to help or
hinder; but 
 
 ___________________________
 
 in distress without
desiring, more than anything else, to help and comfort them? you talk
as if this old house were a theatre; and you seem to look at hepzibah's
and clifford's misfortunes, and those of generations before them, as a
tragedy, such as i have seen acted in the hall of a country hotel, only
the present one appears to be played exclusively for your amusement.  i
do not like this.  the play costs the performers too much, and the
audience is too cold-hearted."

"you are severe," said holgrave, compelled to recognize a degree of
truth in the piquant sketch of his own mood.

"and then," continued phoebe, "what can you mean by your conviction,
which you tell me of, that the end is drawing near? do you know of any
new trouble hanging over my poor relatives? if so, tell me at once, and
i will not leave them!"

"forgive me, phoebe!" said the daguerreotypist, holding out his hand,
to which the girl was constrained to yield her own.  "i am somewhat of
a mystic, it must be confessed.  the te
 
 ___________________________
 
ndency is in my blood, together
with the faculty of mesmerism, which might have brought me to gallows
hill, in the good old times of witchcraft.  believe me, if i were
really aware of any secret, the disclosure of which would benefit your
friends,--who are my own friends, likewise,--you should learn it before
we part.  but i have no such knowledge."

"you hold something back!" said phoebe.

"nothing,--no secrets but my own," answered holgrave.  "i can perceive,
indeed, that judge pyncheon still keeps his eye on clifford, in whose
ruin he had so large a share.  his motives and intentions, however are
a mystery to me.  he is a determined and relentless man, with the
genuine character of an inquisitor; and had he any object to gain by
putting clifford to the rack, i verily believe that he would wrench his
joints from their sockets, in order to accomplish it.  but, so wealthy
and eminent as he is,--so powerful in his own strength, and i
 
 ___________________________
 
's mind, except your own.  moreover,
it is so strange to find myself an inmate of this old pyncheon house,
and sitting in this old garden--(hark, how maule's well is
murmuring!)--that, were it only for this one circumstance, i cannot
help fancying that destiny is arranging its fifth act for a
catastrophe."

"there!"  cried phoebe with renewed vexation; for she was by nature as
hostile to mystery as the sunshine to a dark corner.  "you puzzle me
more than ever!"

"then let us part friends!" said holgrave, pressing her hand.  "or, if
not friends, let us part before you entirely hate me.  you, who love
everybody else in the world!"

"good-by, then," said phoebe frankly.  "i do not mean to be angry a
great while, and should be sorry to have you think so.   there has
cousin hepzibah been standing in the shadow of the doorway, this
quarter of an hour past! she thinks i stay too long in the damp garden.
so, good-night, and good-by."

on the second morning thereafter, phoebe might have been seen, in h
 
 ___________________________
 
pite of this perception that the judge would draw all
human aid to his own behalf, hepzibah was so unaccustomed to act for
herself, that the least word of counsel would have swayed her to any
mode of action. little phoebe pyncheon would at once have lighted up
the whole scene, if not by any available suggestion, yet simply by the
warm vivacity of her character. the idea of the artist occurred to
hepzibah. young and unknown, mere vagrant adventurer as he was, she had
been conscious of a force in holgrave which might well adapt him to be
the champion of a crisis. with this thought in her mind, she unbolted a
door, cobwebbed and long disused, but which had served as a former
medium of communication between her own part of the house and the gable
where the wandering daguerreotypist had now established his temporary
home. he was not there. a book, face downward, on the table, a roll of
manuscript, a half-written sheet, a newspaper, some tools of his
present occupation, and several rejected daguerre
 
 ___________________________
 
of the little
back-yard.  creaking on its hinges, however, like every other gate and
door about the premises, the sound reached the ears of the occupant of
the northern gable, one of the windows of which had a side-view towards
the gate.

"good-morning, uncle venner!" said the daguerreotypist, leaning out of
the window.  "do you hear nobody stirring?"

"not a soul," said the man of patches.  "but that's no wonder.  'tis
barely half an hour past sunrise, yet.  but i'm really glad to see you,
mr. holgrave! there's a strange, lonesome look about this side of the
house; so that my heart misgave me, somehow or other, and i felt as if
there was nobody alive in it.  the front of the house looks a good deal
cheerier; and alice's posies are blooming there beautifully; and if i
were a young man, mr. holgrave, my sweetheart should have one of those
flowers in her bosom, though i risked my neck climbing for it! well,
and did the wind keep you awake last night?"

"it did, indeed!" answered the artist, smil
 
 ___________________________
 
 know whether i am or not,--i should have
concluded that all the old pyncheons were running riot in the lower
rooms, especially in miss hepzibah's part of the house.  but it is very
quiet now."

"yes, miss hepzibah will be apt to over-sleep herself, after being
disturbed, all night, with the racket," said uncle venner.  "but it
would be odd, now, wouldn't it, if the judge had taken both his cousins
into the country along with him? i saw him go into the shop yesterday."

"at what hour?" inquired holgrave.

"oh, along in the forenoon," said the old man.  "well, well! i must go
my rounds, and so must my wheelbarrow.  but i'll be back here at
dinner-time; for my pig likes a dinner as well as a breakfast.  no
meal-time, and no sort of victuals, ever seems to come amiss to my pig.
good morning to you! and, mr. holgrave, if i were a young man, like
you, i'd get one of alice's posies, and keep it in water till phoebe
comes back."

"i have heard," said the daguerreotypist, as he drew in his head, "that
 
 ___________________________
 
ed her heart to leap and thrill with an
indefinable shiver of enjoyment.  she felt herself drawn along, not
towards the parlor, but into a large and unoccupied apartment, which
had formerly been the grand reception-room of the seven gables.  the
sunshine came freely into all the uncurtained windows of this room, and
fell upon the dusty floor; so that phoebe now clearly saw--what,
indeed, had been no secret, after the encounter of a warm hand with
hers--that it was not hepzibah nor clifford, but holgrave, to whom she
owed her reception.  the subtile, intuitive communication, or, rather,
the vague and formless impression of something to be told, had made her
yield unresistingly to his impulse.  without taking away her hand, she
looked eagerly in his face, not quick to forebode evil, but unavoidably
conscious that the state of the family had changed since her departure,
and therefore anxious for an explanation.

the artist looked paler than ordinary; there was a thoughtful and
severe contraction 
 
 ___________________________
 
of his forehead, tracing a deep, vertical line
between the eyebrows.  his smile, however, was full of genuine warmth,
and had in it a joy, by far the most vivid expression that phoebe had
ever witnessed, shining out of the new england reserve with which
holgrave habitually masked whatever lay near his heart.  it was the
look wherewith a man, brooding alone over some fearful object, in a
dreary forest or illimitable desert, would recognize the familiar
aspect of his dearest friend, bringing up all the peaceful ideas that
belong to home, and the gentle current of every-day affairs.  and yet,
as he felt the necessity of responding to her look of inquiry, the
smile disappeared.

"i ought not to rejoice that you have come, phoebe," said he.  "we meet
at a s
 
 ___________________________
 
trange moment!"

"what has happened!" she exclaimed.  "why is the house so deserted?
where are hepzibah and clifford?"

"gone! i cannot imagine where they are!" answered holgrave.  "we are
alone in the house!"

"hepzibah and clifford gone?" cried phoebe.  "it is not possible!  and
why have you brought me into this room, instead of the parlor?  ah,
something terrible has happened! i must run and see!"

"no, no, phoebe!" said holgrave holding her back.  "it is as i have
told you.  they are gone, and i know not whither.  a terrible event
has, indeed happened, but not to them, nor, as i undoubtingly believe,
through any agency of theirs.  if i read your character rightly,
phoebe," he continued, fixing his eyes on hers with stern anxiety,
intermixed with tenderness, "gentle as you are, and seeming to have
your sphere among common things, you yet possess remarkable strength.
you have wonderful poise, and a faculty which, when te
 
 ___________________________
 
sted, will prove
itself capable of dealing with matters that fall far out of the
ordinary rule."

"oh, no, i am very weak!" replied phoebe, trembling.  "but tell me what
has happened!"

"you are strong!" persisted holgrave.  "you must be both strong and
wise; for i am all astray, and need your counsel.  it may be you can
suggest the one right thing to do!"

"tell me!--tell me!" said phoebe, all in a tremble.  "it oppresses,--it
terrifies me,--this mystery! anything else i can bear!"

the artist hesitated.  notwithstanding what he had just said, and most
sincerely, in regard to the self-balancing power with which phoebe
impressed him, it still seemed almost wicked to bring the awful secret
of yesterday to her know
 
 ___________________________
 
ehold fire,
where it would present all the uglier aspect, amid the decorousness of
everything about it.  yet it could not be concealed from her; she must
needs know it.

"phoebe," said he, "do you remember this?" he put into her hand a
daguerreotype; the same that he had shown her at their first interview
in the garden, and which so strikingly brought out the hard and
relentless traits of the original.

"what has this to do with hepzibah and clifford?" asked phoebe, with
impatient surprise that holgrave should so trifle with her at such a
moment.  "it is judge pyncheon! you have shown it to me before!"

"but here is the same face, taken within this half-hour" said the
artist, presenting her with another miniature.  "i had just finished it
when i heard you at the door."

"this is death!" shuddered phoebe, turning very pale.  "judge pyncheon
dead!"

"such as there represented," said holgrave, "he sits in the next room.
the judge is dead, and clifford and hepzibah have vanished!  i know no
more. 
 
 ___________________________
 
ndefinite sense of some catastrophe, or
consummation--impelled me to make my way into this part of the house,
where i discovered what you see.  as a point of evidence that may be
useful to clifford, and also as a memorial valuable to myself,--for,
phoebe, there are hereditary reasons that connect me strangely with
that man's fate,--i used the means at my disposal to preserve this
pictorial record of judge pyncheon's death."

even in her agitation, phoebe could not help remarking the calmness of
holgrave's demeanor.  he appeared, it is true, to feel the whole
awfulness of the judge's death, yet had received the fact into his mind
without any mixture of surprise, but as an event preordained, happening
inevitably, and so fitting itself into past occurrences that it could
almost have been prophesied.

"why have you not thrown open the doors, and called in witnesses?"
inquired she with a painful shudder.  "it is terrible to be here alone!"

"but clifford!" suggested the artist.  "clifford and hepzi
 
 ___________________________
 
 connected with the death that
occurred yesterday and those recorded of the death of clifford's uncle
thirty years ago.   it is true, there was a certain arrangement of
circumstances, unnecessary to be recounted, which made it possible nay,
as men look at these things, probable, or even certain--that old
jaffrey pyncheon came to a violent death, and by clifford's hands."

"whence came those circumstances?" exclaimed phoebe.  "he being
innocent, as we know him to be!"

"they were arranged," said holgrave,--"at least such has long been my
conviction,--they were arranged after the uncle's death, and before it
was made public, by the man who sits in yonder parlor.  his own death,
so like that former one, yet attended by none of those suspicious
circumstances, seems the stroke of god upon him, at once a punishment
for his wickedness, and making plain the innocence of clifford. but
this flight,--it distorts everything! he may be in concealment, near at
hand.  could we but bring him back before the d
 
 ___________________________
 
iscovery of the judge's
death, the evil might be rectified."

"we must not hide this thing a moment longer!" said phoebe.  "it is
dreadful to keep it so closely in our hearts.  clifford is innocent.
god will make it manifest! let us throw open the doors, and call all
the neighborhood to see the truth!"

"you are right, phoebe," rejoined holgrave.  "doubtless you are right."

yet the artist did not feel the horror, which was proper to phoebe's
sweet and order-loving character, at thus finding herself at issue with
society, and brought in contact with an event that transcended ordinary
rules.  neither was he in haste, like her, to betake himself within the
precincts of common life.  on the contrary, he gathered a wild
enjoyment,--as it were, a flower of strange beauty, growing in a
desolate spot, and blossoming in the wind,--such a flowe
 
 ___________________________
 
 ocean would flow betwixt
them, standing on its widely sundered shores.   meanwhile, all the
circumstances of their situation seemed to draw them together; they
were like two children who go hand in hand, pressing closely to one
another's side, through a shadow-haunted passage.  the image of awful
death, which filled the house, held them united by his stiffened grasp.

these influences hastened the development of emotions that might not
otherwise have flowered so.  possibly, indeed, it had been holgrave's
purpose to let them die in their undeveloped germs.  "why do we delay
so?" asked phoebe.  "this secret takes away my breath! let us throw
open the doors!"

"in all our lives there can never come another moment like this!" said
holgrave.  "phoebe, is it all terror?--nothing but terror?  are you
conscious of no joy, as i am, that has made this the only point of life
worth living for?"

"it seems a sin," replied phoebe, trembling, "to think of joy at such a
time!"

"could you but know, phoebe, h
 
 ___________________________
 
ame in with you! the black moment became at once a blissful one.
it must not pass without the spoken word.  i love you!"

"how can you love a simple girl like me?" asked phoebe, compelled by
his earnestness to speak.  "you have many, many thoughts, with which i
should try in vain to sympathize.  and i,--i, too,--i have tendencies
with which you would sympathize as little.  that is less matter.  but i
have not scope enough to make you happy."

"you are my only possibility of happiness!" answered holgrave.  "i have
no faith in it, except as you bestow it on me!"

"and then--i am afraid!" continued phoebe, shrinking towards holgrave,
even while she told him so frankly the doubts with which he affected
her.  "you will lead me out of my own quiet path.  you will make me
strive to follow you where it is pathless.  i cannot do so.  it is not
my nature.  i shall sink down and perish!"

"ah, phoebe!" exclaimed holgrave, with almost a sigh, and a smile that
was burdened with thought.

"it will be far ot
 
 ___________________________
 
es all its
onward impulses to men ill at ease.  the happy man inevitably confines
himself within ancient limits.  i have a presentiment that, hereafter,
it will be my lot to set out trees, to make fences,--perhaps, even, in
due time, to build a house for another generation,--in a word, to
conform myself to laws and the peaceful practice of society.  your
poise will be more powerful than any oscillating tendency of mine."

"i would not have it so!" said phoebe earnestly.

"do you love me?" asked holgrave.  "if we love one another, the moment
has room for nothing more.  let us pause upon it, and be satisfied.  do
you love me, phoebe?"

"you look into my heart," said she, letting her eyes drop.  "you know i
love you!"

and it was in this hour, so full of doubt and awe, that the one miracle
was wrought, without which every human existence is a blank.  the bliss
which makes all things true, beautiful, and holy shone around this
youth and maiden.  they were conscious of nothing sad nor old.  they
tr
 
 ___________________________
 
ansfigured the earth, and made it eden again, and themselves the two
first dwellers in it.  the dead man, so close beside them, was
forgotten.  at such a crisis, there is no death; for immortality is
revealed anew, and embraces everything in its hallowed atmosphere.

but how soon the heavy earth-dream settled down again!

"hark!" whispered phoebe.  "somebody is at the street door!"

"now let us meet the world!" said holgrave.  "no doubt, the rumor of
judge pyncheon's visit to this house, and the flight of hepzibah and
clifford, is about to lead to the investigation of the premises.  we
have no way but to meet it.  let us open the door at once."

but, to their surprise, before they could reach the street door,--even
before they quitted the room in which the foregoing interview had
passed,--they heard footsteps in the farther passage.  the door,
therefore, which they supposed to be securely locked,--which holgrave,
i
 
 ___________________________
 
ndeed, had seen to be so, and at which phoebe had vainly tried to
enter,--must have been opened from without.  the sound of footsteps was
not harsh, bold, decided, and intrusive, as the gait of strangers would
naturally be, making authoritative entrance into a dwelling where they
knew themselves unwelcome.  it was feeble, as of persons either weak or
weary; there was the mingled murmur of two voices, familiar to both the
listeners.

"can it be?" whispered holgrave.

"it is they!" answered phoebe.  "thank god!--thank god!"

and then, as if in sympathy with phoebe's whispered ejaculation, they
heard hepzibah's voice more distinctly.

"thank god, my brother, we are at home!"

"well!--yes!--thank god!" responded clifford.  "a dreary home,
hepzibah! but you have done well to bring me hither! stay! that parlor
door is open.  i cannot pass by it! let me go and rest me in the arbor,
where i used,--oh, very long ago, it seems to me, after what has
befallen us,--w
 
 ___________________________
 
ntry, with the listlessness of an accomplished purpose, uncertain what
to do next,--when phoebe ran to meet them.  on beholding her, hepzibah
burst into tears.  with all her might, she had staggered onward beneath
the burden of grief and responsibility, until now that it was safe to
fling it down.  indeed, she had not energy to fling it down, but had
ceased to uphold it, and suffered it to press her to the earth.
clifford appeared the stronger of the two.

"it is our own little phoebe!--ah! and holgrave with, her" exclaimed
he, with a glance of keen and delicate insight, and a smile, beautiful,
kind, but melancholy.  "i thought of you both, as we came down the
street, and beheld alice's posies in full bloom.  and so the flower of
eden has bloomed, likewise, in this old, darksome house to-day."




                                xxi the departure


the sudden death of so prominent a member of the social world as the
honorable judge jaffrey pyncheon created a sensation (at least, in the
circles
 
 ___________________________
 
the hour of death.  unknowingly, he was a childless man, while striving
to add more wealth to his only child's inheritance.  hardly a week
after his decease, one of the cunard steamers brought intelligence of
the death, by cholera, of judge pyncheon's son, just at the point of
embarkation for his native land.  by this misfortune clifford became
rich; so did hepzibah; so did our little village maiden, and, through
her, that sworn foe of wealth and all manner of conservatism,--the wild
reformer,--holgrave!

it was now far too late in clifford's life for the good opinion of
society to be worth the trouble and anguish of a formal vindication.
what he needed was the love of a very few; not the admiration, or even
the respect, of the unknown many.  the latter might probably have been
won for him, had those on whom the guardianship of his welfare had
fallen deemed it advisable to expose clifford to a miserable
resuscitation of past ideas, when the condition of whatever comfort he
might expect lay in 
 
 ___________________________
 
leer and his family had already been transported thither, where
the two hens had forthwith begun an indefatigable process of
egg-laying, with an evident design, as a matter of duty and conscience,
to continue their illustrious breed under better auspices than for a
century past.  on the day set for their departure, the principal
personages of our story, including good uncle venner, were assembled in
the parlor.

"the country-house is certainly a very fine one, so far as the plan
goes," observed holgrave, as the party were discussing their future
arrangements.  "but i wonder that the late judge--being so opulent, and
with a reasonable prospect of transmitting his wealth to descendants of
his own--should not have felt the propriety of embodying so excellent a
piece of domestic architecture in stone, rather than in wood.  then,
every generation of the family might have altered the interior, to suit
its own taste and convenience; while the exterior, through the lapse of
years, might have been addi
 
 ___________________________
 
tern glance.
"whenever i look at it, there is an old dreamy recollection haunting
me, but keeping just beyond the grasp of my mind.  wealth, it seems to
say!--boundless wealth!--unimaginable wealth! i could fancy that, when
i was a child, or a youth, that portrait had spoken, and told me a rich
secret, or had held forth its hand, with the written record of hidden
opulence.  but those old matters are so dim with me, nowadays! what
could this dream have been?"

"perhaps i can recall it," answered holgrave.  "see! there are a
hundred chances to one that no person, unacquainted with the secret,
would ever touch this spring."

"a secret spring!" cried clifford.  "ah, i remember now! i did discover
it, one summer afternoon, when i was idling and dreaming about the
house, long, long ago.  but the mystery escapes me."

the artist put his finger on the contrivance to which he had referred.
in former days, the effect would probably have been to cause the
picture to start forward.  but, in so long a peri
 
 ___________________________
 
od of concealment, the
machinery had been eaten through with rust; so that at holgrave's
pressure, the portrait, frame and all, tumbled suddenly from its
position, and lay face downward on the floor.  a recess in the wall was
thus brought to light, in which lay an object so covered with a
century's dust that it could not immediately be recognized as a folded
sheet of parchment.  holgrave opened it, and displayed an ancient deed,
signed with the hieroglyphics of several indian sagamores, and
conveying to colonel pyncheon and his heirs, forever, a vast extent of
territory at the eastward.

"this is the very parchment, the attempt to recover which cost the
beautiful alice pyncheon her happiness and life," said the artist,
alluding to his legend.  "it is what the pyncheons sought in vain,
while it was valuable; and now that they find the treasure, it has long
been worthless."

"poo
 
 ___________________________
 
r cousin jaffrey! this is what deceived him," exclaimed hepzibah.
"when they were young together, clifford probably made a kind of
fairy-tale of this discovery.  he was always dreaming hither and
thither about the house, and lighting up its dark corners with
beautiful stories.  and poor jaffrey, who took hold of everything as if
it were real, thought my brother had found out his uncle's wealth.  he
died with this delusion in his mind!"

"but," said phoebe, apart to holgrave, "how came you to know the
secret?"

"my dearest phoebe," said holgrave, "how will it please you to assume
the name of maule? as for the secret, it is the only inheritance that
has come down to me from my ancestors.  you should have known sooner
(only that i was afraid of frightening you away) that, in this long
drama of wrong and retribution, i represent the old wizard, and am
probably as much a wizard as ever he was.  the son of the executed
matthew maule, while building this house, took the 