ted by the picture.

"how do you like the face?" asked hepzibah.

"it is handsome!--it is very beautiful!" said phoebe admiringly.  "it
is as sweet a face as a man's can be, or ought to be.  it has something
of a child's expression,--and yet not childish,--only one feels so very
kindly towards him! he ought never to suffer anything.  one would bear
much for the sake of sparing him toil or sorrow.  who is it, cousin
hepzibah?"

"did you never hear," whispered her cousin, bending towards her, "of
clifford pyncheon?"

"never.  i thought there were no pyncheons left, except yourself and
our cousin jaffrey," answered phoebe.  "and yet i seem to have heard
the name of clifford pyncheon.  yes!--from my father or my mother; but
has he not been a long while dead?"

"well, well, child, perhaps he has!" said hepzibah with a sad, hollow
laugh; "but, in old houses like this, you know, dead people are very
apt to come back again! we shall see.  and, cousin phoebe, since, after
all that i have said, your courage does
 
 ___________________________
 
cousin clifford," said the benevolent judge.  "many years ago, when we
were boys and young men together, i had a great affection for him, and
still feel a tender interest in all his concerns.  you say, cousin
phoebe, he appears to be weak minded.  heaven grant him at least enough
of intellect to repent of his past sins!"

"nobody, i fancy," observed phoebe, "can have fewer to repent of."

"and is it possible, my dear," rejoined the judge, with a commiserating
look, "that you have never heard of clifford pyncheon?--that you know
nothing of his history? well, it is all right; and your mother has
shown a very proper regard for the good name of the family with which
she connected herself.   believe the best you can of this unfortunate
person, and hope the best!  it is a rule which christians should always
follow, in their judgments of one another; and especially is it right
and wise among near relatives, whose characters have necessarily a
degree of mutual dependence.  but is clifford in the parlor? i will
 
 ___________________________
 
ually
well adapted for just observation, was as ready to give out his wisdom
as a town-pump to give water.

"miss hepzibah, ma'am," said he once, after they had all been cheerful
together, "i really enjoy these quiet little meetings of a sabbath
afternoon.  they are very much like what i expect to have after i
retire to my farm!"

"uncle venner" observed clifford in a drowsy, inward tone, "is always
talking about his farm.  but i have a better scheme for him, by and by.
we shall see!"

"ah, mr. clifford pyncheon!" said the man of patches, "you may scheme
for me as much as you please; but i'm not going to give up this one
scheme of my own, even if i never bring it really to pass.  it does
seem to me that men make a wonderful mistake in trying to heap up
property upon property.  if i had done so, i should feel as if
providence was not bound to take care of me; and, at all events, the
city wouldn't be! i'm one of those people who think that infinity is
big enough for us all--and eternity long enough."

"w