er had
actually been written and despatched, conveying information of phoebe's
projected visit.  this epistle, for three or four days past, had been
in the pocket of the penny-postman, who, happening to have no other
business in pyncheon street, had not yet made it convenient to call at
the house of the seven gables.

"no--she can stay only one night," said hepzibah, unbolting the door.
"if clifford were to find her here, it might disturb him!"




                          v may and november


phoebe pyncheon slept, on the night of her arrival, in a chamber that
looked down on the garden of the old house.  it fronted towards the
east, so that at a very seasonable hour a glow of crimson light came
flooding through the window, and bathed the dingy ceiling and
paper-hangings in its own hue.  there were curtains to phoebe's bed; a
dark, antique canopy, and ponderous festoons of a stuff which had been
rich, and even magnificent, in its time; but which now brooded over the
girl like a cloud, making a nigh
 
 ___________________________
 
bah, i suppose, will interweave the fact with her other
traditions, and set it down that the fowls know you to be a pyncheon!"

"the secret is," said phoebe, smiling, "that i have learned how to talk
with hens and chickens."

"ah, but these hens," answered the young man,--"these hens of
aristocratic lineage would scorn to understand the vulgar language of a
barn-yard fowl.  i prefer to think--and so would miss hepzibah--that
they recognize the family tone.  for you are a pyncheon?"

"my name is phoebe pyncheon," said the girl, with  a manner of some
reserve; for she was aware that her new acquaintance could be no other
than the daguerreotypist, of whose lawless propensities the old maid
had given her a disagreeable idea.  "i did not know that my cousin
hepzibah's garden was under another person's care."

"yes," said holgrave, "i dig, and hoe, and weed, in this black old
earth, for the sake of refreshing myself with what little nature and
simplicity may be left in it, after men have so long sown and r
 
 ___________________________
 
of gravity, and, except as his youth modified
it, almost sternness.  she rebelled, as it were, against a certain
magnetic element in the artist's nature, which he exercised towards
her, possibly without being conscious of it.

after a little while, the twilight, deepened by the shadows of the
fruit-trees and the surrounding buildings, threw an obscurity over the
garden.

"there," said holgrave, "it is time to give over work! that last stroke
of the hoe has cut off a beanstalk.  good-night, miss phoebe pyncheon!
any bright day, if you will put one of those rosebuds in your hair, and
come to my rooms in central street, i will seize the purest ray of
sunshine, and make a picture of the flower and its wearer."  he retired
towards his own solitary gable, but turned his head, on reaching the
door, and called to phoebe, with a tone which certainly had laughter in
it, yet which seemed to be more than half in earnest.

"be careful not to drink at maule's well!" said he.  "neither drink nor
bathe your face in 
 
 ___________________________
 
nt, of indescribable grace,
such as no practised art of external manners could have attained.  it
was too slight to seize upon at the instant; yet, as recollected
afterwards, seemed to transfigure the whole man.

"dear clifford," said hepzibah, in the tone with which one soothes a
wayward infant, "this is our cousin phoebe,--little phoebe
pyncheon,--arthur's only child, you know.  she has come from the
country to stay with us awhile; for our old house has grown to be very
lonely now."

"phoebe--phoebe pyncheon?--phoebe?" repeated the guest, with a strange,
sluggish, ill-defined utterance.  "arthur's child! ah, i forget! no
matter.  she is very welcome!"

"come, dear clifford, take this chair," said hepzibah, leading him to
his place.  "pray, phoebe, lower the curtain a very little more.  now
let us begin breakfast."

the guest seated himself in the place assigned him, and looked
strangely around.  he was evidently trying to grapple with the present
scene, and bring it home to his mind with a more sat
 
 ___________________________
 
he gentleman was, he evidently
took her to be a young person serving for wages), "i am a cousin of
miss hepzibah, on a visit to her."

"her cousin?--and from the country? pray pardon me, then," said the
gentleman, bowing and smiling, as phoebe never had been bowed to nor
smiled on before; "in that case, we must be better acquainted; for,
unless i am sadly mistaken, you are my own little kinswoman likewise!
let me see,--mary?--dolly?--phoebe?--yes, phoebe is the name! is it
possible that you are phoebe pyncheon, only child of my dear cousin and
classmate, arthur?  ah, i see your father now, about your mouth! yes,
yes! we must be better acquainted! i am your kinsman, my dear.  surely
you must have heard of judge pyncheon?"

as phoebe curtsied in reply, the judge bent forward, with the
pardonable and even praiseworthy purpose--considering the nearness of
blood and the difference of age--of bestowing on his young relative a
kiss of acknowledged kindred and natural affection.  unfortunately
(without desig
 
 ___________________________
 
ughing.  "i believe
i am a little mad.  this subject has taken hold of my mind with the
strangest tenacity of clutch since i have lodged in yonder old gable.
as one method of throwing it off, i have put an incident of the
pyncheon family history, with which i happen to be acquainted, into the
form of a legend, and mean to publish it in a magazine."

"do you write for the magazines?" inquired phoebe.

"is it possible you did not know it?" cried holgrave.  "well, such is
literary fame! yes.  miss phoebe pyncheon, among the multitude of my
marvellous gifts i have that of writing stories; and my name has
figured, i can assure you, on the covers of graham and godey, making as
respectable an appearance, for aught i could see, as any of the
canonized bead-roll with which it was associated.  in the humorous
line, i am thought to have a very pretty way with me; and as for
pathos, i am as provocative of tears as an onion.  but shall i read you
my story?"

"yes, if it is not very long," said phoebe,--and added

 
 ___________________________
 
osing, in these advantageous
lights, that hepzibah herself could hardly help shrinking from her own
conclusions as to his hollow integrity.  the judge, on one side! and
who, on the other? the guilty clifford! once a byword! now, an
indistinctly remembered ignominy!

nevertheless, in spite of this perception that the judge would draw all
human aid to his own behalf, hepzibah was so unaccustomed to act for
herself, that the least word of counsel would have swayed her to any
mode of action. little phoebe pyncheon would at once have lighted up
the whole scene, if not by any available suggestion, yet simply by the
warm vivacity of her character. the idea of the artist occurred to
hepzibah. young and unknown, mere vagrant adventurer as he was, she had
been conscious of a force in holgrave which might well adapt him to be
the champion of a crisis. with this thought in her mind, she unbolted a
door, cobwebbed and long disused, but which had served as a former
medium of communication between her own part of t