escended into the sepulchral depths of
her reminiscences.  on entering the shop, she found an old man there, a
humble resident of pyncheon street, and whom, for a great many years
past, she had suffered to be a kind of familiar of the house.  he was
an immemorial personage, who seemed always to have had a white head and
wrinkles, and never to have possessed but a single tooth, and that a
half-decayed one, in the front of the upper jaw.  well advanced as
hepzibah was, she could not remember when uncle venner, as the
neighborhood called him, had not gone up and down the street, stooping
a little and drawing his feet heavily over the gravel or pavement.  but
still there was something tough and vigorous about him, that not only
kept him in daily breath, but enabled him to fill a place which would
else have been vacant in the apparently crowded world.  to go of
errands with his slow and shuffling gait, which made you doubt how he
ever was to arrive anywhere; to saw a small household's foot or two of
fi
 
 ___________________________
 
rewood, or knock to pieces an old barrel, or split up a pine board
for kindling-stuff; in summer, to dig the few yards of garden ground
appertaining to a low-rented tenement, and share the produce of his
labor at the halves; in winter, to shovel away the snow from the
sidewalk, or open paths to the woodshed, or along the clothes-line;
such were some of the essential offices which uncle venner performed
among at least a score of families.  within that circle, he claimed the
same sort of privilege, and probably felt as much warmth of interest,
as a clergyman does in the range of his parishioners.  not that he laid
claim to the tithe pig; but, as an analogous mode of reverence, he went
his rounds, every morning, to gather up the crumbs of the table and
overflowings of the dinner-pot, as food for a pig of his own.

in his younger days--for, after all, there was a dim tradition that he
h
 
 ___________________________
 
ad been, not young, but younger--uncle venner was commonly regarded as
rather deficient, than otherwise, in his wits.  in truth he had
virtually pleaded guilty to the charge, by scarcely aiming at such
success as other men seek, and by taking only that humble and modest
part in the intercourse of life which belongs to the alleged
deficiency.  but now, in his extreme old age,--whether it were that his
long and hard experience had actually brightened him, or that his
decaying judgment rendered him less capable of fairly measuring
himself,--t
 
 ___________________________
 
 pretensions to no little wisdom, and
really enjoyed the credit of it.  there was likewise, at times, a vein
of something like poetry in him; it was the moss or wall-flower of his
mind in its small dilapidation, and gave a charm to what might have
been vulgar and commonplace in his earlier and middle life.  hepzibah
had a regard for him, because his name was ancient in the town and had
formerly been respectable.  it was a still better reason for awarding
him a species of familiar reverence that uncle venner was himself the
most ancient existence, whether of man or thing, in pyncheon street,
except the house of the seven gables, and perhaps the elm that
overshadowed it.

this patriarch now presented himself before hepzibah, clad in an old
blue coat, which had a fashionable air, and must have accrued to him
from the cast-off wardrobe of some dashing clerk.  as for his trousers,
they were of tow-cloth, very short in the legs, and bagging down
strangely in the rear, but yet having a suitableness to hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s figure
which his other garment entirely lacked.  his hat had relation to no
other part of his dress, and but very little to the head that wore it.
thus uncle venner was a miscellaneous old gentleman, partly himself,
but, in good measure, somebody else; patched together, too, of
different epochs; an epitome of times and fashions.

"so, you have really begun trade," said he,--"really begun trade!
well, i'm glad to see it.  young people should never live idle in the
world, nor old ones neither, unless when the rheumatize gets hold of
them.  it has given me warning already; and in two or three years
longer, i shall think of putting aside business and retiring 
 
 ___________________________
 
to my
farm.  that's yonder,--the great brick house, you know,--the workhouse,
most folks call it; but i mean to do my work first, and go there to be
idle and enjoy myself.  and i'm glad to see you beginning to do your
work, miss hepzibah!"

"thank you, uncle venner" said hepzibah, smiling; for she always felt
kindly towards the simple and talkative old man.  had he been an old
woman, she might probably have repelled the freedom, which she now took
in good part.  "it is time for me to begin work, indeed! or, to speak
the truth, i have just begun when i ought to be giving it up."

"oh, never say that, miss hepzibah!" answered the old man.  "you are a
young woman yet.  why, i hardly thought myself younger than i am now,
it seems so little while ago since i u
 
 ___________________________
 
 lady.
nowadays, a man would not dare to be called king; and if he feels
himself a little above common folks, he only stoops so much the lower
to them.  i met your cousin, the judge, ten minutes ago; and, in my old
tow-cloth trousers, as you see, the judge raised his hat to me, i do
believe! at any rate, the judge bowed and smiled!"

"yes," said hepzibah, with something bitter stealing unawares into her
tone; "my cousin jaffrey is thought to have a very pleasant smile!"

"and so he has" replied uncle venner.  "and that's rather remarkable in
a pyncheon; for, begging your pardon, miss hepzibah, they never had the
name of being an easy and agreeable set of folks.  there was no getting
close to them.  but now, miss hepzibah, if an old man may be bold to
ask, why don't judge pyncheon, with his great means, step forward, and
tell his cousin to shut up her little shop at once? it's for your
credit to be doing something, but it's not for the judge's credit to
let you!"

"we won't talk of this, if you ple
 
 ___________________________
 
ase, uncle venner," said hepzibah
coldly.  "i ought to say, however, that, if i choose to earn bread for
myself, it is not judge pyncheon's fault.  neither will he deserve the
blame," added she more kindly, remembering uncle venner's privileges of
age and humble familiarity, "if i should, by and by, find it convenient
to retire with you to your farm."

"and it's no bad place, either, that farm of mine!" cried the old man
cheerily, as if there were something positively delightful in the
prospect.  "no bad place is the great brick farm-house, especially for
them that will find a good many old cronies there, as will be my case.
i quite long to be among them, sometimes, of the winter evenings; for
it is but dull business for 
 
 ___________________________
 
annually.  or,--and, surely, anything so
undeniably just could not be beyond the limits of reasonable
anticipation,--the great claim to the heritage of waldo county might
finally be decided in favor of the pyncheons; so that, instead of
keeping a cent-shop, hepzibah would build a palace, and look down from
its highest tower on hill, dale, forest, field, and town, as her own
share of the ancestral territory.

these were some of the fantasies which she had long dreamed about; and,
aided by these, uncle venner's casual attempt at encouragement kindled
a strange festal glory in the poor, bare, melancholy chambers of her
brain, as if that inner world were suddenly lighted up with gas.  but
either he knew nothing of her castles in the air,--as how should
he?--or else her earnest scowl disturbed his recollection, as it might
a more courageous man's.  instead of pursuing any weightier topic,
uncle venner was pleased to favor hepzibah with some sage counsel in
her shop-keeping capacity.

"give no credit!"-
 
 ___________________________
 
doing her utmost to digest the hard little
pellets of his already uttered wisdom, he gave vent to his final, and
what he declared to be his all-important advice, as follows:--

"put on a bright face for your customers, and smile pleasantly as you
hand them what they ask for! a stale article, if you dip it in a good,
warm, sunny smile, will go off better than a fresh one that you've
scowled upon."

to this last apothegm poor hepzibah responded with a sigh so deep and
heavy that it almost rustled uncle venner quite away, like a withered
leaf,--as he was,--before an autumnal gale.  recovering himself,
however, he bent forward, and, with a good deal of feeling in his
ancient visage, beckoned her nearer to him.

"when do you expect him home?" whispered he.

"whom do you mean?" asked hepzibah, turning pale.

"ah!--you don't love to talk about it," said uncle venner.  "well,
well! we'll say no more, though there's word of it all over town.  i
remember him, miss hepzibah, before he could run alone!"

duri
 
 ___________________________
 
"the gingerbread figures are all gone, and so are those
dutch wooden milkmaids, and most of our other playthings.  there has
been constant inquiry for cheap raisins, and a great cry for whistles,
and trumpets, and jew's-harps; and at least a dozen little boys have
asked for molasses-candy.  and we must contrive to get a peck of russet
apples, late in the season as it is.  but, dear cousin, what an
enormous heap of copper!  positively a copper mountain!"

"well done! well done! well done!" quoth uncle venner, who had taken
occasion to shuffle in and out of the shop several times in the course
of the day.  "here's a girl that will never end her days at my farm!
bless my eyes, what a brisk little soul!"

"yes, phoebe is a nice girl!" said hepzibah, with a scowl of austere
approbation.  "but, uncle venner, you have known the family a great
many years.  can you tell me whether there ever was a pyncheon whom she
takes after?"

"i don't believe there ever was," answered the venerable man.  "at any
rate, 
 
 ___________________________
 
it never was my luck to see her like among them, nor, for that
matter, anywhere else.  i've seen a great deal of the world, not only
in people's kitchens and back-yards but at the street-corners, and on
the wharves, and in other places where my business calls me; and i'm
free to say, miss hepzibah, that i never knew a human creature do her
work so much like one of god's angels as this child phoebe does!"

uncle venner's eulogium, if it appear rather too high-strained for the
person and occasion, had, nevertheless, a sense in which it was both
subtile and true.  there was a spiritual quality in phoebe's activity.
the life of the long and busy day--spent in occupations that might so
easily have taken a squalid and ugly aspect--had been made pleasant,
and even lovely, by the spontaneous grace with which these homely
duties seemed to bloom out of her character; so that labor, while she
dealt with it, had the eas
 
 ___________________________
 
he counter.  it was now the
young girl's turn to be the nurse,--the guardian, the playmate,--or
whatever is the fitter phrase,--of the gray-haired man.




                         x the pyncheon garden


clifford, except for phoebe's more active instigation would ordinarily
have yielded to the torpor which had crept through all his modes of
being, and which sluggishly counselled him to sit in his morning chair
till eventide.  but the girl seldom failed to propose a removal to the
garden, where uncle venner and the daguerreotypist had made such
repairs on the roof of the ruinous arbor, or summer-house, that it was
now a sufficient shelter from sunshine and casual showers.  the
hop-vine, too, had begun to grow luxuriantly over the sides of the
little edifice, and made an interior of verdant seclusion, with
innumerable peeps and glimpses into the wider solitude of the garden.

here, sometimes, in this green play-place of flickering light, phoebe
read to clifford.  her acquaintance, the artist, who a
 
 ___________________________
 
ly have been at ease had she
missed either prayer, singing, sermon, or benediction,--after
church-time, therefore, there was, ordinarily, a sober little festival
in the garden.  in addition to clifford, hepzibah, and phoebe, two
guests made up the company.  one was the artist holgrave, who, in spite
of his consociation with reformers, and his other queer and
questionable traits, continued to hold an elevated place in hepzibah's
regard.  the other, we are almost ashamed to say, was the venerable
uncle venner, in a clean shirt, and a broadcloth coat, more respectable
than his ordinary wear, inasmuch as it was neatly patched on each
elbow, and might be called an entire garment, except for a slight
inequality in the length of its skirts.   clifford, on several
occasions, had seemed to enjoy the old man's intercourse, for the sake
of his mellow, cheerful vein, which was like the sweet flavor of a
frost-bitten apple, such as one picks up under the tree in december.  a
man at the very lowest point of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 social scale was easier and more
agreeable for the fallen gentleman to encounter than a person at any of
the intermediate degrees; and, moreover, as clifford's young manhood
had been lost, he was fond of feeling himself comparatively youthful,
now, in apposition with the patriarchal age of uncle venner.  in fact,
it was sometimes observable that clifford half wilfully hid from
himself the consciousness of being stricken in years, and cherished
visions of an earthly future still before him; visions, however, too
indistinctly drawn to be followed by disappointment--though, doubtless,
by depression--when any casual incident or recollection made him
sensible of the withered leaf.

so this oddly composed little social party used to assemble under the
ruinous arbor.  hepzibah--stately as ever at he
 
 ___________________________
 
art, and yielding not an
inch of her old gentility, but resting upon it so much the more, as
justifying a princess-like condescension--exhibited a not ungraceful
hospitality.   she talked kindly to the vagrant artist, and took sage
counsel--lady as she was--with the wood-sawyer, the messenger of
everybody's petty errands, the patched philosopher.  and uncle venner,
who had studied the world at street-corners, and other posts equally
well adapted for just observation, was as ready to give out his wisdom
as a town-pump to give water.

"miss hepzibah, ma'am," said he once, after they had all been cheerful
together, "i really enjoy these quiet little meetings of a sabbath
afternoon.  they are very much like what i expect to have after i
retire to my farm!"

"uncle venner" observed clifford in a drowsy, inward tone, "is always
talking about his farm.  but i h
 
 ___________________________
 
f patches, "you may scheme
for me as much as you please; but i'm not going to give up this one
scheme of my own, even if i never bring it really to pass.  it does
seem to me that men make a wonderful mistake in trying to heap up
property upon property.  if i had done so, i should feel as if
providence was not bound to take care of me; and, at all events, the
city wouldn't be! i'm one of those people who think that infinity is
big enough for us all--and eternity long enough."

"why, so they are, uncle venner," remarked phoebe after a pause; for
she had been trying to fathom the profundity and appositeness of this
concluding apothegm.  "but for this short life of ours, one would like
a house and a moderate garden-spot of one's own."

"it appears to me," said the daguerreotypist, smiling, "that uncle
venner has the principles of fourier at the bottom of his wisdom; only
they have not quite so much distinctness in his mind as in that of the
systematizing frenchman."

"come, phoebe," said hepzibah, "it
 
 ___________________________
 
now and then, an expression, not sinister, but questionable;
as if he had some other interest in the scene than a stranger, a
youthful and unconnected adventurer, might be supposed to have.  with
great mobility of outward mood, however, he applied himself to the task
of enlivening the party; and with so much success, that even dark-hued
hepzibah threw off one tint of melancholy, and made what shift she
could with the remaining portion.  phoebe said to herself,--"how
pleasant he can be!"  as for uncle venner, as a mark of friendship and
approbation, he readily consented to afford the young man his
countenance in the way of his profession,--not metaphorically, be it
understood, but literally, by allowing a daguerreotype of his face, so
familiar to the town, to be exhibited at the entrance of holgrave's
studio.

clifford, as the company partook of their little banquet, grew to be
the gayest of them all.  either it was one of those up-quivering
flashes of the spirit, to which minds in an abnormal stat
 
 ___________________________
 
t!
it is late! it is late! i want my happiness!"

alas, poor clifford! you are old, and worn with troubles that ought
never to have befallen you.  you are partly crazy and partly imbecile;
a ruin, a failure, as almost everybody is,--though some in less degree,
or less perceptibly, than their fellows.  fate has no happiness in
store for you; unless your quiet home in the old family residence with
the faithful hepzibah, and your long summer afternoons with phoebe, and
these sabbath festivals with uncle venner and the daguerreotypist,
deserve to be called happiness!  why not? if not the thing itself, it
is marvellously like it, and the more so for that ethereal and
intangible quality which causes it all to vanish at too close an
introspection.  take it, therefore, while you may. murmur
not,--question not,--but make the most of it!




                            xi the arched window


from the inertness, or what we may term the vegetative character, of
his ordinary mood, clifford would perhaps have b
 
 ___________________________
 
lly of being cast down
about it--she would not so far acknowledge her tears as to dry them
with her handkerchief.  on the doorstep, she met the little urchin
whose marvellous feats of gastronomy have been recorded in the earlier
pages of our narrative.  she took from the window some specimen or
other of natural history,--her eyes being too dim with moisture to
inform her accurately whether it was a rabbit or a hippopotamus,--put
it into the child's hand as a parting gift, and went her way.  old
uncle venner was just coming out of his door, with a wood-horse and saw
on his shoulder; and, trudging along the street, he scrupled not to
keep company with phoebe, so far as their paths lay together; nor, in
spite of his patched coat and rusty beaver, and the curious fashion of
his tow-cloth trousers, could she find it in her heart to outwalk him.

"we shall miss you, next sabbath afternoon," observed the street
philosopher.  "it is unaccountable how little while it takes some folks
to grow just as natura
 
 ___________________________
 
begging your
pardon, miss phoebe (though there can be no offence in an old man's
saying it), that's just what you've grown to me!  my years have been a
great many, and your life is but just beginning; and yet, you are
somehow as familiar to me as if i had found you at my mother's door,
and you had blossomed, like a running vine, all along my pathway since.
come back soon, or i shall be gone to my farm; for i begin to find
these wood-sawing jobs a little too tough for my back-ache."

"very soon, uncle venner," replied phoebe.

"and let it be all the sooner, phoebe, for the sake of those poor souls
yonder," continued her companion.  "they can never do without you,
now,--never, phoebe; never--no more than if one of god's angels had
been living with them, and making their dismal house pleasant and
comfortable! don't it seem to you they'd be in a sad case, if, some
pleasant summer morning like this, the angel should spread his wings,
and fly to the place he came from? well, just so they feel, now that

 
 ___________________________
 
you're going home by the railroad!  they can't bear it, miss phoebe; so
be sure to come back!"

"i am no angel, uncle venner," said phoebe, smiling, as she offered him
her hand at the street-corner.  "but, i suppose, people never feel so
much like angels as when they are doing what little good they may.  so
i shall certainly come back!"

thus parted the old man and the rosy girl; and phoebe took the wings of
the morning, and was soon flitting almost as rapidly away as if endowed
with the aerial locomotion of the angels to whom uncle venner had so
graciously compared her.




                         xv the scowl and 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat
a tailor's seamstress was sitting at her work.   hepzibah flung herself
upon that unknown woman's companionship, even thus far off.  then she
was attracted by a chaise rapidly passing, and watched its moist and
glistening top, and its splashing wheels, until it had turned the
corner, and refused to carry any further her idly trifling, because
appalled and overburdened, mind.  when the vehicle had disappeared, she
allowed herself still another loitering moment; for the patched figure
of good uncle venner was now visible, coming slowly from the head of
the street downward, with a rheumatic limp, because the east wind had
got into his joints.  hepzibah wished that he would pass yet more
slowly, and befriend her shivering solitude a little longer.  anything
that would take her out of the grievous present, and interpose human
beings betwixt herself and what was nearest to her,--whatever would
defer for an instant the inevitable errand on which she was bound,--all
such impediments were welcome.  nex
 
 ___________________________
 
 too weak, that wast so powerful?  not brush away a
fly? nay, then, we give thee up!

and hark! the shop-bell rings.  after hours like these latter ones,
through which we have borne our heavy tale, it is good to be made
sensible that there is a living world, and that even this old, lonely
mansion retains some manner of connection with it.  we breathe more
freely, emerging from judge pyncheon's presence into the street before
the seven gables.




                            xix alice's posies


uncle venner, trundling a wheelbarrow, was the earliest person stirring
in the neighborhood the day after the storm.

pyncheon street, in front of the house of the seven gables, was a far
pleasanter scene than a by-lane, confined by shabby fences, and
bordered with wooden dwellings of the meaner class, could reasonably be
expected to present.  nature made sweet amends, that morning, for the
five unkindly days which had preceded it.  it would have been enough to
live for, merely to look up at the wide benedi
 
 ___________________________
 
t tuft of flowers,--weeds, you would
have called them, only a week ago,--the tuft of crimson-spotted
flowers, in the angle between the two front gables. the old people used
to give them the name of alice's posies, in remembrance of fair alice
pyncheon, who was believed to have brought their seeds from italy.
they were flaunting in rich beauty and full bloom to-day, and seemed,
as it were, a mystic expression that something within the house was
consummated.

it was but little after sunrise, when uncle venner made his appearance,
as aforesaid, impelling a wheelbarrow along the street. he was going
his matutinal rounds to collect cabbage-leaves, turnip-tops,
potato-skins, and the miscellaneous refuse of the dinner-pot, which the
thrifty housewives of the neighborhood were accustomed to put aside, as
fit only to feed a pig. uncle venner's pig was fed entirely, and kept
in prime order, on these eleemosynary contributions; insomuch that the
patched philosopher used to promise that, before retiring to hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s farm,
he would make a feast of the portly grunter, and invite all his
neighbors to partake of the joints and spare-ribs which they had helped
to fatten. miss hepzibah pyncheon's housekeeping had so greatly
improved, since clifford became a member of the family, that her share
of the banquet would have been no lean one; and uncle venner,
accordingly, was a good deal disappointed not to find the large earthen
pan, full of fragmentary eatables, that ordinarily awaited his coming
at the back doorstep of the seven gables.

"i never knew miss hepzibah so forgetful before," said the patriarch to
himself.  "she must have had a dinner yesterday,--no question of that!
she always has one, nowadays.  so where's the pot-liquor and
potato-skins, i ask? shall i knock, and see if she's stirring yet? no,
no,--'t won't do! if little phoebe was
 
 ___________________________
 
 house, i should not
mind knocking; but miss hepzibah, likely as not, would scowl down at me
out of the window, and look cross, even if she felt pleasantly.  so,
i'll come back at noon."

with these reflections, the old man was shutting the gate of the little
back-yard.  creaking on its hinges, however, like every other gate and
door about the premises, the sound reached the ears of the occupant of
the northern gable, one of the windows of which had a side-view towards
the gate.

"good-morning, uncle venner!" said the daguerreotypist, leaning out of
the window.  "do you hear nobody stirring?"

"not a soul," said the man of patches.  "but that's no wonder.  'tis
barely half an hour past sunrise, yet.  but i'm really glad to see you,
mr. holgrave! there's a strange, lonesome look about this side of the
house; so that my heart misgave me, somehow or other, and i felt as if
there was nobody alive in it.  the front of the house looks a good deal
cheerier; and alice's posies are blooming there beautiful
 
 ___________________________
 
though i risked my neck climbing for it! well,
and did the wind keep you awake last night?"

"it did, indeed!" answered the artist, smiling.  "if i were a believer
in ghosts,--and i don't quite know whether i am or not,--i should have
concluded that all the old pyncheons were running riot in the lower
rooms, especially in miss hepzibah's part of the house.  but it is very
quiet now."

"yes, miss hepzibah will be apt to over-sleep herself, after being
disturbed, all night, with the racket," said uncle venner.  "but it
would be odd, now, wouldn't it, if the judge had taken both his cousins
into the country along with him? i saw him go into the shop yesterday."

"at what hour?" inquired holgrave.

"oh, along in the forenoon," said the old man.  "well, well! i must go
my rounds, and so must my wheelbarrow.  but i'll be back here at
dinner-time; for my pig likes a dinner as well as a breakfast.  no
meal-time, and no sort of victuals, ever seems to come amiss to my pig.
good morning to you! and, mr. hol
 
 ___________________________
 
grave, if i were a young man, like
you, i'd get one of alice's posies, and keep it in water till phoebe
comes back."

"i have heard," said the daguerreotypist, as he drew in his head, "that
the water of maule's well suits those flowers best."

here the conversation ceased, and uncle venner went on his way.  for
half an hour longer, nothing disturbed the repose of the seven gables;
nor was there any visitor, except a carrier-boy, who, as he passed the
front doorstep, threw down one of his newspapers; for hepzibah, of
late, had regularly taken it in.  after a while, there came a fat
woman, making prodigious speed, and stumbling as she ran up the steps
of the shop-door.  her face glowed with fire-heat, and, it being a
pretty warm morning, she bubbled and hissed, as it were, as if al
 
 ___________________________
 
se of the seven gables, and take up their abode, for the
present, at the elegant country-seat of the late judge pyncheon.
chanticleer and his family had already been transported thither, where
the two hens had forthwith begun an indefatigable process of
egg-laying, with an evident design, as a matter of duty and conscience,
to continue their illustrious breed under better auspices than for a
century past.  on the day set for their departure, the principal
personages of our story, including good uncle venner, were assembled in
the parlor.

"the country-house is certainly a very fine one, so far as the plan
goes," observed holgrave, as the party were discussing their future
arrangements.  "but i wonder that the late judge--being so opulent, and
with a reasonable prospect of transmitting his wealth to descendants of
his own--should not have felt the propriety of embodying so excellent a
piece of domestic architecture in stone, rather than in wood.  then,
every generation of the family might have alte
 
 ___________________________
 
  you should have known sooner
(only that i was afraid of frightening you away) that, in this long
drama of wrong and retribution, i represent the old wizard, and am
probably as much a wizard as ever he was.  the son of the executed
matthew maule, while building this house, took the opportunity to
construct that recess, and hide away the indian deed, on which depended
the immense land-claim of the pyncheons.  thus they bartered their
eastern territory for maule's garden-ground."

"and now" said uncle venner "i suppose their whole claim is not worth
one man's share in my farm yonder!"

"uncle venner," cried phoebe, taking the patched philosopher's hand,
"you must never talk any more about your farm! you shall never go
there, as long as you live! there is a cottage in our new garden,--the
prettiest little yellowish-brown cottage you ever saw; and the
sweetest-looking place, for it looks just as if it were made of
gingerbread,--and we are going to fit it up and furnish it, on purpose
for you.  and yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u shall do nothing but what you choose, and shall be as
happy as the day is long, and shall keep cousin clifford in spirits
with the wisdom and pleasantness which is always dropping from your
lips!"

"ah! my dear child," quoth good uncle venner, quite overcome, "if you
were to speak to a young man as you do to an old one, his chance of
keeping his heart another minute would not be worth one of the buttons
on my waistcoat! and--soul alive!--that great sigh, which you made me
heave, has burst off the very last of them! but, never mind! it was the
happiest sigh i ever did heave; and it seems as if i must have drawn in
a gulp of heavenly breath, to make it with.  well, well, miss phoebe!
they'll miss me in the gardens hereabouts, and roun
 
 ___________________________
 
d by the back doors;
and pyncheon street, i'm afraid, will hardly look the same without old
uncle venner, who remembers it with a mowing field on one side, and the
garden of the seven gables on the other.  but either i must go to your
country-seat, or you must come to my farm,--that's one of two things
certain; and i leave you to choose which!"

"oh, come with us, by all means, uncle venner!" said clifford, who had
a remarkable enjoyment of the old man's mellow, quiet, and simple
spirit.  "i want you always to be within five minutes, saunter of my
chair.  you are the only philosopher i ever knew of whose wisdom has
not a drop of bitter essence at the bottom!"

"dear me!" cried uncle venner, beginning partly to realize what manner
of man he was.  "and yet folks used to set me down among the simple
ones, in my younger days! but i suppose i am like a roxbury russet,--a
great deal the
 
 ___________________________
 
 yes; and my words of
wisdom, that you and phoebe tell me of, are like the golden dandelions,
which never grow in the hot months, but may be seen glistening among
the withered grass, and under the dry leaves, sometimes as late as
december.  and you are welcome, friends, to my mess of dandelions, if
there were twice as many!"

a plain, but handsome, dark-green barouche had now drawn up in front of
the ruinous portal of the old mansion-house.  the party came forth, and
(with the exception of good uncle venner, who was to follow in a few
days) proceeded to take their places.  they were chatting and laughing
very pleasantly together; and--as proves to be often the case, at
moments when we ought to palpitate with sensibility--clifford and
hepzibah bade a final farewell to the abode of their forefathers, with
hardly more emotion than if they had made it their arrangement to
return thither at tea-time.  several children were drawn to the spot by
so unusual a spectacle as the barouche and pair of gray hor
 
 ___________________________
 
the sagacious dixey,--"pretty good
business!"

maule's well, all this time, though left in solitude, was throwing up a
succession of kaleidoscopic pictures, in which a gifted eye might have
seen foreshadowed the coming fortunes of hepzibah and clifford, and the
descendant of the legendary wizard, and the village maiden, over whom
he had thrown love's web of sorcery.  the pyncheon elm, moreover, with
what foliage the september gale had spared to it, whispered
unintelligible prophecies.  and wise uncle venner, passing slowly from
the ruinous porch, seemed to hear a strain of music, and fancied that
sweet alice pyncheon--after witnessing these deeds, this bygone woe and
this present happiness, of her kindred mortals--had given one farewell
touch of a spirit's joy upon her harpsichord, as she floated heavenward
from the house of the seven gables!
