y darkly overshadow their posterity.

the house of the seven gables, antique as it now looks, was not the
first habitation erected by civilized man on precisely the same spot of
ground.  pyncheon street formerly bore the humbler appellation of
maule's lane, from the name of the original occupant of the soil,
before whose cottage-door it was a cow-path.  a natural spring of soft
and pleasant water--a rare treasure on the sea-girt peninsula where the
puritan settlement was made--had early induced matthew maule to build a
hut, shaggy with thatch, at this point, although somewhat too remote
from what was then the centre of the village.  in the growth of the
town, however, after some thirty or forty years, the site covered by
this rude hovel had become exceedingly desirable in the eyes of a
prominent and powerful personage, who asserted plausible claims to the
proprietorship of this and a large adjacent tract of land, on the
strength of a grant from the legislature.  colonel pyncheon, the
claimant, as w
 
 ___________________________
 
e gather from whatever traits of him are preserved, was
characterized by an iron energy of purpose.  matthew maule, on the
other hand, though an obscure man, was stubborn in the defence of what
he considered his right; and, for several years, he succeeded in
protecting the acre or two of earth which, with his own toil, he had
hewn out of the primeval forest, to be his garden ground and homestead.
no written record of this dispute is known to be in existence.  our
acquaintance with the whole subject is derived chiefly from tradition.
it would be bold, therefore, and possibly unjust, to venture a decisive
opi
 
 ___________________________
 
nion as to its merits; although it appears to have been at least a
matter of doubt, whether colonel pyncheon's claim were not unduly
stretched, in order to make it cover the small metes and bounds of
matthew maule.  what greatly strengthens such a suspicion is the fact
that this controversy between two ill-matched antagonists--at a period,
moreover, laud it as we may, when personal influence had far more
weight than now--remained for years undecided, and came to a close only
with the death of the party occupying the disputed soil.  the mode of
his death, too, affects the mind differently, in our day, from what it
did a century and a half ago.  it was a death that blasted with strange
horror the humble na
 
 ___________________________
 
me of the dweller in the cottage, and made it seem
almost a religious act to drive the plough over the little area of his
habitation, and obliterate his place and memory from among men.

old matthew maule, in a word, was executed for the crime of witchcraft.
he was one of the martyrs to that terrible delusion, which should teach
us, among its other morals, that the influential classes, and those who
take upon themselves to be leaders of the people, are fully liable to
all the passionate error that has ever characterized the maddest mob.
clergymen, judges, statesmen,--the wisest, calmest, holiest persons of
their day stood in the inner circle round about the gallows, loudest to
applaud the work o
 
 ___________________________
 
n, it is not
strange that a man of inconsiderable note, like maule, should have
trodden the martyr's path to the hill of execution almost unremarked in
the throng of his fellow sufferers.  but, in after days, when the
frenzy of that hideous epoch had subsided, it was remembered how loudly
colonel pyncheon had joined in the general cry, to purge the land from
witchcraft; nor did it fail to be whispered, that there was an
invidious acrimony in the zeal with which he had sought the
condemnation of matthew maule.  it was well known that the victim had
recognized the bitterness of personal enmity in his persecutor's
conduct towards him, and that he declared himself hunted to death for
his spoil.  at the moment of execution--with the halter about his neck,
and while colonel pyncheon sat on horseback, grimly gazing at the scene
maule had addressed him from the scaffold, and uttered a prophecy, of
which history, as well as fireside tradition, has preserved the very
words.  "god," said the dying man, pointi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng his finger, with a ghastly
look, at the undismayed countenance of his enemy,--"god will give him
blood to drink!"  after the reputed wizard's death, his humble
homestead had fallen an easy spoil into colonel pyncheon's grasp.  when
it was understood, however, that the colonel intended to erect a family
mansion-spacious, ponderously framed of oaken timber, and calculated to
endure for many generations of his posterity over the spot first
covered by the log-built hut of matthew maule, there was much shaking
of the head among the village gossips.  without absolutely expressing a
doubt whether the stalwart puritan had acted as a man of conscience and
integrity throughout the proceedings which have been sketched, they,
nevertheless, hinted that he was about to build his house over an
unquiet grave.  his home would include the home of the dead and buried
wizard, and would thus afford the ghost of the latter a kind of
privilege to haunt its new apartments, and the chambers into 
 
 ___________________________
 
d with
commonsense, as massive and hard as blocks of granite, fastened
together by stern rigidity of purpose, as with iron clamps, he followed
out his original design, probably without so much as imagining an
objection to it.  on the score of delicacy, or any scrupulousness which
a finer sensibility might have taught him, the colonel, like most of
his breed and generation, was impenetrable.  he therefore dug his
cellar, and laid the deep foundations of his mansion, on the square of
earth whence matthew maule, forty years before, had first swept away
the fallen leaves.  it was a curious, and, as some people thought, an
ominous fact, that, very soon after the workmen began their operations,
the spring of water, above mentioned, entirely lost the deliciousness
of its pristine quality.  whether its sources were disturbed by the
depth of the new cellar, or whatever subtler cause might lurk at the
bottom, it is certain that the water of maule's well, as it continued
to be called, grew hard and brackish. 
 
 ___________________________
 
he fixedness of colonel pyncheon's
stare; that there was blood on his ruff, and that his hoary beard was
saturated with it.  it was too late to give assistance.  the
iron-hearted puritan, the relentless persecutor, the grasping and
strong-willed man was dead! dead, in his new house! there is a
tradition, only worth alluding to as lending a tinge of superstitious
awe to a scene perhaps gloomy enough without it, that a voice spoke
loudly among the guests, the tones of which were like those of old
matthew maule, the executed wizard,--"god hath given him blood to
drink!"

thus early had that one guest,--the only guest who is certain, at one
time or another, to find his way into every human dwelling,--thus early
had death stepped across the threshold of the house of the seven gables!

colonel pyncheon's sudden and mysterious end made a vast deal of noise
in its day.  there were many rumors, some of which have vaguely drifted
down to the present time, how that appearances indicated violence; that
there w
 
 ___________________________
 
"here is
the old pyncheon come again! now the seven gables will be
new-shingled!"  from father to son, they clung to the ancestral house
with singular tenacity of home attachment.  for various reasons,
however, and from impressions often too vaguely founded to be put on
paper, the writer cherishes the belief that many, if not most, of the
successive proprietors of this estate were troubled with doubts as to
their moral right to hold it.  of their legal tenure there could be no
question; but old matthew maule, it is to be feared, trode downward
from his own age to a far later one, planting a heavy footstep, all the
way, on the conscience of a pyncheon.  if so, we are left to dispose of
the awful query, whether each inheritor of the property--conscious of
wrong, and failing to rectify it--did not commit anew the great guilt
of his ancestor, and incur all its original responsibilities.  and
supposing such to be the case, would it not be a far truer mode of
expression to say of the pyncheon family, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
 other, to be
summoned forth from his living tomb.

it is essential to say a few words respecting the victim of this now
almost forgotten murder.  he was an old bachelor, and possessed of
great wealth, in addition to the house and real estate which
constituted what remained of the ancient pyncheon property.  being of
an eccentric and melancholy turn of mind, and greatly given to
rummaging old records and hearkening to old traditions, he had brought
himself, it is averred, to the conclusion that matthew maule, the
wizard, had been foully wronged out of his homestead, if not out of his
life.  such being the case, and he, the old bachelor, in possession of
the ill-gotten spoil,--with the black stain of blood sunken deep into
it, and still to be scented by conscientious nostrils,--the question
occurred, whether it were not imperative upon him, even at this late
hour, to make restitution to maule's posterity.  to a man living so
much in the past, and so little in the present, as the secluded and
antiqua
 
 ___________________________
 
rian old bachelor, a century and a half seemed not so vast a
period as to obviate the propriety of substituting right for wrong.  it
was the belief of those who knew him best, that he would positively
have taken the very singular step of giving up the house of the seven
gables to the representative of matthew maule, but for the unspeakable
tumult which a suspicion of the old gentleman's project awakened among
his pyncheon relatives.  their exertions had the effect of suspending
his purpose; but it was feared that he would perform, after death, by
the operation of his last will, what he had so hardly been prevented
from doing in his proper lifetime.  but there is no one thing which men
so rarely do, whatever the provocation or inducement, as to bequeath
patrimonial property away from their own blood.  they
 
 ___________________________
 
tood to be wretchedly poor, and seemed to make it her
choice to remain so; inasmuch as her affluent cousin, the judge, had
repeatedly offered her all the comforts of life, either in the old
mansion or his own modern residence.  the last and youngest pyncheon
was a little country-girl of seventeen, the daughter of another of the
judge's cousins, who had married a young woman of no family or
property, and died early and in poor circumstances.  his widow had
recently taken another husband.

as for matthew maule's posterity, it was supposed now to be extinct.
for a very long period after the witchcraft delusion, however, the
maules had continued to inhabit the town where their progenitor had
suffered so unjust a death.  to all appearance, they were a quiet,
honest, well-meaning race of people, cherishing no malice against
individuals or the public for the wrong which had been done them; or
if, at their own fireside, they transmitted from father to child any
hostile recollection of the wizard's fate and
 
 ___________________________
 
e and there
about the town, in hired tenements, and coming finally to the almshouse
as the natural home of their old age.  at last, after creeping, as it
were, for such a length of time along the utmost verge of the opaque
puddle of obscurity, they had taken that downright plunge which, sooner
or later, is the destiny of all families, whether princely or plebeian.
for thirty years past, neither town-record, nor gravestone, nor the
directory, nor the knowledge or memory of man, bore any trace of
matthew maule's descendants.  his blood might possibly exist elsewhere;
here, where its lowly current could be traced so far back, it had
ceased to keep an onward course.

so long as any of the race were to be found, they had been marked out
from other men--not strikingly, nor as with a sharp line, but with an
effect that was felt rather than spoken of--by an hereditary character
of reserve.  their companions, or those who endeavored to become such,
grew conscious of a circle round about the maules, within t
 
 ___________________________
 
 it was impossible for any man to step.  it was
this indefinable peculiarity, perhaps, that, by insulating them from
human aid, kept them always so unfortunate in life.  it certainly
operated to prolong in their case, and to confirm to them as their only
inheritance, those feelings of repugnance and superstitious terror with
which the people of the town, even after awakening from their frenzy,
continued to regard the memory of the reputed witches.  the mantle, or
rather the ragged cloak, of old matthew maule had fallen upon his
children.  they were half believed to inherit mysterious attributes;
the family eye was said to possess strange power.  among other
good-for-nothing properties and privileges, one was especially assigned
them,--that of exercising an influence over people's dreams.  the
pyncheons, if all stories were true, haughtily as they bore themselves
in the noonday streets of their native town, were no better than
bond-servants to these plebeian maules, on entering the topsy-turvy
commo
 
 ___________________________
 
 i am as provocative of tears as an onion.  but shall i read you
my story?"

"yes, if it is not very long," said phoebe,--and added
laughingly,--"nor very dull."

as this latter point was one which the daguerreotypist could not decide
for himself, he forthwith produced his roll of manuscript, and, while
the late sunbeams gilded the seven gables, began to read.




                          xiii alice pyncheon


there was a message brought, one day, from the worshipful gervayse
pyncheon to young matthew maule, the carpenter, desiring his immediate
presence at the house of the seven gables.

"and what does your master want with me?" said the carpenter to mr.
pyncheon's black servant.  "does the house need any repair?  well it
may, by this time; and no blame to my father who built it, neither! i
was reading the old colonel's tombstone, no longer ago than last
sabbath; and, reckoning from that date, the house has stood
seven-and-thirty years.  no wonder if there should be a job to do on
the roof."

"do
 
 ___________________________
 
ll, well, friend scipio; let your master know that i'm coming," said
the carpenter with a laugh.  "for a fair, workmanlike job, he'll find
me his man.  and so the house is haunted, is it? it will take a tighter
workman than i am to keep the spirits out of the seven gables.  even if
the colonel would be quiet," he added, muttering to himself, "my old
grandfather, the wizard, will be pretty sure to stick to the pyncheons
as long as their walls hold together."

"what's that you mutter to yourself, matthew maule?" asked scipio.
"and what for do you look so black at me?"

"no matter, darky," said the carpenter.  "do you think nobody is to
look black but yourself? go tell your master i'm coming; and if you
happen to see mistress alice, his daughter, give matthew maule's humble
respects to her.  she has brought a fair face from italy,--fair, and
gentle, and proud,--has that same alice pyncheon!"

"he talk of mistress alice!" cried scipio, as he returned from his
errand.  "the low carpenter-man! he no busi
 
 ___________________________
 
ness so much as to look at
her a great way off!"

this young matthew maule, the carpenter, it must be observed, was a
person little understood, and not very generally liked, in the town
where he resided; not that anything could be alleged against his
integrity, or his skill and diligence in the handicraft which he
exercised.  the aversion (as it might justly be called) with which many
persons regarded him was partly the result of his own character and
deportment, and partly an inheritance.

he was the grandson of a former matthew maule, one of the early
settlers of th
 
 ___________________________
 
 work praiseworthy in itself, the
proceedings against the witches had proved far less acceptable to the
beneficent father than to that very arch enemy whom they were intended
to distress and utterly overwhelm.  it is not the less certain,
however, that awe and terror brooded over the memories of those who
died for this horrible crime of witchcraft.  their graves, in the
crevices of the rocks, were supposed to be incapable of retaining the
occupants who had been so hastily thrust into them.  old matthew maule,
especially, was known to have as little hesitation or difficulty in
rising out of his grave as an ordinary man in getting out of bed, and
was as often seen at midnight as living people at noonday.  this
pestilent wizard (in whom his just punishment seemed to have wrought no
manner of amendment) had an inveterate habit of haunting a certain
mansion, styled the house of the seven gables, against the owner of
which he pretended to hold an unsettled claim for ground-rent.  the
ghost, it appears,--
 
 ___________________________
 
ound-rent, from the day when the
cellar began to be dug, should be paid down, or the mansion itself
given up; else he, the ghostly creditor, would have his finger in all
the affairs of the pyncheons, and make everything go wrong with them,
though it should be a thousand years after his death.  it was a wild
story, perhaps, but seemed not altogether so incredible to those who
could remember what an inflexibly obstinate old fellow this wizard
maule had been.

now, the wizard's grandson, the young matthew maule of our story, was
popularly supposed to have inherited some of his ancestor's
questionable traits.  it is wonderful how many absurdities were
promulgated in reference to the young man.  he was fabled, for example,
to have a strange power of getting into people's dreams, and regulating
matters there according to his own fancy, pretty much like the
stage-manager of a theatre.  there was a great deal of talk among the
neighbors, particularly the petticoated ones, about what they called
the witchcr
 
 ___________________________
 
all warm,
and made a great whole of the seven smaller ones.

there was a vertical sundial on the front gable; and as the carpenter
passed beneath it, he looked up and noted the hour.

"three o'clock!" said he to himself.  "my father told me that dial was
put up only an hour before the old colonel's death.  how truly it has
kept time these seven-and-thirty years past! the shadow creeps and
creeps, and is always looking over the shoulder of the sunshine!"

it might have befitted a craftsman, like matthew maule, on being sent
for to a gentleman's house, to go to the back door, where servants and
work-people were usually admitted; or at least to the side entrance,
where the better class of tradesmen made application.  but the
carpenter had a great deal of pride and stiffness in his nature; and,
at this moment, moreover, his heart was bitter with the sense of
hereditary wrong, because he considered the great pyncheon house to be
standing on soil which should have been his own.  on this very site,
beside
 
 ___________________________
 
ed to him that
a person in maule's station had a claim on his courtesy, or would
trouble himself about it one way or the other.

the carpenter, however, stepped at once to the hearth, and turned
himself about, so as to look mr. pyncheon in the face.

"you sent for me," said he.  "be pleased to explain your business, that
i may go back to my own affairs."

"ah! excuse me," said mr. pyncheon quietly.  "i did not mean to tax
your time without a recompense.  your name, i think, is maule,--thomas
or matthew maule,--a son or grandson of the builder of this house?"

"matthew maule," replied the carpenter,--"son of him who built the
house,--grandson of the rightful proprietor of the soil."

"i know the dispute to which you allude," observed mr. pyncheon with
undisturbed equanimity.  "i am well aware that my grandfather was
compelled to resort to a suit at law, in order to establish his claim
to the foundation-site of this edifice.  we will not, if you please,
renew the discussion.  the matter was settled a
 
 ___________________________
 
 out of an impracticable
scheme.  it is obvious to conclude, therefore, that he had grounds, not
apparent to his heirs, for his confident anticipation of success in the
matter of this eastern claim.  in a word, i believe,--and my legal
advisers coincide in the belief, which, moreover, is authorized, to a
certain extent, by the family traditions,--that my grandfather was in
possession of some deed, or other document, essential to this claim,
but which has since disappeared."

"very likely," said matthew maule,--and again, it is said, there was a
dark smile on his face,--"but what can a poor carpenter have to do with
the grand affairs of the pyncheon family?"

"perhaps nothing," returned mr. pyncheon, "possibly much!"

here ensued a great many words between matthew maule and the proprietor
of the seven gables, on the subject which the latter had thus broached.
it seems (although mr. pyncheon had some hesitation in referring to
stories so exceedingly absurd in their aspect) that the popular belief
poi
 
 ___________________________
 
yers assigned to these
fables, that (but mr. pyncheon did not see fit to inform the carpenter
of the fact) they had secretly caused the wizard's grave to be
searched.  nothing was discovered, however, except that, unaccountably,
the right hand of the skeleton was gone.

now, what was unquestionably important, a portion of these popular
rumors could be traced, though rather doubtfully and indistinctly, to
chance words and obscure hints of the executed wizard's son, and the
father of this present matthew maule.  and here mr. pyncheon could
bring an item of his own personal evidence into play.  though but a
child at the time, he either remembered or fancied that matthew's
father had had some job to perform on the day before, or possibly the
very morning of the colonel's decease, in the private room where he and
the carpenter were at this moment talking.  certain papers belonging to
colonel pyncheon, as his grandson distinctly recollected, had been
spread out on the table.

matthew maule understood the
 
 ___________________________
 
 either my grandfather or myself.  a gentleman, before
seeking intercourse with a person of your station and habits, will
first consider whether the urgency of the end may compensate for the
disagreeableness of the means.  it does so in the present instance."

he then renewed the conversation, and made great pecuniary offers to
the carpenter, in case the latter should give information leading to
the discovery of the lost document, and the consequent success of the
eastern claim. for a long time matthew maule is said to have turned a
cold ear to these propositions. at last, however, with a strange kind
of laugh, he inquired whether mr. pyncheon would make over to him the
old wizard's homestead-ground, together with the house of the seven
gables, now standing on it, in requital of the documentary evidence so
urgently required.

the wild, chimney-corner legend (which, without copying all its
extravagances, my narrative essentially follows) here gives an account
of some very strange behavior on the par
 
 ___________________________
 
upposed to be so
intimately connected with the fate of the house, and so magically built
into its walls, that, if once it should be removed, that very instant
the whole edifice would come thundering down in a heap of dusty ruin.
all through the foregoing conversation between mr. pyncheon and the
carpenter, the portrait had been frowning, clenching its fist, and
giving many such proofs of excessive discomposure, but without
attracting the notice of either of the two colloquists.  and finally,
at matthew maule's audacious suggestion of a transfer of the
seven-gabled structure, the ghostly portrait is averred to have lost
all patience, and to have shown itself on the point of descending
bodily from its frame.  but such incredible incidents are merely to be
mentioned aside.

"give up this house!" exclaimed mr. pyncheon, in amazement at the
proposal.  "were i to do so, my grandfather would not rest quiet in his
grave!"

"he never has, if all stories are true," remarked the carpenter
composedly.  "but th
 
 ___________________________
 
at matter concerns his grandson more than it does
matthew maule.  i have no other terms to propose."

impossible as he at first thought it to comply with maule's conditions,
still, on a second glance, mr. pyncheon was of opinion that they might
at least be made matter of discussion.  he himself had no personal
attachment for the house, nor any pleasant associations connected with
his childish residence in it.  on the contrary, after seven-and-thirty
years, the presence of his dead grandfather seemed still to pervade it,
as on that morning when the affrighte
 
 ___________________________
 
e.  he was quite ashamed, after the foregoing
reflections, to propose any diminution of so moderate a recompense for
the immense service to be rendered.

"i consent to your proposition, maule!" cried he. "put me in possession
of the document essential to establish my rights, and the house of the
seven gables is your own!"

according to some versions of the story, a regular contract to the
above effect was drawn up by a lawyer, and signed and sealed in the
presence of witnesses.  others say that matthew maule was contented
with a private written agreement, in which mr. pyncheon pledged his
honor and integrity to the fulfillment of the terms concluded upon.
the gentleman then ordered wine, which he and the carpenter drank
together, in confirmation of their bargain.  during the whole preceding
discussion and subsequent formalities, the old puritan's portrait seems
to have persisted in its shadowy gestures of disapproval; but without
effect, except that, as mr. pyncheon set down the emptied glass, he
t
 
 ___________________________
 
 daughter alice."

"you are mad, maule!" exclaimed mr. pyncheon haughtily; and now, at
last, there was anger mixed up with his pride.  "what can my daughter
have to do with a business like this?"

indeed, at this new demand on the carpenter's part, the proprietor of
the seven gables was even more thunder-struck than at the cool
proposition to surrender his house.  there was, at least, an assignable
motive for the first stipulation; there appeared to be none whatever
for the last.  nevertheless, matthew maule sturdily insisted on the
young lady being summoned, and even gave her father to understand, in a
mysterious kind of explanation,--which made the matter considerably
darker than it looked before,--that the only chance of acquiring the
requisite knowledge was through the clear, crystal medium of a pure and
virgin intelligence, like that of the fair alice.  not to encumber our
story with mr. pyncheon's scruples, whether of conscience, pride, or
fatherly affection, he at length ordered his daughter
 
 ___________________________
 
the girl look at me as if i were a brute beast?" thought he,
setting his teeth.  "she shall know whether i have a human spirit; and
the worse for her, if it prove stronger than her own!"

"my father, you sent for me," said alice, in her sweet and harp-like
voice.  "but, if you have business with this young man, pray let me go
again.  you know i do not love this room, in spite of that claude, with
which you try to bring back sunny recollections."

"stay a moment, young lady, if you please!" said matthew maule.  "my
business with your father is over.  with yourself, it is now to begin!"

alice looked towards her father, in surprise and inquiry.

"yes, alice," said mr. pyncheon, with some disturbance and confusion.
"this young man--his name is matthew maule--professes, so far as i can
understand him, to be able to discover, through your means, a certain
paper or parchment, which was missing long before your birth.  the
importance of the document in question renders it advisable to neglect
no possible,
 
 ___________________________
 
le, method of regaining it.  you will
therefore oblige me, my dear alice, by answering this person's
inquiries, and complying with his lawful and reasonable requests, so
far as they may appear to have the aforesaid object in view.  as i
shall remain in the room, you need apprehend no rude nor unbecoming
deportment, on the young man's part; and, at your slightest wish, of
course, the investigation, or whatever we may call it, shall
immediately be broken off."

"mistress alice pyncheon," remarked matthew maule, with the utmost
deference, but yet a half-hidden sarcasm in his look and tone, "will no
doubt feel herself quite safe in her father's presence, and under his
all-sufficient protection."

"i certainly shall entertain no manner of apprehension, with my father
at hand," said alice with maidenly dignity.  "neither do i conceive
that a lady, while true to herself, can have aught to fear from
whomsoever, or in any circumstances!"

poor alice! by what unhappy impulse did she thus put herself at once 
 
 ___________________________
 
on
terms of defiance against a strength which she could not estimate?

"then, mistress alice," said matthew maule, handing a
chair,--gracefully enough, for a craftsman, "will it please you only to
sit down, and do me the favor (though altogether beyond a poor
carpenter's deserts) to fix your eyes on mine!"

alice complied, she was very proud.  setting aside all advantages of
rank, this fair girl deemed herself conscious of a power--combined of
beauty, high, unsullied purity, and the preservative force of
womanhood--that could make her sphere impenetrable, unless betrayed by
treachery within.  she instincti
 
 ___________________________
 
he did not stir.

"louder!" said maule, smiling.

"alice! awake!" cried her father.  "it troubles me to see you thus!
awake!"

he spoke loudly, with terror in his voice, and close to that delicate
ear which had always been so sensitive to every discord.  but the sound
evidently reached her not.  it is indescribable what a sense of remote,
dim, unattainable distance betwixt himself and alice was impressed on
the father by this impossibility of reaching her with his voice.

"best touch her!" said matthew maule "shake the girl, and roughly, too!
my hands are hardened with too much use of axe, saw, and plane,--else i
might help you!"

mr. pyncheon took her hand, and pressed it with the earnestness of
startled emotion.  he kissed her, with so great a heart-throb in the
kiss, that he thought she must needs feel it.  then, in a gust of anger
at her insensibility, he shook her maiden form with a violence which,
the next moment, it affrighted him to remember.  he withdrew his
encircling arms, and alice--who
 
 ___________________________
 
ether she be as proud as the carpenter found her awhile
since."

he spoke, and alice responded, with a soft, subdued, inward
acquiescence, and a bending of her form towards him, like the flame of
a torch when it indicates a gentle draught of air.  he beckoned with
his hand, and, rising from her chair,--blindly, but undoubtingly, as
tending to her sure and inevitable centre,--the proud alice approached
him.  he waved her back, and, retreating, alice sank again into her
seat.

"she is mine!" said matthew maule.  "mine, by the right of the
strongest spirit!"

in the further progress of the legend, there is a long, grotesque, and
occasionally awe-striking account of the carpenter's incantations (if
so they are to be called), with a view of discovering the lost
document.  it appears to have been his object to convert the mind of
alice into a kind of telescopic medium, through which mr. pyncheon and
himself might obtain a glimpse into the spiritual world.  he succeeded,
accordingly, in holding an imperfe
 
 ___________________________
 
 shifted yet
awhile from the colonel's posterity."

mr. pyncheon tried to speak, but--what with fear and passion--could
make only a gurgling murmur in his throat.  the carpenter smiled.

"aha, worshipful sir!--so you have old maule's blood to drink!" said he
jeeringly.

"fiend in man's shape! why dost thou keep dominion over my child?"
cried mr. pyncheon, when his choked utterance could make way.  "give me
back my daughter.  then go thy ways; and may we never meet again!"

"your daughter!" said matthew maule.  "why, she is fairly mine!
nevertheless, not to be too hard with fair mistress alice, i will leave
her in your keeping; but i do not warrant you that she shall never have
occasion to remember maule, the carpenter."

he waved his hands with an upward motion; and, after a few repetitions
of similar gestures, the beautiful alice pyncheon awoke from her
strange trance.  she awoke without the slightest recollection of her
visionary experience; but as one losing herself in a momentary reverie,
and r
 
 ___________________________
 
eturning to the consciousness of actual life, in almost as brief
an interval as the down-sinking flame of the hearth should quiver again
up the chimney.  on recognizing matthew maule, she assumed an air of
somewhat cold but gentle dignity, the rather, as there was a certain
peculiar smile on the carpenter's visage that stirred the native pride
of the fair alice.   so ended, for that time, the quest for the lost
title-deed of the pyncheon territory at the eastward; nor, though often
subsequently renewed, has it ever yet befallen a pyncheon to set his
eye upon that parchment.

but, alas for the beautiful, the gentle, yet too haughty alice!  a
power that she little dreamed of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ungenerous scorn
upon her.  thus all the dignity of life was lost.  she felt herself too
much abased, and longed to change natures with some worm!

one evening, at a bridal party (but not her own; for, so lost from
self-control, she would have deemed it sin to marry), poor alice was
beckoned forth by her unseen despot, and constrained, in her gossamer
white dress and satin slippers, to hasten along the street to the mean
dwelling of a laboring-man.  there was laughter and good cheer within;
for matthew maule, that night, was to wed the laborer's daughter, and
had summoned proud alice pyncheon to wait upon his bride.  and so she
did; and when the twain were one, alice awoke out of her enchanted
sleep.  yet, no longer proud,--humbly, and with a smile all steeped in
sadness,--she kissed maule's wife, and went her way.  it was an
inclement night; the southeast wind drove the mingled snow and rain
into her thinly sheltered bosom; her satin slippers were wet through
and through, as she trod the muddy sid
 
 ___________________________
 
t day a cold;
soon, a settled cough; anon, a hectic cheek, a wasted form, that sat
beside the harpsichord, and filled the house with music!  music in
which a strain of the heavenly choristers was echoed! oh; joy! for
alice had borne her last humiliation! oh, greater joy! for alice was
penitent of her one earthly sin, and proud no more!

the pyncheons made a great funeral for alice.  the kith and kin were
there, and the whole respectability of the town besides.  but, last in
the procession, came matthew maule, gnashing his teeth, as if he would
have bitten his own heart in twain,--the darkest and wofullest man that
ever walked behind a corpse! he meant to humble alice, not to kill her;
but he had taken a woman's delicate soul into his rude gripe, to play
with--and she was dead!




                            xiv phoebe's good-bye


holgrave, plunging into his tale with the energy and absorption natural
to a young author, had given a good deal of action to the parts capable
of being developed and ex
 
 ___________________________
 
n his mind!"

"but," said phoebe, apart to holgrave, "how came you to know the
secret?"

"my dearest phoebe," said holgrave, "how will it please you to assume
the name of maule? as for the secret, it is the only inheritance that
has come down to me from my ancestors.  you should have known sooner
(only that i was afraid of frightening you away) that, in this long
drama of wrong and retribution, i represent the old wizard, and am
probably as much a wizard as ever he was.  the son of the executed
matthew maule, while building this house, took the opportunity to
construct that recess, and hide away the indian deed, on which depended
the immense land-claim of the pyncheons.  thus they bartered their
eastern territory for maule's garden-ground."

"and now" said uncle venner "i suppose their whole claim is not worth
one man's share in my farm yonder!"

"uncle venner," cried phoebe, taking the patched philosopher's hand,
"you must never talk any more about your farm! you shall never go
there, as long as y