utbuildings that stood on another street.  it would be an omission,
trifling, indeed, but unpardonable, were we to forget the green moss
that had long since gathered over the projections of the windows, and
on the slopes of the roof nor must we fail to direct the reader's eye
to a crop, not of weeds, but flower-shrubs, which were growing aloft in
the air, not a great way from the chimney, in the nook between two of
the gables.  they were called alice's posies.  the tradition was, that
a certain alice pyncheon had flung up the seeds, in sport, and that the
dust of the street and the decay of the roof gradually formed a kind of
soil for them, out of which they grew, when alice had long been in her
grave.  however the flowers might have come there, it was both sad and
sweet to observe how nature adopted to herself this desolate, decaying,
gusty, rusty old house of the pyncheon family; and how the
ever-returning summer did her best to gladden it with tender beauty,
and grew melancholy in the effort.

th
 
 ___________________________
 
arden.  being a very tall one, and of luxuriant
growth, it had been propped up against the side of the house, and was
literally covered with a rare and very beautiful species of white rose.
a large portion of them, as the girl afterwards discovered, had blight
or mildew at their hearts; but, viewed at a fair distance, the whole
rosebush looked as if it had been brought from eden that very summer,
together with the mould in which it grew.  the truth was, nevertheless,
that it had been planted by alice pyncheon,--she was phoebe's
great-great-grand-aunt,--in soil which, reckoning only its cultivation
as a garden-plat, was now unctuous with nearly two hundred years of
vegetable decay.  growing as they did, however, out of the old earth,
the flowers still sent a fresh and sweet incense up to their creator;
nor could it have been the less pure and acceptable because phoebe's
young breath mingled with it, as the fragrance floated past the window.
hastening down the creaking and carpetless staircase, she fo
 
 ___________________________
 
, how that there
was undoubtedly an immense treasure of english guineas hidden somewhere
about the house, or in the cellar, or possibly in the garden.

"if you should happen to find it, phoebe," said hepzibah, glancing
aside at her with a grim yet kindly smile, "we will tie up the
shop-bell for good and all!"

"yes, dear cousin," answered phoebe; "but, in the mean time, i hear
somebody ringing it!"

when the customer was gone, hepzibah talked rather vaguely, and at
great length, about a certain alice pyncheon, who had been exceedingly
beautiful and accomplished in her lifetime, a hundred years ago.  the
fragrance of her rich and delightful character still lingered about the
place where she had lived, as a dried rose-bud scents the drawer where
it has withered and perished.  this lovely alice had met with some
great and mysterious calamity, and had grown thin and white, and
gradually faded out of the world.  but, even now, she was supposed to
haunt the house of the seven gables, and, a great many tim
 
 ___________________________
 
one of the pyncheons was to die,--she had been heard playing sadly
and beautifully on the harpsichord.  one of these tunes, just as it had
sounded from her spiritual touch, had been written down by an amateur of
music; it was so exquisitely mournful that nobody, to this day, could
bear to hear it played, unless when a great sorrow had made them know
the still profounder sweetness of it.

"was it the same harpsichord that you showed me?" inquired phoebe.

"the very same," said hepzibah.  "it was alice pyncheon's harpsichord.
when i was learning music, my father would never let me open it.  so,
as i could only play on my teacher's instrument, i have forgotten all
my music long ago."

leaving these antique themes, the old lady began to talk about the
daguerreotypist, whom, as he seemed to be a well-meaning and orderly
young man, and in narrow circumstances, she had permitted to take up
his residence in one of the seven gables.  but, on seeing more of mr.
holgrave, she hardly knew what to make of him.  
 
 ___________________________
 
 must use a more moderate simile,--this
miserable croak, running through all the variations of the voice, is
like a black silken thread, on which the crystal beads of speech are
strung, and whence they take their hue.  such voices have put on
mourning for dead hopes; and they ought to die and be buried along with
them!

discerning that clifford was not gladdened by her efforts, hepzibah
searched about the house for the means of more exhilarating pastime.
at one time, her eyes chanced to rest on alice pyncheon's harpsichord.
it was a moment of great peril; for,--despite the traditionary awe that
had gathered over this instrument of music, and the dirges which
spiritual fingers were said to play on it,--the devoted sister had
solemn thoughts of thrumming on its chords for clifford's benefit, and
accompanying the performance with her voice.  poor clifford! poor
hepzibah! poor harpsichord! all three would have been miserable
together.  by some good agency,--possibly, by the unrecognized
interposition of
 
 ___________________________
 
 associated.  in the humorous
line, i am thought to have a very pretty way with me; and as for
pathos, i am as provocative of tears as an onion.  but shall i read you
my story?"

"yes, if it is not very long," said phoebe,--and added
laughingly,--"nor very dull."

as this latter point was one which the daguerreotypist could not decide
for himself, he forthwith produced his roll of manuscript, and, while
the late sunbeams gilded the seven gables, began to read.




                          xiii alice pyncheon


there was a message brought, one day, from the worshipful gervayse
pyncheon to young matthew maule, the carpenter, desiring his immediate
presence at the house of the seven gables.

"and what does your master want with me?" said the carpenter to mr.
pyncheon's black servant.  "does the house need any repair?  well it
may, by this time; and no blame to my father who built it, neither! i
was reading the old colonel's tombstone, no longer ago than last
sabbath; and, reckoning from that date, the
 
 ___________________________
 
pretty sure to stick to the pyncheons
as long as their walls hold together."

"what's that you mutter to yourself, matthew maule?" asked scipio.
"and what for do you look so black at me?"

"no matter, darky," said the carpenter.  "do you think nobody is to
look black but yourself? go tell your master i'm coming; and if you
happen to see mistress alice, his daughter, give matthew maule's humble
respects to her.  she has brought a fair face from italy,--fair, and
gentle, and proud,--has that same alice pyncheon!"

"he talk of mistress alice!" cried scipio, as he returned from his
errand.  "the low carpenter-man! he no business so much as to look at
her a great way off!"

this young matthew maule, the carpenter, it must be observed, was a
person little understood, and not very generally liked, in the town
where he resided; not that anything could be alleged against his
integrity, or his skill and diligence in the handicraft which he
exercised.  the aversion (as it might justly be called) with which man
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
the whites of his eyes in amazement on beholding only the carpenter.

"lord-a-mercy, what a great man he be, this carpenter fellow!" mumbled
scipio, down in his throat.  "anybody think he beat on the door with
his biggest hammer!"

"here i am!" said maule sternly.  "show me the way to your master's
parlor."

as he stept into the house, a note of sweet and melancholy music
thrilled and vibrated along the passage-way, proceeding from one of the
rooms above stairs.  it was the harpsichord which alice pyncheon had
brought with her from beyond the sea.  the fair alice bestowed most of
her maiden leisure between flowers and music, although the former were
apt to droop, and the melodies were often sad.  she was of foreign
education, and could not take kindly to the new england modes of life,
in which nothing beautiful had ever been developed.

as mr. pyncheon had been impatiently awaiting maule's arrival, black
scipio, of course, lost no time in ushering the carpenter into his
master's presence. the roo
 
 ___________________________
 
 that of the fair alice.  not to encumber our
story with mr. pyncheon's scruples, whether of conscience, pride, or
fatherly affection, he at length ordered his daughter to be called.  he
well knew that she was in her chamber, and engaged in no occupation
that could not readily be laid aside; for, as it happened, ever since
alice's name had been spoken, both her father and the carpenter had
heard the sad and sweet music of her harpsichord, and the airier
melancholy of her accompanying voice.

so alice pyncheon was summoned, and appeared.  a portrait of this young
lady, painted by a venetian artist, and left by her father in england,
is said to have fallen into the hands of the present duke of
devonshire, and to be now preserved at chatsworth; not on account of
any associations with the original, but for its value as a picture, and
the high character of beauty in the countenance.  if ever there was a
lady born, and set apart from the world's vulgar mass by a certain
gentle and cold stateliness, it was
 
 ___________________________
 
 this very alice pyncheon.  yet
there was the womanly mixture in her; the tenderness, or, at least, the
tender capabilities.  for the sake of that redeeming quality, a man of
generous nature would have forgiven all her pride, and have been
content, almost, to lie down in her path, and let alice set her slender
foot upon his heart.  all that he would have required was simply the
acknowledgment that he was indeed a man, and a fellow-being, moulded of
the same elements as she.

as alice came into the room, her eyes fell up
 
 ___________________________
 
on the carpenter, who was
standing near its centre, clad in green woollen jacket, a pair of loose
breeches, open at the knees, and with a long pocket for his rule, the
end of which protruded; it was as proper a mark of the artisan's
calling as mr. pyncheon's full-dress sword of that gentleman's
aristocratic pretensions.  a glow of artistic approval brightened over
alice pyncheon's face; she was struck with admiration--which she made
no attempt to conceal--of the remarkable comeliness, strength, and
energy of maule's figure.  but that admiring glance (which most other
men, perhaps, would have cherished as a sweet recollection all through
life) the carpenter never forgave.  it must have been the devil himself
that made maule so subtile in his preception.

"does the girl look at me as if i were a brute beast?" thought he,
setting his teeth.  "she shall know whether i have
 
 ___________________________
 
possible, even if improbable, method of regaining it.  you will
therefore oblige me, my dear alice, by answering this person's
inquiries, and complying with his lawful and reasonable requests, so
far as they may appear to have the aforesaid object in view.  as i
shall remain in the room, you need apprehend no rude nor unbecoming
deportment, on the young man's part; and, at your slightest wish, of
course, the investigation, or whatever we may call it, shall
immediately be broken off."

"mistress alice pyncheon," remarked matthew maule, with the utmost
deference, but yet a half-hidden sarcasm in his look and tone, "will no
doubt feel herself quite safe in her father's presence, and under his
all-sufficient protection."

"i certainly shall entertain no manner of apprehension, with my father
at hand," said alice with maidenly dignity.  "neither do i conceive
that a lady, while true to herself, can have aught to fear from
whomsoever, or in any circumstances!"

poor alice! by what unhappy impulse did she 
 
 ___________________________
 
y, my dear father, do not interrupt the young man," said alice,
without changing her position.  "his efforts, i assure you, will prove
very harmless."

again mr. pyncheon turned his eyes towards the claude.  it was then his
daughter's will, in opposition to his own, that the experiment should
be fully tried.  henceforth, therefore, he did but consent, not urge
it.  and was it not for her sake far more than for his own that he
desired its success? that lost parchment once restored, the beautiful
alice pyncheon, with the rich dowry which he could then bestow, might
wed an english duke or a german reigning-prince, instead of some new
england clergyman or lawyer! at the thought, the ambitious father
almost consented, in his heart, that, if the devil's power were needed
to the accomplishment of this great object, maule might evoke him.
alice's own purity would be her safeguard.

with his mind full of imaginary magnificence, mr. pyncheon heard a
half-uttered exclamation from his daughter.  it was very fai
 
 ___________________________
 

cried mr. pyncheon, when his choked utterance could make way.  "give me
back my daughter.  then go thy ways; and may we never meet again!"

"your daughter!" said matthew maule.  "why, she is fairly mine!
nevertheless, not to be too hard with fair mistress alice, i will leave
her in your keeping; but i do not warrant you that she shall never have
occasion to remember maule, the carpenter."

he waved his hands with an upward motion; and, after a few repetitions
of similar gestures, the beautiful alice pyncheon awoke from her
strange trance.  she awoke without the slightest recollection of her
visionary experience; but as one losing herself in a momentary reverie,
and returning to the consciousness of actual life, in almost as brief
an interval as the down-sinking flame of the hearth should quiver again
up the chimney.  on recognizing matthew maule, she assumed an air of
somewhat cold but gentle dignity, the rather, as there was a certain
peculiar smile on the carpenter's visage that stirred the nativ
 
 ___________________________
 
ward; nor, though often
subsequently renewed, has it ever yet befallen a pyncheon to set his
eye upon that parchment.

but, alas for the beautiful, the gentle, yet too haughty alice!  a
power that she little dreamed of had laid its grasp upon her maiden
soul.  a will, most unlike her own, constrained her to do its grotesque
and fantastic bidding.  her father as it proved, had martyred his poor
child to an inordinate desire for measuring his land by miles instead
of acres.  and, therefore, while alice pyncheon lived, she was maule's
slave, in a bondage more humiliating, a thousand-fold, than that which
binds its chain around the body.  seated by his humble fireside, maule
had but to wave his hand; and, wherever the proud lady chanced to
be,--whether in her chamber, or entertaining her father's stately
guests, or worshipping at church,--whatever her place or occupation,
her spirit passed from beneath her own control, and bowed itself to
maule.  "alice, laugh!"--the carpenter, beside his hearth, would 
 
 ___________________________
 
too
much abased, and longed to change natures with some worm!

one evening, at a bridal party (but not her own; for, so lost from
self-control, she would have deemed it sin to marry), poor alice was
beckoned forth by her unseen despot, and constrained, in her gossamer
white dress and satin slippers, to hasten along the street to the mean
dwelling of a laboring-man.  there was laughter and good cheer within;
for matthew maule, that night, was to wed the laborer's daughter, and
had summoned proud alice pyncheon to wait upon his bride.  and so she
did; and when the twain were one, alice awoke out of her enchanted
sleep.  yet, no longer proud,--humbly, and with a smile all steeped in
sadness,--she kissed maule's wife, and went her way.  it was an
inclement night; the southeast wind drove the mingled snow and rain
into her thinly sheltered bosom; her satin slippers were wet through
and through, as she trod the muddy sidewalks.  the next day a cold;
soon, a settled cough; anon, a hectic cheek, a wasted fo
 
 ___________________________
 
ng short of positive despair, that to-day she might
sit shivering alone, and not suffer continually a new grief, and
unreasonable pang of remorse, at every fitful sigh of her fellow
sufferer.

but clifford, it seemed, though he did not make his appearance below
stairs, had, after all, bestirred himself in quest of amusement.  in
the course of the forenoon, hepzibah heard a note of music, which
(there being no other tuneful contrivance in the house of the seven
gables) she knew must proceed from alice pyncheon's harpsichord.  she
was aware that clifford, in his youth, had possessed a cultivated taste
for music, and a considerable degree of skill in its practice.  it was
difficult, however, to conceive of his retaining an accomplishment to
which daily exercise is so essential, in the measure indicated by the
sweet, airy, and delicate, though most melancholy strain, that now
stole upon her ear.  nor was it less marvellous that the long-silent
instrument should be capable of so much melody.  hepzibah in
 
 ___________________________
 
 family,
which were attributed to the legendary alice.  but it was, perhaps,
proof of the agency of other than spiritual fingers, that, after a few
touches, the chords seemed to snap asunder with their own vibrations,
and the music ceased.

but a harsher sound succeeded to the mysterious notes; nor was the
easterly day fated to pass without an event sufficient in itself to
poison, for hepzibah and clifford, the balmiest air that ever brought
the humming-birds along with it.  the final echoes of alice pyncheon's
performance (or clifford's, if his we must consider it) were driven
away by no less vulgar a dissonance than the ringing of the shop-bell.
a foot was heard scraping itself on the threshold, and thence somewhat
ponderously stepping on the floor.  hepzibah delayed a moment, while
muffling herself in a faded shawl, which had been her defensive armor
in a forty years' warfare against the east wind.  a characteristic
sound, however,--neither a cough nor a hem, but a kind of rumbling and
reverberat
 
 ___________________________
 
face downward on the floor.  a recess in the wall was
thus brought to light, in which lay an object so covered with a
century's dust that it could not immediately be recognized as a folded
sheet of parchment.  holgrave opened it, and displayed an ancient deed,
signed with the hieroglyphics of several indian sagamores, and
conveying to colonel pyncheon and his heirs, forever, a vast extent of
territory at the eastward.

"this is the very parchment, the attempt to recover which cost the
beautiful alice pyncheon her happiness and life," said the artist,
alluding to his legend.  "it is what the pyncheons sought in vain,
while it was valuable; and now that they find the treasure, it has long
been worthless."

"poor cousin jaffrey! this is what deceived him," exclaimed hepzibah.
"when they were young together, clifford probably made a kind of
fairy-tale of this discovery.  he was always dreaming hither and
thither about the house, and lighting up its dark corners with
beautiful stories.  and poor jaffrey,
 
 ___________________________
 
ing up a
succession of kaleidoscopic pictures, in which a gifted eye might have
seen foreshadowed the coming fortunes of hepzibah and clifford, and the
descendant of the legendary wizard, and the village maiden, over whom
he had thrown love's web of sorcery.  the pyncheon elm, moreover, with
what foliage the september gale had spared to it, whispered
unintelligible prophecies.  and wise uncle venner, passing slowly from
the ruinous porch, seemed to hear a strain of music, and fancied that
sweet alice pyncheon--after witnessing these deeds, this bygone woe and
this present happiness, of her kindred mortals--had given one farewell
touch of a spirit's joy upon her harpsichord, as she floated heavenward
from the house of the seven gables!
