st
fantastically awry.  the other adornment was the portrait of old
colonel pyncheon, at two thirds length, representing the stern features
of a puritanic-looking personage, in a skull-cap, with a laced band and
a grizzly beard; holding a bible with one hand, and in the other
uplifting an iron sword-hilt.  the latter object, being more
successfully depicted by the artist, stood out in far greater
prominence than the sacred volume.  face to face with this picture, on
entering the apartment, miss hepzibah pyncheon came to a pause;
regarding it with a singular scowl, a strange contortion of the brow,
which, by people who did not know her, would probably have been
interpreted as an expression of bitter anger and ill-will.  but it was
no such thing.  she, in fact, felt a reverence for the pictured visage,
of which only a far-descended and time-stricken virgin could be
susceptible; and this forbidding scowl was the innocent result of her
near-sightedness, and an effort so to concentrate her powers of vision

 
 ___________________________
 
nse of inevitable doom.  but her heart never frowned.  it
was naturally tender, sensitive, and full of little tremors and
palpitations; all of which weaknesses it retained, while her visage was
growing so perversely stern, and even fierce.  nor had hepzibah ever
any hardihood, except what came from the very warmest nook in her
affections.

all this time, however, we are loitering faintheartedly on the
threshold of our story.  in very truth, we have an invincible
reluctance to disclose what miss hepzibah pyncheon was about to do.

it has already been observed, that, in the basement story of the gable
fronting on the street, an unworthy ancestor, nearly a century ago, had
fitted up a shop.  ever since the old gentleman retired from trade, and
fell asleep under his coffin-lid, not only the shop-door, but the inner
arrangements, had been suffered to remain unchanged; while the dust of
ages gathered inch-deep over the shelves and counter, and partly filled
an old pair of scales, as if it were of value enoug
 
 ___________________________
 
 of what called itself
old gentility.  a lady--who had fed herself from childhood with the
shadowy food of aristocratic reminiscences, and whose religion it was
that a lady's hand soils itself irremediably by doing aught for
bread,--this born lady, after sixty years of narrowing means, is fain
to step down from her pedestal of imaginary rank.  poverty, treading
closely at her heels for a lifetime, has come up with her at last.  she
must earn her own food, or starve! and we have stolen upon miss
hepzibah pyncheon, too irreverently, at the instant of time when the
patrician lady is to be transformed into the plebeian woman.

in this republican country, amid the fluctuating waves of our social
life, somebody is always at the drowning-point.  the tragedy is enacted
with as continual a repetition as that of a popular drama on a holiday,
and, nevertheless, is felt as deeply, perhaps, as when an hereditary
noble sinks below his order.  more deeply; since, with us, rank is the
grosser substance of wealth and a
 
 ___________________________
 
 at, had somewhat hastened her decision.  her humble
preparations, therefore, were duly made, and the enterprise was now to
be commenced.  nor was she entitled to complain of any remarkable
singularity in her fate; for, in the town of her nativity, we might
point to several little shops of a similar description, some of them in
houses as ancient as that of the seven gables; and one or two, it may
be, where a decayed gentlewoman stands behind the counter, as grim an
image of family pride as miss hepzibah pyncheon herself.

it was overpoweringly ridiculous,--we must honestly confess it,--the
deportment of the maiden lady while setting her shop in order for the
public eye. she stole on tiptoe to the window, as cautiously as if she
conceived some bloody-minded villain to be watching behind the
elm-tree, with intent to take her life. stretching out her long, lank
arm, she put a paper of pearl-buttons, a jew's-harp, or whatever the
small article might be, in its destined place, and straightway vanished
back 
 
 ___________________________
 
er is noblest in joy or sorrow.
life is made up of marble and mud.  and, without all the deeper trust
in a comprehensive sympathy above us, we might hence be led to suspect
the insult of a sneer, as well as an immitigable frown, on the iron
countenance of fate.  what is called poetic insight is the gift of
discerning, in this sphere of strangely mingled elements, the beauty
and the majesty which are compelled to assume a garb so sordid.




                         iii the first customer


miss hepzibah pyncheon sat in the oaken elbow-chair, with her hands
over her face, giving way to that heavy down-sinking of the heart which
most persons have experienced, when the image of hope itself seems
ponderously moulded of lead, on the eve of an enterprise at once
doubtful and momentous.  she was suddenly startled by the tinkling
alarum--high, sharp, and irregular--of a little bell.  the maiden lady
arose upon her feet, as pale as a ghost at cock-crow; for she was an
enslaved spirit, and this the talisman to w
 
 ___________________________
 
ro dancer, had wrought an irreparable ruin.  the
structure of ancient aristocracy had been demolished by him, even as if
his childish gripe had torn down the seven-gabled mansion.  now let
hepzibah turn the old pyncheon portraits with their faces to the wall,
and take the map of her eastern territory to kindle the kitchen fire,
and blow up the flame with the empty breath of her ancestral
traditions! what had she to do with ancestry? nothing; no more than
with posterity! no lady, now, but simply hepzibah pyncheon, a forlorn
old maid, and keeper of a cent-shop!

nevertheless, even while she paraded these ideas somewhat
ostentatiously through her mind, it is altogether surprising what a
calmness had come over her.  the anxiety and misgivings which had
tormented her, whether asleep or in melancholy day-dreams, ever since
her project began to take an aspect of solidity, had now vanished quite
away.  she felt the novelty of her position, indeed, but no longer with
disturbance or affright.  now and then, ther
 
 ___________________________
 

and her inmates) by the unassisted light of his countenance.  on
perceiving a young rose-bud of a girl, instead of the gaunt presence of
the old maid, a look of surprise was manifest.  he at first knit his
brows; then smiled with more unctuous benignity than ever.

"ah, i see how it is!" said he in a deep voice,--a voice which, had it
come from the throat of an uncultivated man, would have been gruff,
but, by dint of careful training, was now sufficiently agreeable,--"i
was not aware that miss hepzibah pyncheon had commenced business under
such favorable auspices.  you are her assistant, i suppose?"

"i certainly am," answered phoebe, and added, with a little air of
lady-like assumption (for, civil as the gentleman was, he evidently
took her to be a young person serving for wages), "i am a cousin of
miss hepzibah, on a visit to her."

"her cousin?--and from the country? pray pardon me, then," said the
gentleman, bowing and smiling, as phoebe never had been bowed to nor
smiled on before; "in that case,
 
 ___________________________
 
kins, and the miscellaneous refuse of the dinner-pot, which the
thrifty housewives of the neighborhood were accustomed to put aside, as
fit only to feed a pig. uncle venner's pig was fed entirely, and kept
in prime order, on these eleemosynary contributions; insomuch that the
patched philosopher used to promise that, before retiring to his farm,
he would make a feast of the portly grunter, and invite all his
neighbors to partake of the joints and spare-ribs which they had helped
to fatten. miss hepzibah pyncheon's housekeeping had so greatly
improved, since clifford became a member of the family, that her share
of the banquet would have been no lean one; and uncle venner,
accordingly, was a good deal disappointed not to find the large earthen
pan, full of fragmentary eatables, that ordinarily awaited his coming
at the back doorstep of the seven gables.

"i never knew miss hepzibah so forgetful before," said the patriarch to
himself.  "she must have had a dinner yesterday,--no question of that!
she alwa