r
fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, and have such junketings
round about and on the river, and dances and picnics in the woods
daytimes, and balls at the house nights.  these people was mostly
kinfolks of the family.  the men brought their guns with them.  it was a
handsome lot of quality, i tell you.

there was another clan of aristocracy around there--five or six
families--mostly of the name of shepherdson.  they was as high-toned
and well born and rich and grand as the tribe of grangerfords.  the
shepherdsons and grangerfords used the same steamboat landing, which was
about two mile above our house; so sometimes when i went up there with a
lot of our folks i used to see a lot of the shepherdsons there on their
fine horses.

one day buck and me was away out in the woods hunting, and heard a horse
coming.  we was crossing the road.  buck says:

“quick!  jump for the woods!”

we done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves.  pretty
soon a splendid young man come gal
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
the time; so at last bud seen it warn’t any use, so he stopped and faced
around so as to have the bullet holes in front, you know, and the old
man he rode up and shot him down.  but he didn’t git much chance to
enjoy his luck, for inside of a week our folks laid _him_ out.”

“i reckon that old man was a coward, buck.”

“i reckon he _warn’t_ a coward.  not by a blame’ sight.  there ain’t a
coward amongst them shepherdsons--not a one.  and there ain’t no cowards
amongst the grangerfords either.  why, that old man kep’ up his end in a
fight one day for half an hour against three grangerfords, and come
out winner.  they was all a-horseback; he lit off of his horse and got
behind a little woodpile, and kep’ his horse before him to stop the
bullets; but the grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around
the old man, and peppered away at him, and he peppered away at them.
 him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled, but the
grangerfords had to be _fetche