e long ago, we're sinking in dirt!"  they
would be able to do the job the next day, k. nodded, it was too late in
the evening to make them do it there and then as he had originally
intended.  he sat down briefly in order to keep them near him for a
little longer, looked through a few of the copies to give the impression
that he was checking them and then, as he saw that they would not dare
to leave at the same time as himself, went home tired and with his mind
numb.




chapter six
k.'s uncle - leni

        one afternoon - k. was very busy at the time, getting the post
ready - k.'s uncle karl, a small country land owner, came into the room,
pushing his way between two of the staff who were bringing in some
papers.   k. had long expected his uncle to appear, but the sight of him
now shocked k. far less than the prospect of it had done a long time
before.  his uncle was bound to come, k. had been sure of that for about
a month.  he already thought at the time he could see how his uncle
woul
 
 ___________________________
 
y into the living room, she had a
round face like a puppy's, not only the pale cheeks and the chin were
round but the temples and the hairline were too.  "josef!" called his
uncle once more, and he asked the girl, "it's trouble with his heart, is
it?"  "i think it is, sir," said the girl, who by now had found time to
go ahead with the candle and open the door into the room. in one corner
of the room, where the light of the candle did not reach, a face with a
long beard looked up from the bed.  "leni, who's this coming in?" asked
the lawyer, unable to recognise his guests because he was dazzled by the
candle.  "it's your old friend, albert," said k.'s uncle.  "oh, albert,"
said the lawyer, falling back onto his pillow as if this visit meant he
would not need to keep up appearances.  "is it really as bad as that?"
asked k.'s uncle, sitting on the edge of the bed.  "i don't believe it
is.  it's a recurrence of your heart trouble and it'll pass over like
the other times."  "maybe," said the la
 
 ___________________________
 
then.  even your young lady
here doesn't seem to have much life in her, unless she's just
pretending."  the maid was still standing by the door with the candle;
as far as could be made out, she was watching k. more than she was
watching his uncle even while the latter was still speaking about her.
k. leant against a chair that he had pushed near to the girl.  "when
you're as ill as i am," said the lawyer, "you need to have peace.  i
don't find it depressing."  after a short pause he added, "and leni
looks after me well, she's a good girl."  but that was not enough to
persuade k.'s uncle, he had visibly taken against his friend's carer
and, even though he did not contradict the invalid, he persecuted her
with his scowl as she went over to the bed, put the candle on the
bedside table and, leaning over the bed, made a fuss of him by tidying
the pillows.  k.'s uncle nearly forgot the need to show any
consideration for the man who lay ill in bed, he stood up, walked up and
down behind the carer
 
 ___________________________
 
his
hands.  fortunately, though, behind the girl, the invalid raised himself
up, k.'s uncle made an ugly face as if swallowing something disgusting
and then, somewhat calmer, said, "we have naturally not lost our senses,
not yet; if what i am asking for were not possible i would not be asking
for it.  now please, go!"  the carer stood up straight by the bed
directly facing k.'s uncle, k. thought he noticed that with one hand she
was stroking the lawyer's hand.  "you can say anything in front of
leni," said the invalid, in a tone that was unmistakably imploring.
"it's not my business," said k.'s uncle, "and it's not my secrets."  and
he twisted himself round as if wanting to go into no more negotiations
but giving himself a little more time to think. "whose business is it
then?" asked the lawyer in an exhausted voice as he leant back again.
"my nephew's," said k.'s uncle, "and i've brought him along with me."
and he introduced him, "chief clerk josef k."  "oh!" said the invalid,
now with mu
 
 ___________________________
 
ch more life in him, and reached out his hand towards k.  "do
forgive me, i didn't notice you there at all."  then he then said to his
carer, "leni, go," stretching his hand out to her as if this were a
farewell that would have to last for a long time.  this time the girl
offered no resistance.  "so you," he finally said to k.'s uncle, who had
also calmed down and stepped closer, "you haven't come to visit me
because i'm ill but you've come on business."  the lawyer now looked so
much stronger that it seemed the idea of being visited because he was
ill had somehow made him weak, he remained supporting himself of one
elbow, which must have 
 
 ___________________________
 
orgive me, i haven't
introduced you - this is my friend albert k., this is his nephew, the
chief clerk josef k., and this is the office director - so, the office
director was kind enough to pay me a visit.  it's only possible to
appreciate just how valuable a visit like this is if you've been let
into the secret of what a pile of work the office director has heaped
over him.  well, he came anyway, we were having a peaceful chat, as far
as i was able when i'm so weak, and although we hadn't told leni she
mustn't let anyone in as we weren't expecting anyone, we still would
rather have remained alone, but then along came you, albert, thumping
your fists on the door, the office director moved over into the corner
pulling his table and chair with him, but now it turns out we might
have, that is, if that's what you wish, we might have something to
discuss with each other and it would be good if we can all come back
together again.  - office director  ...," he said with his head on one
side, poin
 
 ___________________________
 
the poor must have felt quite lost in it.  k. thought he
could see the little steps with which visitors would approach the
massive desk.  but then he forgot about all of this and had eyes only
for the carer who sat very close beside him, almost pressing him against
the armrest.  "i did think," she said "you would come out here to me by
yourself without me having to call you first.  it was odd.  first you stare
at me as soon as you come in, and then you keep me waiting.  and you
ought to call me leni, too," she added quickly and suddenly, as if no
moment of this conversation should be lost.  "gladly," said k.  "but as
for its being odd, leni, that's easy to explain.  firstly, i had to
listen to what the old men were saying and couldn't leave without a good
reason, but secondly i'm not a bold  person, if anything i'm quite shy,
and you, leni, you didn't really look like you could be won over in one
stroke, either."  "that's not it," said leni, laying one arm on the
armrest and looking at k.,
 
 ___________________________
 
is left arm pressed
against the back and armrest, his right arm, however, was completely
free and only grasped the armrest with his hand, as if about to jump up
any moment in vigorous outrage and make some decisive comment or even to
pass sentence.  the accused was probably meant to be imagined at the
foot of the steps, the top one of which could be seen in the picture,
covered with a yellow carpet.  "that might be my judge," said k.,
pointing to the picture with one finger.  "i know him," said leni
looking up at the picture, "he comes here quite often.  that picture is
from when he was young, but he can never have looked anything like it,
as he's tiny, minute almost.  but despite that, he had himself made to
look bigger in the picture as he's madly vain, just like everyone round
here.  but even i'm vain and that makes me very unhappy that you don't
like me."  k. replied to that last comment merely by embracing leni and
drawing her towards him, she lay her head quietly on his shoulder.  to
 
 ___________________________
 

the rest of it, though, he said, "what rank is he?"  "he's an examining
judge," she said, taking hold of the hand with which k. held her and
playing with his fingers.  "just an examining judge once again," said k.
in disappointment, "the senior officials keep themselves hidden.  but
here he is sitting on a throne."  "that's all just made up," said leni
with her face bent over k.'s hand, "really he's sitting on a kitchen
chair with an old horse blanket folded over it.  but do you have to be
always thinking about your trial?" she added slowly.  "no, not at all,"
said k., "i probably even think too little about it."  "that's not the
mistake you're making," said leni, "you're too unyielding, that's what
i've heard."  "who said that?" asked k., he felt her body against his
chest and looked down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair.  "i'd be
sayin
 
 ___________________________
 
g too much if i told you that," answered leni.  "please don't ask
for names, but do stop making these mistakes of yours, stop being so
unyielding, there's nothing you can do to defend yourself from this
court, you have to confess.  so confess to them as soon as you get the
chance.  it's only then that they give you the chance to get away, not
till then.  only, without help from outside even that's impossible, but
you needn't worry about getting this help as i want to help you myself."
"you understand a lot about this court and what sort of
 
 ___________________________
 
r skirt and adjusting
her blouse.  then she hung both her arms around his neck, leant back and
took a long look at him.  "and what if i don't confess, could you not
help me then?" asked k. to test her out.  i'm accumulating women to help
me, he thought to himself almost in amazement, first miss b√ºrstner, then
the court usher's wife, and now this little care assistant who seems to
have some incomprehensible need for me.  the way she sits on my lap as
if it were her proper place!  "no," answered leni, slowly shaking her
head, "i couldn't help you then.  but you don't want my help anyway, it
means nothing to you, you're too stubborn and won't be persuaded."
then, after a while she asked, "do you have a lover?"  "no," said k.
"oh, you must have," she said.  "well, i have really," said k.  "just
think, i've even betrayed her while i'm carrying her photograph with
me."  leni insisted he show her a photograph of elsa, and then, hunched
on his lap, studied the picture closely.  the photograph was
 
 ___________________________
 
 not one
that had been taken while elsa was posing for it, it showed her just
after she had been in a wild dance such as she liked to do in wine bars,
her skirt was still flung out as she span round, she had placed her
hands on her firm hips and, with her neck held taut, looked to one side
with a laugh; you could not see from the picture whom her laugh was
intended for.  "she's very tightly laced," said leni, pointing to the
place where she thought this could be seen.  "i don't like her, she's
clumsy and crude.  but maybe she's gentle and friendly towards you,
that's the impression you get from the picture.  big, strong girls like
that often don't know how to be anything but gentle and friendly.  would
she be capable of sacrificing herself for you, though?"  "no," said k.,
"she isn't gentle or friendly, and nor would she be capable of
sacrificing herself for me.  but i've never yet asked any of tho
 
 ___________________________
 
se
things of her.  i've never looked at this picture as closely as you."
"you can't think much of her, then," said leni. "she can't be your lover
after all."  "yes she is," said k., "i'm not going to take my word back
on that."  "well she might be your lover now, then," said leni, "but you
wouldn't miss her much if you lost her or if you exchanged her for
somebody else, me for instance."  "that is certainly conceivable," said
k. with a smile, "but she does have one major advantage over you, she
knows nothing about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't think
about it.  she wouldn't try to persuade me to be less unyielding."  "well
that's no advantage," said leni.  "if she's got no advantage other than
that, i can keep on hoping.  has she got any bodily defects?"  "'
 
 ___________________________
 
bodily
defects'?" asked k.  "yeah," said leni, "as i do have a bodily defect,
just a little one.  look."  she spread the middle and ring fingers of
her right hand apart from each other.  between those fingers the flap of
skin connecting them reached up almost as far as the top joint of the
little finger.  in the darkness, k. did not see at first what it was she
wanted to show him, so she led his hand to it so that he could feel.
"what a freak of nature," said k., and when he had taken a look at the
whole hand he added, "what a pretty claw!
 
 ___________________________
 
"  leni looked on with a kind
of pride as k. repeatedly opened and closed her two fingers in
amazement, until, finally, he briefly kissed them and let go.  "oh!" she
immediately exclaimed, "you kissed me!"  hurriedly, and with her mouth
open, she clambered up k.'s lap with her knees.  he was almost aghast as
he looked up at her, now that she was so close to him there was a
bitter, irritating smell from her, like pepper, she grasped his head,
leant out over him, and bit and kissed his neck, even biting 
 
 ___________________________
 
"   just then, her knee slipped
out and, with a little cry, she nearly fell down onto the carpet, k.
tried to hold her by putting his arms around her and was pulled down
with her.  "now you're mine," she said.  her last words to him as he
left were, "here's the key to the door, come whenever you want", and she
planted an undirected kiss on his back.  when he stepped out the front
door there was a light rain falling, he was about to go to the middle of
the street to see if he could still glimpse leni at the window when k.'s
uncle leapt out of a car that k., thinking of other things, had not seen
waiting outside the building.  he took hold of k. by both arms and
shoved him against the door as if he wanted to nail him to it.  "young
man," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?!  things were
going well with this business of yours, now you've caused it terrible
damage.  you slip off with some dirty, little thing who, moreover, is
obviously the lawyer's beloved, and stay away for hours
 
 ___________________________
 
e were so many questions here to be
asked.  asking questions were the most important thing.  k. had the
feeling that he would be able to ask all the questions needed here
himself.  the lawyer, in contrast, did not ask questions but did all the
talking himself or sat silently facing him, leant forward slightly over
the desk, probably because he was hard of hearing, pulled on a strand of
hair in the middle of his beard and looked down at the carpet, perhaps
at the very spot where k. had lain with leni.  now and then he would
give k. some vague warning of the sort you give to children.  his
speeches were as pointless as they were boring, and k. decided that when
the final bill came he would pay not a penny for them.  once the lawyer
thought he had humiliated k. sufficiently, he usually started something
that would raise his spirits again.  he had already, he would then say,
won many such cases, partly or in whole, cases which may not really have
been as difficult as this one but which, on the
 
 ___________________________
 
they could not then have
known.  if k., stupefied from all this talking, ever pointed out that
even considering all these difficulties progress was very slow, the
lawyer would object that progress was not slow at all, but that they
might have progressed far further if k. had come to him at the right
time.  but he had come to him late and that lateness would bring still
further difficulties, and not only where time was concerned.  the only
welcome interruption during these visits was always when leni contrived
to bring the lawyer his tea while k. was there.  then she would stand
behind k. - pretending to watch the lawyer as he bent greedily over his
cup, poured the tea in and drank - and secretly let k. hold her hand.
there was always complete silence.  the lawyer drank.  k. squeezed
leni's hand and leni would sometimes dare to gently stroke k.'s hair.
"still here, are you?" the lawyer would ask when he was ready.  "i
wanted to take the dishes away," said leni, they would give each other's

 
 ___________________________
 
tionally slowly, he had to remain in his office a long time, and it
was already past ten o'clock when he finally stood in front of the
lawyer's front door.  even before he rang he considered whether it might
not be better to give the lawyer notice by letter or telephone, a
personal conversation would certainly be very difficult.  nonetheless,
k. did not actually want to do without it, if he gave notice by any
other means it would be received in silence or with a few formulated
words, and unless leni could discover anything k. would never learn how
the lawyer had taken his dismissal and what its consequences might be,
in the lawyer's not unimportant opinion.  but sitting in front of him
and taken by surprise by his dismissal, k. would be able easily to infer
everything he wanted from the lawyer's face and behaviour, even if he
could not be induced to say very much.  it was not even out of the
question that k. might, after all, be persuaded that it would be best to
leave his defence to the l
 
 ___________________________
 
awyer and withdraw his dismissal.

        as usual, there was at first no response to k.'s ring at the door.
"leni could be a bit quicker," thought k.  but he could at least be glad
there was nobody else interfering as usually happened, be it the man in
his nightshirt or anyone else who might bother him.  as k. pressed on
the button for the second time he looked back at the other door, but
this time it, too, remained closed.  at last, two eyes appeared at the
spy-hatch in the lawyer's door, although they weren't leni's eyes.
someone unlocked the door, but kept himself pressed against it as he
called back in
 
 ___________________________
 
side, "it's him!", and only then did he open the door
properly.  k. pushed against the door, as behind him he could already
hear the key being hurriedly turned in the lock of the door to the other
flat.  when the door in front of him finally opened, he stormed straight
into the hallway.  through the corridor which led between the rooms he
saw leni, to whom the warning cry of the door opener had been directed,
still running away in her nightshirt.  he looked at her for a moment
and then looked round at the person who had opened the door.  it was a
small, wizened man with a full beard, he held a candle in his hand.  "do
you work here?" asked k.  "no," answered the man, "i don't belong here
at all, the lawyer is only representing me, i'm here on legal business."
"without your coat?" asked k., indicating the man's deficiency of dress
with a 
 
 ___________________________
 
gesture of his hand.  "oh, do forgive me!" said the man, and he
looked at himself in the light of the candle he was holding as if he had
not known about his appearance until then.
"is leni your lover?" asked k. curtly.  he had set his legs slightly
apart, his hands, in which he held his hat, were behind his back.
merely by being in possession of a thick overcoat he felt his advantage
over this thin little man.  "oh god," he said and, shocked, raised one
hand in front of his face as if in defence, "no, no, what can you be
thinking?"  "you look honest enough," said k. with a smile, "but come
along anyway."  k. indicated with his hat which way the man was to go
and let him go ahead 
 
 ___________________________
 
," said k.  he felt himself as much at
liberty as is normally only felt in foreign parts when speaking with
people of lower standing, keeping everything about himself to himself,
speaking only casually about the interests of the other, able to raise
him to a level above one's own, but also able, at will, to let him drop
again.  k. stopped at the door of the lawyer's office, opened it and, to
the businessman who had obediently gone ahead, called, "not so fast!
bring some light here!"  k. thought leni might have hidden in here, he
let the businessman search in every corner, but the room was empty.  in
front of the picture of the judge k. took hold of the businessman's
braces to stop him moving on.  "do you know him?" he asked, pointing
upwards with his finger.  the businessman lifted the candle, blinked as
he looked up and said, "it's a judge."  "an important judge?" asked k.,
and stood to the side and in front of the businessman so that he could
observe what impression the picture had on hi
 
 ___________________________
 
tion.  "he's an important judge."  "you don't have
much insight," said k.  "he is the lowest of the lowest examining
judges."  "i remember now," said the businessman as he lowered the
candle, "that's what i've already been told."  "well of course you
have," called out k., "i'd forgotten about it, of course you would
already have been told."  "but why, why?" asked the businessman as he
moved forwards towards the door, propelled by the hands of k.  outside
in the corridor k. said,
"you know where leni's hidden, do you?"  "hidden?" said the businessman,
"no, but she might be in the kitchen cooking soup for the lawyer."  "why
didn't you say that immediately?" asked k.  "i was going to take you
there, but you called me back again," answered the businessman, as if
confused by the contradictory commands.  "you think you're very clever,
don't you," said k, "now take me there!"  k. had never been in the
kitchen, it was surprisingly big and very well equipped.  the stove
alone was three times bigger
 
 ___________________________
 
 than normal stoves, but it was not possible
to see any detail beyond this as the kitchen was at the time illuminated
by no more than a small lamp hanging by the entrance.  at the stove
stood leni, in a white apron as always, breaking eggs into a pot
standing on a spirit lamp.
"good evening, josef," she said with a glance sideways.  "good evening,"
said k., pointing with one hand to a chair in a corner which the
businessman was to sit on, and he did indeed sit down on it.  k. however
went very close behind leni's back, leant over her shoulder and asked,
"who is this man?"  leni put one hand around k. as she stirred the soup
with the other, she drew him forward toward herself and said, "h
 
 ___________________________
 
in your
nightshirt," said k., putting his hand on her head and turning it back
towards the stove.  she was silent.  "is he your lover?" asked k.  she
was about to take hold of the pot of soup, but k. took both her hands
and said, "answer me!"  she said, "come into the office, i'll explain
everything to you."  "no," said k., "i want you to explain it here."
she put her arms around him and wanted to kiss him.  k., though, pushed
her away and said, "i don't want you to kiss me now."  "josef," said
leni, looking at k. imploringly but frankly in the eyes, "you're not
going to be jealous of mr. block now, are you?  rudi," she then said,
turning to the businessman, "help me out will you, i'm being suspected
of something, you can see that, leave the candle alone."  it had looked
as though mr. block had not been paying attention but he had been
following closely.  "i don't even know why you might be jealous," he
said ingenuously.  "nor do i, actually," said k., looking at the
businessman with a smi
 
 ___________________________
 
le.  leni laughed out loud and while k. was not
paying attention took the opportunity of embracing him and whispering,
"leave him alone, now, you can see what sort of person he is.  i've been
helping him a little bit because he's an important client of the
lawyer's, and no other reason.  and what about you?  do you want to
speak to the lawyer at this time of day?  he's very unwell today, but if
you want i'll tell him you're here.  but you can certainly spend the
night with me.  it's so long since you wer
 
 ___________________________
 
lect your case!  and i've got some
things to tell you that i've learned about.  but now, before anything
else, take your coat off!"  she helped him off with his coat, took the
hat off his head, ran with the things into the hallway to hang them up,
then she ran back and saw to the soup.  "do you want me to tell him
you're here straight away or take him his soup first?"  "tell him i'm
here first," said k.  he was in a bad mood, he had originally intended a
detailed discussion of his business with leni, especially the question
of his giving the lawyer notice, but now he no longer wanted to because
of the presence of the businessman.  now he considered his affair too
important to let this little businessman take part in it and perhaps
change some of his decisions, and so
he called leni back even though she was already on her way to the
lawyer.  "bring him his soup first," he said, "i want him to get his
strength up for the discussion with me, he'll need it."  "you're a
client of the lawyer's t
 
 ___________________________
 
oo, aren't you," said the businessman quietly
from his corner as if he were trying to find this out.  it was not,
however, taken well.  "what business is that of yours?" said k., and
leni said,
"will you be quiet. - i'll take him his soup first then, shall i?" and
she poured the soup into a dish. "the only worry then is that he might
go to sleep soon after he's eaten."  "what i've got to say to him will
keep him awake," said k., who still wanted to intimate that he intended
some important negotiations with the lawyer, he wanted leni to ask him
what it was and only then to ask her advice.  but instead, she just
promptly carried out the order he had given her.  when she went over 
 
 ___________________________
 
she deliberately brushed against him and whispered,
"i'll tell him you're here as soon as he's eaten the soup so that i can
get you back as soon as possible."  "just go," said k., "just go."  "be
a bit more friendly," she said and, still holding the dish, turned
completely round once more in the doorway.

        k. watched her as she went; the decision had finally been made
that the lawyer was to be dismissed, it was probably better that he had
not been able to discuss the matter any more with leni beforehand; she
hardly understood the complexity of the matter, she would certainly have
advised him against it and perhaps would even have prevented him from
dismissing the lawyer this time, he would have remained in doubt and
unease and eventually have carried out his decision after a while anyway
as this decision was something he could not avoid.  the sooner it was
carried out the more harm would be avoided.  and moreover, perhaps the
businessman had something to say on the matter.

        
 
 ___________________________
 
!  but
i've already thought all these things through countless times, to me
they're the most obvious things in the world."  "you must be glad your
trial has already progressed so far, are you?" asked k., he did not wish
to ask directly how the businessman's affairs stood, but received no
clear answer anyway.  "yes, i've been working at my trial for five years
now," said the businessman as his head sank, "that's no small
achievement."  then he was silent for a while.  k. listened to hear
whether leni was on her way back.  on the one hand he did not want her
to come back too soon as he still had many questions to ask and did not
want her to find him in this intimate discussion with the businessman,
but on the other hand it irritated him that she stayed so long with the
lawyer when k. was there, much longer than she needed to give him his
soup.  "i still remember it exactly," the businessman began again, and
k. immediately gave him his full attention, "when my case was as old as
yours is now.
 
 ___________________________
 
rse, would be the stupidest thing you
could do, and you wouldn't be left in peace in bed for very long
either."  "so you weren't thinking about the great lawyers at that
time?" asked k.  "not for very long," said the businessman, and smiled
again, "you can't forget about them entirely, i'm afraid, especially in
the night when these thoughts come so easily.  but i wanted immediate
results in those days, so i went to the petty lawyers."

        "well look at you two sat huddled together!" called leni as she
came back with the dish and stood in the doorway.  they were indeed sat
close together, if either of them turned his head even slightly it would
have knocked against the other's, the businessman was not only very
small but also sat hunched down, so that k. was also forced to bend down
low if he wanted to hear everything.  "not quite yet!" called out k., to
turn leni away, his hand, still resting on the businessman's hand,
twitching with impatience.  "he wanted me to tell him about my tri
 
 ___________________________
 
al,"
said the businessman to leni.  "carry on, then, carry on," she said.
she spoke to the businessman with affection but, at the same time, with
condescension.  k. did not like that, he had begun to learn that the man
was of some value after all, he had experience at least, and he was
willing to share it.  leni was probably wrong about him.  he watched her
in irritation as leni now took the candle from the businessman's hand -
which he had been holding on to all this time - wiped his hand with her
apron and then knelt beside him to scratch off some wax that had dripped
from the candle onto his trousers.  "you were about to tell me about the
petty lawyers," said k., shoving leni's hand away with no further
comment.  "what's wrong with you today?" asked leni, tapped him gently
and carried on with what she had been doing.  "yes, the petty lawyers,"
said the businessman, 
 
 ___________________________
 
putting his hand to his brow as if thinking hard.
k. wanted to help him and said, "you wanted immediate results and so
went to the petty lawyers."
"yes, that's right," said the businessman, but did not continue with
what he'd been saying.  "maybe he doesn't want to speak about it in
front of leni," thought k., suppressing his impatience to hear the rest
straight away, and stopped trying to press him.

        "have you told him i'm here?" he asked leni.  "course i have," she
said, "he's waiting for you.  leave block alone now, you can talk to
block later, he'll still be here."  k. still hesitated.  "you'll still
be here?" he asked the businessman, wanting to hear the answer from him
and not wanting leni to speak about the businessman as if he weren't
there, he was full of secret resentment towards leni today.  and once
more it was only leni who answered.  "he often sleeps here."  "he sleeps
here?" exclaimed k., he had thought the businessman 
 
 ___________________________
 
would just wait
there for him while he quickly settled his business with the lawyer, and
then they would leave together to discuss everything thoroughly and
undisturbed.  "yes," said leni, "not everyone's like you, josef, allowed
to see the lawyer at any time you like.  do don't even seem surprised
that the lawyer, despite being ill, still receives you at eleven o'clock
at night.  you take it far too much for granted, what your friends do
for you.  well, your friends, or at least i do, we like to do things for
you.  i don't want or need any more thanks than that you're fond of me."
"fond of you?" thought k. at first, and only then it occurred to him,
"well, yes, i am fond of her
 
 ___________________________
 
." nonetheless, what he said, forgetting all
the rest, was, "he receives me because i am his client.  if i needed
anyone else's help i'd have to beg and show gratitude whenever i do
anything."  "he's really nasty today, isn't he?" leni asked the
businessman.  "now it's me who's not here," thought k., and nearly lost
his temper with the businessman when, with the same rudeness as leni, he
said, "the lawyer also has other reasons to receive him.  his case is
much more interesting than mine.  and it's only in its early stages too,
it probably hasn't progressed very far so the lawyer still likes to deal
with him.  that'll all change later on."  "yeah, yeah," said leni,
looking at the businessman and laughing. "he doesn't half talk!" she
said, turning to face k.  "you can't believe a word he says.  he's as
talkative as he is sweet.  maybe that's why the lawyer can't stand him.
a
 
 ___________________________
 
et block sleep here, it wouldn't be the first time dr. huld has wanted
to see him in the night.  so now block is ready for that.   sometimes,
when he knows block is still here, he'll even change his mind about
letting him in to see him."  k. looked questioningly at the businessman.
the latter nodded and, although he had spoken quite openly with k.
earlier, seemed to be confused with shame as he said, "yes, later on you
become very dependent on your lawyer."  "he's only pretending to mind,"
said leni.  "he likes to sleep here really, he's often said so."  she
went over to a little door and shoved it open.  "do you want to see his
bedroom?" she asked.  k. went over to the low, windowless room and
looked in from the doorway.  the room contained a narrow bed which
filled it completely, so that to get into the bed you would need to
climb over the bedpost.  at the head of the bed there was a niche in the
wall where, fastidiously tidy, stood a candle, a bottle of ink, and a
pen with a bundle of p
 
 ___________________________
 
apers which were probably to do with the trial.
"you sleep in the maid's room?" asked k., as he went back to the
businessman.  "leni's let me have it," answered the businessman, "it has
many advantages."  k. looked long at him; his first impression of the
businessman had perhaps not been right; he had experience as his trial
had already lasted a long time, but he had paid a heavy price for this
experience.  k. was suddenly unable to bear the sight of the businessman
any longer.  "bring him to bed, then!" he called out to leni, who seemed
to understand him.  for himself, he wanted to go to the lawyer and, by
dismissing him, f
 
 ___________________________
 
ree himself from not only the lawyer but also from leni
and the businessman.  but before he had reached the door the businessman
spoke to him gently.  "excuse me, sir," he said, and k. looked round
crossly.  "you've forgotten your promise," said the businessman,
stretching his hand out to k. imploringly from where he sat.  "you were
going to tell me a secret."  "that is true," said k., as he glanced at
leni, who was watching him carefully, to check on her.  "so listen; it's
hardly a secret now anyway.  i'm going to see the lawyer now to sack
him."  "he's sacking him!" yelled the businessman, and he jumped up from
his chair and ran around the kitchen with his arms in the air.  he kept
on shouting, "he's sacking his lawyer!"  leni tried to rush at k. but
the businessman got in her way so that she shoved him away with her
fists.  then, still with her hands balled into fists, she ran after k.
who, how
 
 ___________________________
 
ever, had been given a long start.  he was already inside the
lawyer's room by the time leni caught up with him.  he had almost closed
the door behind himself, but leni held the door open with her foot,
grabbed his arm and tried to pull him back.  but he put such pressure on
her wrist that, with a sigh, she was forced to release him.  she did not
dare go into the room straight away, and k. locked the door with the
key.

        "i've been waiting for you a very long time," said the lawyer from
his bed.  he had been reading something by the light of a candle but now
he laid it onto the bedside table and put his glasses on, looking at k.
sharply through them.  i
 
 ___________________________
 
nstead of apologising k. said, "i'll be leaving
again soon."  as he had not apologised the lawyer ignored what k. said,
and replied, "i won't let you in this late again next time."  "i find
that quite acceptable," said k.  the lawyer looked at him quizzically.
"sit down," he said.  "as you wish," said k., drawing a chair up to the
bedside table and sitting down.
"it seemed to me that you locked the door," said the lawyer.  "yes,"
said k., "it was because of leni."  he had no intention of letting
anyone off lightly.  but the lawyer asked him, "was she being
importunate again?"  "importunate?" asked k.  "yes," said the lawyer,
laughing as he did so, had a fit of coughing and then, once it had
passed, began to laugh again.  "i'm sure you must have noticed how
importunate she can be sometimes," he said, and patted k.'s hand which
k. had rested on the bedside table and which he now snatched back.  "you
don't attach much importance to it, then," said the law
 
 ___________________________
 
yer when k. was
silent, "so much the better.  otherwise i might have needed to apologise
to you.  it is a peculiarity of leni's.  i've long since forgiven her
for it, and i wouldn't be talking of it now, if you hadn't locked the
door just now.  anyway, perhaps i should at least explain this
peculiarity of hers to you, but you seem rather disturbed, the way
you're looking at me, and so that's why i'll do it, this peculiarity of
hers consists in this; leni finds most of the accused attractive.  she
attaches herself to each of them, loves each of them, even seems to be
loved by each of them; then she sometimes entertains me by telling me
about them when i allow her to.  i am not so astonished by all of this
as you seem to be.  if you look at them in the right way the accused
really can be attractive, quite often.  but that is a remarkable and to
some extent scientific phenomenon.  being indicted does not cause any
clear, precisely definable change
 
 ___________________________
 
all block in, unlock the door and sit down here
beside the bedside table."  "be glad to," said k., and did as the lawyer
suggested; he was always ready to learn something new.  but to make sure
of himself for any event he added, "but you do realise that you are no
longer to be my lawyer, don't you?"  "yes," said the lawyer.  "but you
can still change your mind today if you want to."  he lay back down in
the bed, pulled the quilt up to his chin and turned to face the wall.
then he rang.

        leni appeared almost the moment he had done so.  she looked
hurriedly at k. and the lawyer to try and find out what had happened;
she seemed to be reassured by the sight of k. sitting calmly at the
lawyer's bed.  she smiled and nodded to k., k. looked blankly back at
her.  "fetch block," said the lawyer.  but instead of going to fetch
him, leni just went to the door and called out, "block!  to the lawyer!"
then, probably because the lawyer had turned his face to the wall and
was paying no attention,
 
 ___________________________
 
 she slipped in behind k.'s chair.  from then
on, she bothered him by leaning forward over the back of the chair or,
albeit very tenderly and carefully, she would run her hands through his
hair and over his cheeks.  k. eventually tried to stop her by taking
hold of one hand, and after some resistance leni let him keep hold of
it.  block came as soon as he was called, but he remained standing in
the doorway and seemed to be wondering whether he should enter or not.
he raised his eyebrows and lowered his head as if listening to find out
whether the order to attend the lawyer would be repeated.  k. could have
encouraged to enter, but he had decided to make a final break not only
with the lawyer but with everything in his home, so he kept himself
motionless.  leni was also silent.  block noticed tha
 
 ___________________________
 
block had wanted but instead threatened him with
a stick, as now block really began to shake.  "i went to see," said the
lawyer, "the third judge yesterday, a friend of mine, and slowly brought
the conversation round to the subject of you.  do you want to know what
he said?"  "oh, yes please," said block.  the lawyer did not answer
immediately, so block repeated his request and lowered his head as if
about to kneel down.  but then k. spoke to him:  "what do you think
you're doing?" he shouted.  leni had wanted to stop him from calling out
and so he took hold of her other hand.  it was not love that made him
squeeze it and hold on to it so tightly, she sighed frequently and tried
to disengage her hands from him.  but block was punished for k.'s
outburst, as the lawyer asked him, "who is your lawyer?"  "you are,
sir," said block.  "and who besides me?" the lawyer asked.  "no-one
besides you, sir," said block.  "and let there be no-one besides me,"
said the lawyer.  block fully understood wha
 
 ___________________________
 
ose
study of how to behave with the court, what we ought to do and what the
court practices are."  "don't let anyone bother you," said the lawyer,
"and do what seems to you to be right."  "i will," said block, as if
speaking to himself to give himself courage, and with a quick glance to
the side he kneeled down close beside the bed.  "i'm kneeling now dr.
huld, sir," he said.  but the lawyer remained silent.  with one hand,
block carefully stroked the bed cover.  in the silence while he did so,
leni, as she freed herself from k.'s hands, said, "you're hurting me.
let go of me.  i'm going over to block."  she went over to him and sat
on the edge of the bed.  block was very pleased at this and with lively,
but silent, gestures he immediately urged her to intercede for him with
the lawyer.  it was clear that he desperately needed to be told
something by the lawyer, although perhaps only so that he could make use
of the information with his other lawyers.  leni probably knew very well
how the 
 
 ___________________________
 
lawyer could be brought round, pointed to his hand and pursed
her lips as if making a kiss.  block immediately performed the hand-kiss
and, at further urging from leni, repeated it twice more.  but the
lawyer continued to be silent.  then leni leant over the lawyer, as she
stretched out, the attractive shape of her body could be seen, and, bent
over close to his face, she stroked his long white hair.  that now
forced him to give an answer.  "i'm rather wary of telling him," said
the lawyer, and his head could be seen shaking slightly, perhaps so that
he would feel the pressure of leni's hand better.  block listened
closely with his head lowered, as if by listening he were breaking an
order.  "what makes you so wary about it?" asked l
 
 ___________________________
 
eni.  k. had the
feeling he was listening to a contrived dialogue that had been repeated
many times, that would be repeated many times more, and that for block
alone it would never lose its freshness.  "what has his behaviour been
like today?" asked the lawyer instead of an answer.  before leni said
anything she looked down at block and watched him a short while as he
raised his hands towards her and rubbed them together imploringly.
finally she gave a serious nod, turned back to the lawyer and said,
"he's been quiet and industrious."  this was an elderly businessman, a
man whose beard was long, and he was begging a young girl to speak on
his behalf.  even if there was some plan behind what he did, there was
nothing that could reinstate him in the eyes of his fellow man.  k.
could not
 
 ___________________________
 
 no longer a
client, he was the lawyer's dog.  if the lawyer had ordered him to crawl
under the bed as if it were a kennel and to bark out from under it, then
he would have done so with enthusiasm.  k. listened to all of this,
testing it and thinking it over as if he had been given the task of
closely observing everything spoken here, inform a higher office about
it and write a report.  "and what has he been doing all day?" asked the
lawyer.  "i kept him locked in the maid's room all day," said leni, "so
that he wouldn't stop me doing my work.  that's where he usually stays.
from time to time i looked in through the spyhole to see what he was
doing, and each time he was kneeling on the bed and reading the papers
you gave him, propped up on the window sill.  that made a good
impression on me; as the window only opens onto an air shaft and gives
hardly any light.  it showed how obedient he is that he was even reading
in those conditions."  "i'm pleased to hear it," said the lawyer.  "but
did
 
 ___________________________
 
 he understand what he was reading?"  while this conversation was
going on, block continually moved his lips and was clearly formulating
the answers he hoped leni would give.  "well i can't give you any
certain answer to that of course," said leni, "but i could see that he
was reading thoroughly.  he spent all day reading the same page, running
his finger along the lines.  whenever i looked in on him he sighed as if
this reading was a lot of work for him.  i expect the papers you gave
him were very hard to understand."  "yes," said the lawyer, "they
certainly are that.  and i really don't think he understood anything of
them.  but they should at least give him some inkling of just how hard a
struggle it is and how much work it is for me 
 
 ___________________________
 
to defend him.  and who am
i doing all this hard work for?  i'm doing it - it's laughable even to
say it - i'm doing it for block.  he ought to realise what that means,
too.  did he study without a pause?"  "almost without a pause," answered
leni.  "just the once he asked me for a drink of water, so i gave him a
glassful through the window.  then at eight o'clock i let him out and
gave him something to eat."  block glanced sideways at k., as if he were
being praised and had to impress k. as well.  he now seemed more
optimistic, he moved more freely and rocked back and forth on his knees.
this made his astonishment all the more obvious when he heard the
following words from the lawyer:  "you speak well of him," said the
lawyer, "but that
 
 ___________________________
 
's just what makes it difficult for me.  you see, the
judge did not speak well of him at all, neither about block nor about
his case."  "didn't speak well of him?" asked leni.  "how is that
possible?"  block looked at her with such tension he seemed to think
that although the judge's words had been spoken so long before she would
be able to change them in his favour.  "not at all," said the lawyer.
"in fact he became quite cross when i started to talk about block to
him. 'don't talk to me about block,' he said.  'he is my client,' said
i.  'you're letting him abuse you,' he said.  'i don't think his case is
lost yet,' said i.  'you're letting him abuse you,' he repe
 
 ___________________________
 
s the
point at which proceedings begin.  i can't set out all the opinions
opposed to that view here, and you wouldn't understand it anyway,
suffice it to say that there are many reasons to disagree with him."
embarrassed, block ran his fingers through the pile of the carpet, his
anxiety about what the judge had said had let him forget his inferior
status towards the lawyer for a while, he thought only about himself and
turned the judges words round to examine them from all sides.  "block,"
said leni, as if reprimanding him, and, taking hold of the collar of his
coat, pulled him up slightly higher.  "leave the carpet alone and listen
to what the lawyer is saying."

this chapter was left unfinished.




chapter nine
in the cathedral

        a very important italian business contact of the bank had come to
visit the city for the first time and k. was given the task of showing
him some of its cultural sights.  at any other time he would have seen
this job as an honour but now, when he was fin
 
 ___________________________
 
to have left him
completely, it was the italian who had caused him all this effort and
sometimes he became so angry with him that he buried the dictionary
under some papers firmly intending to do no more preparation, but then
he realised he could not walk up and down in the cathedral with the
italian without saying a word, so, in an even greater rage, he
pulled the dictionary back out again.

        at exactly half past nine, just when he was about to leave, there
was a telephone call for him, leni wished him good morning and asked how
he was, k. thanked her hurriedly and told her it was impossible for him
to talk now as he had to go to the cathedral. "to the cathedral?" asked
leni.  "yes, to the cathedral."  "what do you have to go to the
cathedral for?" said leni.  k. tried to explain it to her briefly, but
he had hardly begun when leni suddenly said, "they're harassing you."
one thing that k. could not bear was pity that he had not wanted or
expected, he took his leave of her with two 