since time had passed on in the meantime, and the boy remained a
stranger and in a gloomy disposition, since he displayed a proud and
stubbornly disobedient heart, did not want to do any work, did not pay
his respect to the old men, stole from vasudeva's fruit-trees, then
siddhartha began to understand that his son had not brought him
happiness and peace, but suffering and worry.  but he loved him, and he
preferred the suffering and worries of love over happiness and joy
without the boy.  since young siddhartha was in the hut, the old men had
split the work.  vasudeva had again taken on the job of the ferryman all
by himself, and siddhartha, in order to be with his son, did the work in
the hut and the field.

for a long time, for long months, siddhartha waited for his son to
understand him, to accept his love, to perhaps reciprocate it.  for
long months, vasudeva waited, watching, waited and said nothing.  one
day, when siddhartha the younger had once again tormented his father
very much with spite an
 
 ___________________________
 
ry devout man, perhaps a
saint, all these there no attributes which could win the boy over.  he
was bored by this father, who kept him prisoner here in this miserable
hut of his, he was bored by him, and for him to answer every naughtiness
with a smile, every insult with friendliness, every viciousness with
kindness, this very thing was the hated trick of this old sneak.  much
more the boy would have liked it if he had been threatened by him, if he
had been abused by him.

a day came, when what young siddhartha had on his mind came bursting
forth, and he openly turned against his father.  the latter had given
him a task, he had told him to gather brushwood.  but the boy did not
leave the hut, in stubborn disobedience and rage he stayed where he was,
thumped on the ground with his feet, clenched his fists, and screamed in
a powerful outburst his hatred and contempt into his father's face.

"get the brushwood for yourself!" he shouted foaming at the mouth, "i'm
not your servant.  i do know, that you won
 
 ___________________________
 
mala, where
he had seen her for the first time in her sedan-chair.  the past rose
up in his soul, again he saw himself standing there, young, a bearded,
naked samana, the hair full of dust.  for a long time, siddhartha stood
there and looked through the open gate into the garden, seeing monks in
yellow robes walking among the beautiful trees.

for a long time, he stood there, pondering, seeing images, listening to
the story of his life.  for a long time, he stood there, looked at the
monks, saw young siddhartha in their place, saw young kamala walking
among the high trees.  clearly, he saw himself being served food and
drink by kamala, receiving his first kiss from her, looking proudly and
disdainfully back on his brahmanism, beginning proudly and full of
desire his worldly life.  he saw kamaswami, saw the servants, the
orgies, the gamblers with the dice, the musicians, saw kamala's
song-bird in the cage, lived through all this once again, breathed
sansara, was once again old and tired, felt once agai