r in the hot sun and then fainted quietly and
had to stay in bed for a week.  suellen, sullen and tearful,
pretended to faint too, but came back to consciousness spitting
like an angry cat when scarlett poured a gourdful of water in her
face.  finally she refused point-blank.

"i won't work in the fields like a darky!  you can't make me.  what
if any of our friends ever heard of it?  what if--if mr. kennedy
ever knew?  oh, if mother knew about this--"

"you just mention mother's name once more, suellen o'hara, and i'll
slap you flat," cried scarlett.  "mother worked harder than any
darky on this place and you know it, miss fine airs!"

"she did not!  at least, not in the fields.  and you can't make me.
i'll tell papa on you and he won't make me work!"

"don't you dare go bothering pa with any of our troubles!" cried
scarlett, distracted between indignation at her sister and fear for
gerald.

"i'll help you, sissy," interposed carreen docilely.  "i'll work
for sue and me too.  she isn't well yet and 
 
 ___________________________
 
t will i do?"  the swimming eyes looked up to him as if
she knew he knew everything and was hanging on his words.

"well, i don't know right now.  but i'll think of something."

"oh, i know you will!  you are so smart--frank."

she had never called him by his first name before and the sound
came to him as a pleasant shock and surprise.  the poor girl was
probably so upset she didn't even notice her slip.  he felt very
kindly toward her and very protecting.  if there was anything he
could do for suellen o'hara's sister, he would certainly do it.  he
pulled out a red bandanna handkerchief and handed it to her and she
wiped her eyes and began to smile tremulously.

"i'm such a silly little goose," she said apologetically.  "please
forgive me."

"you aren't a silly little goose.  you're a very brave little woman
and you are trying to carry to heavy a load.  i'm afraid miss
pittypat isn't going to be much help to you.  i hear she lost most
of her property and mr. henry hamilton's in bad shape himself.  i
 
 ___________________________
 
h a wave of homesickness hard to dispel.  but
there it was.  she had made her bargain and she intended to stand
by it.  and she was so grateful to frank for saving tara she felt a
warm affection for him and an equally warm determination that he
should never regret marrying her.

the ladies of atlanta knew their neighbors' business only slightly
less completely than they knew their own and were far more
interested in it.  they all knew that for years frank kennedy had
had an "understanding" with suellen o'hara.  in fact, he had said,
sheepishly, that he expected to get married in the spring.  so the
tumult of gossip, surmise and deep suspicion which followed the
announcement of his quiet wedding to scarlett was not surprising.
mrs. merriwether, who never let her curiosity go long unsatisfied
if she could help it, asked him point-blank just what he meant by
marrying one sister when he was betrothed to the other.  she
reported to mrs. elsing that all the answer she got for her pains
was a silly look.  
 
 ___________________________
 
lanta, i thought maybe that gives me the right to
speak first."

the last part of his speech was lost in a faint sibilant buzz that
went through the gathering, an angry beelike buzz.  there were
indignation and disappointment in the sound.  everyone liked will,
everyone respected him for what he had done for tara.  everyone
knew his affections lay with carreen, so the news that he was to
marry the neighborhood pariah instead sat ill upon them.  good old
will marrying that nasty, sneaking little suellen o'hara!

for a moment the air was tense.  mrs. tarleton's eyes began to snap
and her lips to shape soundless words.  in the silence, old man
mcrae's high voice could be heard imploring his grandson to tell
him what had been said.  will faced them all, still mild of face,
but there was something in his pale blue eyes which dared them to
say one word about his future wife.  for a moment the balance hung
between the honest affection everyone had for will and their
contempt for suellen.  and will won.  he