 and, anyway, the
girls won't let her.  they said they were going to have her go to
one party at least like a lady, riding in the carriage."

"i hope it doesn't rain tomorrow," said scarlett.  "it's rained
nearly every day for a week.  there's nothing worse than a
barbecue turned into an indoor picnic."

"oh, it'll be clear tomorrow and hot as june," said stuart.
"look at that sunset.  i never saw one redder.  you can always
tell weather by sunsets."

they looked out across the endless acres of gerald o'hara's newly
plowed cotton fields toward the red horizon.  now that the sun was
setting in a welter of crimson behind the hills across the flint
river, the warmth of the april day was ebbing into a faint but
balmy chill.

spring had come early that year, with warm quick rains and sudden
frothing of pink peach blossoms and dogwood dappling with white
stars the dark river swamp and far-off hills.  already the plowing
was nearly finished, and the bloody glory of the sunset colored
the fresh-cut furrows
 
 ___________________________
 
they
don't have nothing but rabbit and possum, i'll--i'll tell ma.  and
we won't let you go to the war with us, either."

"airs?  me put on airs fo' dem cheap niggers?  nawsuh, ah got
better manners.  ain' miss beetriss taught me manners same as she
taught y'all?"

"she didn't do a very good job on any of the three of us," said
stuart.  "come on, let's get going."

he backed his big red horse and then, putting spurs to his side,
lifted him easily over the split rail fence into the soft field of
gerald o'hara's plantation.  brent's horse followed and then
jeems', with jeems clinging to pommel and mane.  jeems did not
like to jump fences, but he had jumped higher ones than this in
order to keep up with his masters.

as they picked their way across the red furrows and down the hill
to the river bottom in the deepening dusk, brent yelled to his
brother:

"look, stu!  don't it seem like to you that scarlett would have
asked us to supper?"

"i kept thinking she would," yelled stuart.  "why do you
suppose
 
 ___________________________
 
to her disturbed mind.
she loved this land so much, without even knowing she loved it,
loved it as she loved her mother's face under the lamp at prayer
time.

still there was no sign of gerald on the quiet winding road.  if
she had to wait much longer, mammy would certainly come in search
of her and bully her into the house.  but even as she strained her
eyes down the darkening road, she heard a pounding of hooves at
the bottom of the pasture hill and saw the horses and cows scatter
in fright.  gerald o'hara was coming home across country and at
top speed.

he came up the hill at a gallop on his thick-barreled, long-legged
hunter, appearing in the distance like a boy on a too large horse.
his long white hair standing out behind him, he urged the horse
forward with crop and loud cries.

filled with her own anxieties, she nevertheless watched him with
affectionate pride, for gerald was an excellent horseman.

"i wonder why he always wants to jump fences when he's had a few
drinks," she thought.  "and
 
 ___________________________
 
e feet tall, but so
heavy of barrel and thick of neck that his appearance, when
seated, led strangers to think him a larger man.  his thickset
torso was supported by short sturdy legs, always incased in the
finest leather boots procurable and always planted wide apart like
a swaggering small boy's.  most small people who take themselves
seriously are a little ridiculous; but the bantam cock is
respected in the barnyard, and so it was with gerald.  no one
would ever have the temerity to think of gerald o'hara as a
ridiculous little figure.

he was sixty years old and his crisp curly hair was silver-white,
but his shrewd face was unlined and his hard little blue eyes were
young with the unworried youthfulness of one who has never taxed
his brain with problems more abstract than how many cards to draw
in a poker game.  his was as irish a face as could be found in the
length and breadth of the homeland he had left so long ago--round,
high colored, short nosed, wide mouthed and belligerent.

beneath his
 
 ___________________________
 
 choleric exterior gerald o'hara had the tenderest of
hearts.  he could not bear to see a slave pouting under a
reprimand, no matter how well deserved, or hear a kitten mewing or
a child crying; but he had a horror of having this weakness
discovered.  that everyone who met him did discover his kindly
heart within five minutes was unknown to him; and his vanity would
have suffered tremendously if he had found it out, for he liked to
think that when he bawled orders at the top of his voice everyone
trembled and obeyed.  it had n
 
 ___________________________
 
so it is.  and besides, missy,
what are you doing out here without your shawl?"

seeing that he was employing familiar maneuvers to extricate
himself from unpleasant conversation, she slipped her arm through
his and said:  "i was waiting for you.  i didn't know you would be
so late.  i just wondered if you had bought dilcey."

"bought her i did, and the price has ruined me.  bought her and
her little wench, prissy.  john wilkes was for almost giving them
away, but never will i have it said that gerald o'hara used
friendship in a trade.  i made him take three thousand for the two
of them."

"in the name of heaven, pa, three thousand!  and you didn't need
to buy prissy!"

"has the time come when me own daughters sit in judgment on me?"
shouted gerald rhetorically.  "prissy is a likely little wench and
so--"

"i know her.  she's a sly, stupid creature," scarlett rejoined
calmly, unimpressed by his uproar.  "and the only reason you
bought her was because dilcey asked you to buy her."

gerald looked cre
 
 ___________________________
 
s to themselves."

"why, pa, ashley is not--"

"hold your whist, puss!  i said nothing against the lad, for i
like him.  and when i say queer, it's not crazy i'm meaning.  he's
not queer like the calverts who'd gamble everything they have on a
horse, or the tarletons who turn out a drunkard or two in every
litter, or the fontaines who are hot-headed little brutes and
after murdering a man for a fancied slight.  that kind of
queerness is easy to understand, for sure, and but for the grace
of god gerald o'hara would be having all those faults!  and i
don't mean that ashley would run off with another woman, if you
were his wife, or beat you.  you'd be happier if he did, for at
least you'd be understanding that.  but he's queer in other ways,
and there's no understanding him at all.  i like him, but it's
neither heads nor tails i can make of most he says.  now, puss,
tell me true, do you understand his folderol about books and
poetry and music and oil paintings and such foolishness?"

"oh, pa," cried s
 
 ___________________________
 
secrets
through long nights to intimate girl friends.  but no, that wasn't
possible.  mother had always been just as she was, a pillar of
strength, a fount of wisdom, the one person who knew the answers
to everything.

but scarlett was wrong, for, years before, ellen robillard of
savannah had giggled as inexplicably as any fifteen-year-old in
that charming coastal city and whispered the long nights through
with friends, exchanging confidences, telling all secrets but one.
that was the year when gerald o'hara, twenty-eight years older
than she, came into her life--the year, too, when youth and her
black-eyed cousin, philippe robillard, went out of it.  for when
philippe, with his snapping eyes and his wild ways, left savannah
forever, he took with him the glow that was in ellen's heart and
left for the bandy-legged little irishman who married her only a
gentle shell.

but that was enough for gerald, overwhelmed at his unbelievable
luck in actually marrying her.  and if anything was gone from her,
he
 
 ___________________________
 
ica from ireland when he was twenty-one.
he had come hastily, as many a better and worse irishman before
and since, with the clothes he had on his back, two shillings
above his passage money and a price on his head that he felt was
larger than his misdeed warranted.  there was no orangeman this
side of hell worth a hundred pounds to the british government or
to the devil himself; but if the government felt so strongly about
the death of an english absentee landlord's rent agent, it was
time for gerald o'hara to be leaving and leaving suddenly.  true,
he had called the rent agent "a bastard of an orangeman," but
that, according to gerald's way of looking at it, did not give the
man any right to insult him by whistling the opening bars of "the
boyne water."

the battle of the boyne had been fought more than a hundred years
before, but, to the o'haras and their neighbors, it might have
been yesterday when their hopes and their dreams, as well as their
lands and wealth, went off in the same cloud of du
 
 ___________________________
 
t to
mark his own.  he stood on the blackened foundation stones of the
burned building, looked down the long avenue of trees leading
toward the road and swore lustily, with a joy too deep for
thankful prayer.  these twin lines of somber trees were his, his
the abandoned lawn, waist high in weeds under white-starred young
magnolia trees.  the uncultivated fields, studded with tiny pines
and underbrush, that stretched their rolling red-clay surface away
into the distance on four sides belonged to gerald o'hara--were
all his because he had an unbefuddled irish head and the courage
to stake everything on a hand of cards.

gerald closed his eyes and, in the stillness of the unworked
acres, he felt that he had come home.  here under his feet would
rise a house of whitewashed brick.  across the road would be new
rail fences, inclosing fat cattle and blooded horses, and the red
earth that rolled down the hillside to the rich river bottom land
would gleam white as eiderdown in the sun--cotton, acres and acr
 
 ___________________________
 
ng about his family.  while
the society of up-country georgia was not so impregnable as that
of the coast aristocrats, no family wanted a daughter to wed a man
about whose grandfather nothing was known.

gerald knew that despite the genuine liking of the county men with
whom he hunted, drank and talked politics there was hardly one
whose daughter he could marry.  and he did not intend to have it
gossiped about over supper tables that this, that or the other
father had regretfully refused to let gerald o'hara pay court to
his daughter.  this knowledge did not make gerald feel inferior to
his neighbors.  nothing could ever make gerald feel that he was
inferior in any way to anyone.  it was merely a quaint custom of
the county that daughters only married into families who had lived
in the south much longer than twenty-two years, had owned land and
slaves and been addicted only to the fashionable vices during that
time.

"pack up.  we're going to savannah," he told pork.  "and if i hear
you say 'whist!
 
 ___________________________
 
and when the night was nearly spent, mammy, who had cried herself
out over her mistress' dark head, protested, "but, honey, you kain
do dat!"

"i will do it.  he is a kind man.  i will do it or go into the
convent at charleston."

it was the threat of the convent that finally won the assent of
bewildered and heartstricken pierre robillard.  he was staunchly
presbyterian, even though his family were catholic, and the
thought of his daughter becoming a nun was even worse than that of
her marrying gerald o'hara.  after all, the man had nothing
against him but a lack of family.

so, ellen, no longer robillard, turned her back on savannah, never
to see it again, and with a middle-aged husband, mammy, and twenty
"house niggers" journeyed toward tara.

the next year, their first child was born and they named her katie
scarlett, after gerald's mother.  gerald was disappointed, for he
had wanted a son, but he nevertheless was pleased enough over his
small black-haired daughter to serve rum to every slave at
 
 ___________________________
 
 was a year old, and more healthy and vigorous than a
girl baby had any right to be, in mammy's opinion, ellen's second
child, named susan elinor, but always called suellen, was born,
and in due time came carreen, listed in the family bible as
caroline irene.  then followed three little boys, each of whom
died before he had learned to walk--three little boys who now lay
under the twisted cedars in the burying ground a hundred yards
from the house, beneath three stones, each bearing the name of
"gerald o'hara, jr."

from the day when ellen first came to tara, the place had been
transformed.  if she was only fifteen years old, she was
nevertheless ready for the responsibilities of the mistress of a
plantation.  before marriage, young girls must be, above all other
things, sweet, gentle, beautiful and ornamental, but, after
marriage, they were expected to manage households that numbered a
hundred people or more, white and black, and they were trained
with that in view.

ellen had been given this prepa
 
 ___________________________
 
t one minute by the clock.  we'll be getting to
twelve oaks in a little bit, and every man there, old and young,
wanting to know about the horses.  ah, but it's breaking me heart
to see such a fine pretty lady as your mother so stingy with her
beasts!  now, where's your patriotism, mrs. tarleton?  does the
confederacy mean nothing to you at all?"

"ma," cried small betsy, "randa's sitting on my dress and i'm
getting all wrinkled."

"well, push randa off you, betsy, and hush.  now, listen to me,
gerald o'hara," she retorted, her eyes beginning to snap.  "don't
you go throwing the confederacy in my face!  i reckon the
confederacy means as much to me as it does to you, me with four
boys in the troop and you with none.  but my boys can take care of
themselves and my horses can't.  i'd gladly give the horses free
of charge if i knew they were going to be ridden by boys i know,
gentlemen used to thoroughbreds.  no, i wouldn't hesitate a
minute.  but let my beauties be at the mercy of back-woodsmen and
cr
 
 ___________________________
 
ver would be any different and now scarlett realized the truth
and accepted it without emotion--that until he died gerald would
always be waiting for ellen, always listening for her.  he was in
some dim borderline country where time was standing still and ellen
was always in the next room.  the mainspring of his existence was
taken away when she died and with it had gone his bounding
assurance, his impudence and his restless vitality.  ellen was the
audience before which the blustering drama of gerald o'hara had
been played.  now the curtain had been rung down forever, the
footlights dimmed and the audience suddenly vanished, while the
stunned old actor remained on his empty stage, waiting for his
cues.

that morning the house was still, for everyone except scarlett,
wade and the three sick girls was in the swamp hunting the sow.
even gerald had aroused a little and stumped off across the
furrowed fields, one hand on pork's arm and a coil of rope in the
other.  suellen and careen had cried themselv
 
 ___________________________
 
 and, at such times, she did not
seem to care what she said or how much it hurt.  clouds of gloom
hung over the house on such occasions.  frank went early to the
store and stayed late.  pitty scrambled into her bedroom like a
rabbit panting for its burrow.  wade and uncle peter retired to the
carriage house and cookie kept to her kitchen and forebore to raise
her voice to praise the lord in song.  only mammy endured
scarlett's temper with equanimity and mammy had had many years of
training with gerald o'hara and his explosions.

scarlett did not mean to be short tempered and she really wanted to
make frank a good wife, for she was fond of him and grateful for
his help in saving tara.  but he did try her patience to the
breaking point so often and in so many different ways.

she could never respect a man who let her run over him and the
timid, hesitant attitude he displayed in any unpleasant situation,
with her or with others, irritated her unbearably.  but she could
have overlooked these things and
 
 ___________________________
 
she had shot one man
and she would love, yes, love to shoot another.  she would--

melanie who feared to venture onto her own front porch was appalled
by such threats.

"oh, you must not risk yourself!  i should die if anything happened
to you!  oh, please--"

"i will!  i will!  i will walk--"

melanie looked at her and saw that this was not the hysteria of a
woman still weak from childbirth.  there was the same breakneck,
headlong determination in scarlett's face that melanie had often
seen in gerald o'hara's face when his mind was made up.  she put
her arms around scarlett's waist and held her tightly.

"it's all my fault for not being brave like you and for keeping
ashley at home with me all this time when he should have been at
the mill.  oh, dear!  i'm such a ninny!  darling, i'll tell ashley
i'm not a bit frightened and i'll come over and stay with you and
aunt pitty and he can go back to work and--"

not even to herself would scarlett admit that she did not think
ashley could cope with the s