nd a cynical humor in his mouth as he smiled at her,
and scarlett caught her breath.  she felt that she should be
insulted by such a look and was annoyed with herself because she did
not feel insulted.  she did not know who he could be, but there was
undeniably a look of good blood in his dark face.  it showed in the
thin hawk nose over the full red lips, the high forehead and the
wide-set eyes.

she dragged her eyes away from his without smiling back, and he
turned as someone called:  "rhett!  rhett butler!  come here!  i
want you to meet the most hardhearted girl in georgia."

rhett butler?  the name had a familiar sound, somehow connected
with something pleasantly scandalous, but her mind was on ashley
and she dismissed the thought.

"i must run upstairs and smooth my hair," she told stuart and
brent, who were trying to get her cornered from the crowd.  "you
boys wait for me and don't run off with any other girl or i'll be
furious."

she could see that stuart was going to be difficult to handle
 
 ___________________________
 
want to eat
barbecue with you.  and don't you go off philandering with those
other girls, because i'm mighty jealous," came the incredible
words from red lips with a dimple on each side; and briskly black
lashes swept demurely over green eyes.

"i won't," he finally managed to breathe, never dreaming that she
was thinking he looked like a calf waiting for the butcher.

tapping him lightly on the arm with her folded fan, she turned to
start up the stairs and her eyes again fell on the man called
rhett butler who stood alone a few feet away from charles.
evidently he had overheard the whole conversation, for he grinned
up at her as maliciously as a tomcat, and again his eyes went over
her, in a gaze totally devoid of the deference she was accustomed
to.

"god's nightgown!" said scarlett to herself in indignation, using
gerald's favorite oath.  "he looks as if--as if he knew what i
looked like without my shimmy," and, tossing her head, she went up
the steps.

in the bedroom where the wraps were laid,
 
 ___________________________
 
m
here, but he was visiting mr. kennedy in jonesboro--something
about buying cotton--and, of course, mr. kennedy had to bring him
along with him.  he couldn't just go off and leave him."

"what is the matter with him?"

"my dear, he isn't received!"

"not really!"

"no."

scarlett digested this in silence, for she had never before been
under the same roof with anyone who was not received.  it was very
exciting.

"what did he do?"

"oh, scarlett, he has the most terrible reputation.  his name is
rhett butler and he's from charleston and his folks are some of
the nicest people there, but they won't even speak to him.  caro
rhett told me about him last summer.  he isn't any kin to her
family, but she knows all about him, everybody does.  he was
expelled from west point.  imagine!  and for things too bad for
caro to know.  and then there was that business about the girl he
didn't marry."

"do tell me!"

"darling, don't you know anything?  caro told me all about it last
summer and her mama would die if
 
 ___________________________
 
eave charleston and now nobody
receives him," finished cathleen triumphantly, and just in time,
for dilcey came back into the room to oversee the toilet of her
charge.

"did she have a baby?" whispered scarlett in cathleen's ear.

cathleen shook her head violently.  "but she was ruined just the
same," she hissed back.

i wish i had gotten ashley to compromise me, thought scarlett
suddenly.  he'd be too much of a gentleman not to marry me.  but
somehow, unbidden, she had a feeling of respect for rhett butler
for refusing to marry a girl who was a fool.



scarlett sat on a high rosewood ottoman, under the shade of a huge
oak in the rear of the house, her flounces and ruffles billowing
about her and two inches of green morocco slippers--all that a
lady could show and still remain a lady--peeping from beneath
them.  she had scarcely touched plate in her hands and seven
cavaliers about her.  the barbecue had reached its peak and the
warm air was full of laughter and talk, the click of silver on
porcel
 
 ___________________________
 
y.  "i declare," she
whispered to the fluttering matrons about her, "he gets worse
every day.  would you believe it, this very morning he said to
mary--and she's only sixteen:  'now, missy . . .'"  and the voice
went off into a whisper as the granddaughter slipped out to try to
induce mr. mcrae to return to his seat in the shade.

of all the group that milled about under the trees, girls smiling
excitedly, men talking impassionedly, there was only one who
seemed calm.  scarlett's eyes turned to rhett butler, who leaned
against a tree, his hands shoved deep in his trouser pockets.  he
stood alone, since mr. wilkes had left his side, and had uttered
no word as the conversation grew hotter.  the red lips under the
close-clipped black mustache curled down and there was a glint of
amused contempt in his black eyes--contempt, as if he listened to
the braggings of children.  a very disagreeable smile, scarlett
thought.  he listened quietly until stuart tarleton, his red hair
tousled and his eyes gleaming
 
 ___________________________
 
, repeated:  "why, we could lick them
in a month!  gentlemen always fight better than rabble.  a month--
why, one battle--"

"gentlemen," said rhett butler, in a flat drawl that bespoke his
charleston birth, not moving from his position against the tree or
taking his hands from his pockets, "may i say a word?"

there was contempt in his manner as in his eyes, contempt overlaid
with an air of courtesy that somehow burlesqued their own manners.

the group turned toward him and accorded him the politeness always
due an outsider.

"has any one of you gentlemen ever thought that there's not a
cannon factory south of the mason-dixon line?  or how few ir
 
 ___________________________
 
of these things."

"why, he means the boys are a passel of fools!" thought scarlett
indignantly, the hot blood coming to her cheeks.

evidently, she was not the only one to whom this idea occurred,
for several of the boys were beginning to stick out their chins.
john wilkes casually but swiftly came back to his place beside the
speaker, as if to impress on all present that this man was his
guest and that, moreover, there were ladies present.

"the trouble with most of us southerners," continued rhett butler,
"is that we either don't travel enough or we don't profit enough
by our travels.  now, of course, all you gentlemen are well
traveled.  but what have you seen?  europe and new york and
philadelphia and, of course, the ladies have been to saratoga" (he
bowed slightly to the group under the arbor).  "you've seen the
hotels and the museums and the balls and the gambling houses.  and
you've come home believing that there's no place like the south.
as for me, i was charleston born, but i have spent
 
 ___________________________
 
ugh
he realized that everyone present knew just why he no longer lived
in charleston, and cared not at all if they did know.  "i have
seen many things that you all have not seen.  the thousands of
immigrants who'd be glad to fight for the yankees for food and a
few dollars, the factories, the foundries, the shipyards, the iron
and coal mines--all the things we haven't got.  why, all we have
is cotton and slaves and arrogance.  they'd lick us in a month."

for a tense moment, there was silence.  rhett butler removed a
fine linen handkerchief from his coat pocket and idly flicked dust
from his sleeve.  then an ominous murmuring arose in the crowd and
from under the arbor came a humming as unmistakable as that of a
hive of newly disturbed bees.  even while she felt the hot blood
of wrath still in her cheeks, something in scarlett's practical
mind prompted the thought that what this man said was right, and
it sounded like common sense.  why, she'd never even seen a
factory, or known anyone who had see
 
 ___________________________
 
eak the silence.  she must do
something or go mad.  she picked up the bowl and hurled it
viciously across the room toward the fireplace.  it barely cleared
the tall back of the sofa and splintered with a little crash
against the marble mantelpiece.

"this," said a voice from the depths of the sofa, "is too much."

nothing had ever startled or frightened her so much, and her mouth
went too dry for her to utter a sound.  she caught hold of the
back of the chair, her knees going weak under her, as rhett butler
rose from the sofa where he had been lying and made her a bow of
exaggerated politeness.

"it is bad enough to have an afternoon nap disturbed by such a
passage as i've been forced to hear, but why should my life be
endangered?"

he was real.  he wasn't a ghost.  but, saints preserve us, he had
heard everything!  she rallied her forces into a semblance of
dignity.

"sir, you should have made known your presence."

"indeed?"  his white teeth gleamed and his bold dark eyes laughed
at her.  "but y
 
 ___________________________
 
oo."

"if you should ask me," said honey with mysterious importance,
"there's only one person she does give a rap about.  and that's
ashley!"

as the whisperings merged together violently, questioning,
interrupting, scarlett felt herself go cold with fear and
humiliation.  honey was a fool, a silly, a simpleton about men,
but she had a feminine instinct about other women that scarlett
had underestimated.  the mortification and hurt pride that she had
suffered in the library with ashley and with rhett butler were pin
pricks to this.  men could be trusted to keep their mouths shut,
even men like mr. butler, but with honey wilkes giving tongue like
a hound in the field, the entire county would know about it before
six o'clock.  and gerald had said only last night that he wouldn't
be having the county laughing at his daughter.  and how they would
all laugh now!  clammy perspiration, starting under her armpits,
began to creep down her ribs.

melanie's voice, measured and peaceful, a little reproving, r
 
 ___________________________
 
er seen, dancing in merciless merriment.  of all the people in
the world to turn up here, this terrible person who had witnessed
that scene with ashley which still gave her nightmares; this
odious wretch who ruined girls and was not received by nice
people; this despicable man who had said, and with good cause,
that she was not a lady.

at the sound of his voice, melanie turned and for the first time
in her life scarlett thanked god for the existence of her sister-
in-law.

"why--it's--it's mr. rhett butler, isn't it?" said melanie with a
little smile, putting out her hand.  "i met you--"

"on the happy occasion of the announcement of your betrothal," he
finished, bending over her hand.  "it is kind of you to recall
me."

"and what are you doing so far from charleston, mr. butler?"

"a boring matter of business, mrs. wilkes.  i will be in and out
of your town from now on.  i find i must not only bring in goods
but see to the disposal of them."

"bring in--" began melly, her brow wrinkling, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
 patriotic efforts have made this bazaar not only
a pecuniary success," he began, "but have transformed this rough
hall into a bower of loveliness, a fit garden for the charming
rosebuds i see about me."

everyone clapped approvingly.

"the ladies have given their best, not only of their time but of
the labor of their hands, and these beautiful objects in the
booths are doubly beautiful, made as they are by the fair hands of
our charming southern women."

there were more shouts of approval, and rhett butler who had been
lounging negligently against the counter at scarlett's side
whispered:  "pompous goat, isn't he?"

startled, at first horrified, at this lese majesty toward
atlanta's most beloved citizen, she stared reprovingly at him.
but the doctor did look like a goat with his gray chin whiskers
wagging away at a great rate, and with difficulty she stifled a
giggle.

"but these things are not enough.  the good ladies of the hospital
committee, whose cool hands have soothed many a suffering brow
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
brought back from the jaws of death our brave men wounded in the
bravest of all causes, know our needs.  i will not enumerate them.
we must have more money to buy medical supplies from england, and
we have with us tonight the intrepid captain who has so
successfully run the blockade for a year and who will run it again
to bring us the drugs we need.  captain rhett butler!"

though caught unawares, the blockader made a graceful bow--too
graceful, thought scarlett, trying to analyze it.  it was almost
as if he overdid his courtesy because his contempt for everybody
present was so great.  there was a loud burst of applause as he
bowed and a craning of necks from the ladies in the corner.  so
that was who poor charles hamilton's widow was carrying on with!
and charlie hardly dead a year!

"we need more gold and i am asking you for it," the doctor
continued.  "i am 
 
 ___________________________
 
l on metal and cries
of "wait--wait!  i've got it unfastened now.  there!"  maybelle
merriwether was pulling off her lovely twin bracelets from above
and below her elbows.  fanny elsing, crying "mamma, may i?" was
tearing from her curls the seed-pearl ornament set in heavy gold
which had been in the family for generations.  as each offering
went into the basket, there was applause and cheering.

the grinning little man was coming to their booth now, his basket
heavy on his arm, and as he passed rhett butler a handsome gold
cigar case was thrown carelessly into the basket.  when he came to
scarlett and rested his basket upon the counter, she shook her
head throwing wide her hands to show that she had nothing to give.
it was embarrassing to be the only person present who was giving
nothing.  and then she saw the bright gleam of her wide gold
wedding ring.

for a confused moment she tried to remember charles' face--how he
had looked when he slipped it on her finger.  but the memory was
blurred, blurr
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by the sudden feeling of irritation that memory
of him always brought to her.  charles--he was the reason why life
was over for her, why she was an old woman.

with a sudden wrench she seized the ring but it stuck.  the zouave
was moving toward melanie.

"wait!" cried scarlett.  "i have something for you!"  the ring
came off and, as she started to throw it into the basket, heaped
up with chains, watches, rings, pins and bracelets, she caught
rhett butler's eye.  his lips were twisted in a slight smile.
defiantly, she tossed the ring onto the top of the pile.

"oh, my darling!" whispered molly, clutching her arm, her eyes
blazing with love and pride.  "you brave, brave girl!  wait--
please, wait, lieutenant picard!  i have something for you, too!"

she was tugging at her own wedding ring, the ring scarlett knew
had never once left that finger since ashley put it there.
scarlett knew, as no one did, how much it meant to her.  it came
off with dif
 
 ___________________________
 
 was
moving toward the group of elderly ladies in the corner, scarlett
defiant, melanie with a look more pitiful than tears.  and neither
expression was lost on the man who stood beside them.

"if you hadn't been brave enough to do it, i would never have been
either," said melly, putting her arm about scarlett's waist and
giving her a gentle squeeze.  for a moment scarlett wanted to
shake her off and cry "name of god!" at the top of her lungs, as
gerald did when he was irritated, but she caught rhett butler's
eye and managed a very sour smile.  it was annoying the way melly
always misconstrued her motives--but perhaps that was far
preferable to having her suspect the truth.

"what a beautiful gesture," said rhett butler, softly.  "it is
such sacrifices as yours that hearten our brave lads in gray."

hot words bubbled to her lips and it was with difficulty that she
checked them.  there was mockery in everything he said.  she
disliked him heartily, lounging there against the booth.  but
there was so
 
 ___________________________
 
er had stated flatly and loudly that her
maybelle would never take part in such a proceeding; but as
maybelle's name was called most often and the amount went up to
seventy-five dollars, her protests began to dwindle.  scarlett
leaned her elbows on the counter and almost glared at the excited
laughing crowd surging about the platform, their hands full of
confederate paper money.

now, they would all dance--except her and the old ladies.  now
everyone would have a good time, except her.  she saw rhett butler
standing just below the doctor and, before she could change the
expression of her face, he saw her and one corner of his mouth
went down and one eyebrow went up.  she jerked her chin up and
turned away from him and suddenly she heard her own name called--
called in an unmistakable charleston voice that rang out above the
hubbub of other names.

"mrs. charles hamilton--one hundred and fifty dollars--in gold."

a sudden hush fell on the crowd both at the mention of the sum and
at the name.  scarl
 
 ___________________________
 
ighly desired girl present
and oh, best of all, at the prospect of dancing again.

"oh, i don't care!  i don't care what they say!" she whispered, as
a sweet madness swept over her.  she tossed her head and sped out
of the booth, tapping her heels like castanets, snapping open her
black silk fan to its widest.

for a fleeting instant she saw melanie's incredulous face, the
look on the chaperons' faces, the petulant girls, the enthusiastic
approval of the soldiers.

then she was on the floor and rhett butler was advancing toward
her through the aisle of the crowd, that nasty mocking smile on
his face.  but she didn't care--didn't care if he were abe lincoln
himself!  she was going to dance again.  she was going to lead the
reel.  she swept him a low curtsy and a dazzling smile and he
bowed, one hand on his frilled bosom.  levi, horrified, was quick
to cover the situation and bawled:  "choose yo' padners fo' de
ferginny reel!"

and the orchestra crashed into that best of all reel tunes,
"dixie."




 
 ___________________________
 
t perversely, pouring half a pitcher
of syrup over her waffles.  "he just does it for money.  he told
me so.  he doesn't care anything about the confederacy and he says
we're going to get licked.  but he dances divinely."

her audience was speechless with horror.

"i'm tired of sitting at home and i'm not going to do it any
longer.  if they all talked about me about last night, then my
reputation is already gone and it won't matter what else they
say."

it did not occur to her that the idea was rhett butler's.  it came
so patly and fitted so well with what she was thinking.

"oh!  what will your mother say when she hears?  what will she
think of me?"

a cold qualm of guilt assailed scarlett at the thought of ellen's
consternation, should she ever learn of her daughter's scandalous
conduct.  but she took heart at the thought of the twenty-five
miles between atlanta and tara.  miss pitty certainly wouldn't
tell ellen.  it would put her in such a bad light as a chaperon.
and if pitty didn't tattle, s
 
 ___________________________
 
o down," thought scarlett.  "after all he's my
father and poor pitty would die before she'd go."  besides, she
didn't want the servants to see gerald in his present condition.
and if peter tried to put him to bed, he might get unruly.  pork
was the only one who knew how to handle him.

she pinned the wrapper close about her throat, lit her bedside
candle and hurried down the dark stairs into the front hall.
setting the candle on the stand, she unlocked the door and in the
wavering light she saw rhett butler, not a ruffle disarranged,
supporting her small, thickset father.  the "lament" had evidently
been gerald's swan song for he was frankly hanging onto his
companion's arm.  his hat was gone, his crisp long hair was
tumbled in a white mane, his cravat was under one ear, and there
were liquor stains down his shirt bosom.

"your father, i believe?" said captain butler, his eyes amused in
his swarthy face.  he took in her dishabille in one glance that
seemed to penetrate through her wrapper.

"bring
 
 ___________________________
 
in the center of a crowd of men.  and men fell in love so easily,
after you did little things for them at the hospital.  she
wouldn't mind the hospital so much now.  men were so easily
stirred when they had been ill.  they fell into a clever girl's
hand just like the ripe peaches at tara when the trees were gently
shaken.

she went back toward her father with the reviving liquor, thanking
heaven that the famous o'hara head had not been able to survive
last night's bout and wondering suddenly if rhett butler had had
anything to do with that.



chapter xi


on an afternoon of the following week, scarlett came home from the
hospital weary and indignant.  she was tired from standing on her
feet all morning and irritable because mrs. merriwether had
scolded her sharply for sitting on a soldier's bed while she
dressed his wounded arm.  aunt pitty and melanie, bonneted in
their best, were on the porch with wade and prissy, ready for
their weekly round of calls.  scarlett asked to be excused from
accompa
 
 ___________________________
 
overing acorns with cloth for buttons--and pitty lacked the moral
stamina to refuse them.  besides, she had a childish love of
surprise packages and could not resist opening his gifts.  and,
having once opened them, she did not feel that she could refuse
them.  then, having accepted his gifts, she could not summon
courage enough to tell him his reputation made it improper for him
to call on three lone women who had no male protector.  aunt pitty
always felt that she needed a male protector when rhett butler was
in the house.

"i don't know what it is about him," she would sigh helplessly.
"but--well, i think he'd be a nice, attractive man if i could just
feel that--well, that deep down in his heart he respected women."

since the return of her wedding ring, melanie had felt that rhett
was a gentleman of rare refinement and delicacy and she was
shocked at this remark.  he was unfailingly courteous to her, but
she was a little timid with him, largely because she was shy with
any man she had not know
 
 ___________________________
 
 professional gambling were
included in his career, as atlanta heard it.

there was hardly a family in georgia who could not own to their
sorrow at least one male member or relative who gambled, losing
money, houses, land and slaves.  but that was different.  a man
could gamble himself to poverty and still be a gentleman, but a
professional gambler could never be anything but an outcast.

had it not been for the upset conditions due to the war and his
own services to the confederate government, rhett butler would
never have been received in atlanta.  but now, even the most
strait laced felt that patriotism called upon them to be more
broad minded.  the more sentimental were inclined to view that the
black sheep of the butler family had repented of his evil ways and
was making an attempt to atone for his sins.  so the ladies felt
in duty bound to stretch a point, especially in the case of so
intrepid a blockader.  everyone knew now that the fate of the
confederacy rested as much upon the skill of t
 
 ___________________________
 
a moment.  he
looked pointedly at mrs. elsing's flat bosom, grinned suddenly
and, bowing, made his exit.



mrs. merriwether rode home in aunt pitty's carriage, and scarcely
had the four ladies seated themselves when she exploded.

"there now, pittypat hamilton!  i hope you are satisfied!"

"with what?" cried pitty, apprehensively.

"with the conduct of that wretched butler man you've been
harboring."

pittypat fluttered, too upset by the accusation to recall that
mrs. merriwether had also been rhett butler's hostess on several
occasions.  scarlett and melanie thought of this, but bred to
politeness to their elders, refrained from remarking on the
matter.  instead they studiously looked down at their mittened
hands.

"he insulted us all and the confederacy too," said mrs. merriwether,
and her stout bust heaved violently beneath its glittering
passementerie trimmings.  "saying that we were fighting for money!
saying that our leaders had lied to us!  he should be put in jail.
yes, he should.  i shal
 
 ___________________________
 
et that scamp come into your
house again!"

"oh," mumbled pitty, helplessly, looking as if she wished she were
dead.  she looked appealingly at the two girls who kept their eyes
cast down and then hopefully toward uncle peter's erect back.  she
knew he was listening attentively to every word and she hoped he
would turn and take a hand in the conversation, as he frequently
did.  she hoped he would say:  "now, miss dolly, you let miss
pitty be," but peter made no move.  he disapproved heartily of
rhett butler and poor pitty knew it.  she sighed and said:  "well,
dolly, if you think--"

"i do think," returned mrs. merriwether firmly.  "i can't imagine
what possessed you to receive him in the first place.  after this
afternoon, there won't be a decent home in town that he'll be
welcome in.  do get up some gumption and forbid him your house."

she turned a sharp eye on the girls.  "i hope you two are marking
my words," she continued, "for it's partly your fault, being so
pleasant to him.  just tell him
 
 ___________________________
 
"folks'll talk sumpin'
scan'lous.  wait till us gits home."

scarlett said nothing.  she did not even squeeze the hand that
melanie had inserted into her palm for comfort.  she had read
ashley's letters for only one purpose--to assure herself that he
still loved her.  now melanie had given a new meaning to passages
in the letters which scarlett's eyes had barely seen.  it shocked
her to realize that anyone as absolutely perfect as ashley could
have any thought in common with such a reprobate as rhett butler.
she thought:  "they both see the truth of this war, but ashley is
willing to die about it and rhett isn't.  i think that shows
rhett's good sense."  she paused a moment, horror struck that she
could have such a thought about ashley.  "they both see the same
unpleasant truth, but rhett likes to look it in the face and
enrage people by talking about it--and ashley can hardly bear to
face it."

it was very bewildering.



chapter xiii


under mrs. merriwether's goading, dr. meade took action, in 
 
 ___________________________
 

prices would be higher and the money worthless.

to make matters worse, there was only one railroad line from
wilmington to richmond and, while thousands of barrels of flour
and boxes of bacon spoiled and rotted in wayside stations for want
of transportation, speculators with wines, taffetas and coffee to
sell seemed always able to get their goods to richmond two days
after they were landed at wilmington.

the rumor which had been creeping about underground was now being
openly discussed, that rhett butler not only ran his own four
boats and sold the cargoes at unheard-of prices but bought up the
cargoes of other boats and held them for rises in prices.  it was
said that he was at the head of a combine worth more than a
million dollars, with wilmington as its headquarters for the
purpose of buying blockade goods on the docks.  they had dozens of
warehouses in that city and in richmond, so the story ran, and the
warehouses were crammed with food and clothing that were being
held for higher prices.
 
 ___________________________
 
lease but keep your mouth shut,
everything would be so much nicer."

"that's your system, isn't it, my green-eyed hypocrite?  scarlett,
scarlett!  i hoped for more courageous conduct from you.  i
thought the irish said what they thought and the divvil take the
hindermost.  tell me truthfully, don't you sometimes almost burst
from keeping your mouth shut?"

"well--yes," scarlett confessed reluctantly.  "i do get awfully
bored when they talk about the cause, morning, noon and night.
but goodness, rhett butler, if i admitted it nobody would speak to
me and none of the boys would dance with me!"

"ah, yes, and one must be danced with, at all costs.  well, i
admire your self-control but i do not find myself equal to it.
nor can i masquerade in a cloak of romance and patriotism, no
matter how convenient it might be.  there are enough stupid
patriots who are risking every cent they have in the blockade and
who are going to come out of this war paupers.  they don't need me
among their number, either to br
 
 ___________________________
 
e gutter.  or, better still buy
masses for your soul.  i'm sure your soul could do with a few
masses."

she laughed unwillingly, and the laughing reflection under the
green brim decided her instantly.

"whatever are you trying to do to me?"

"i'm tempting you with fine gifts until your girlish ideals are
quite worn away and you are at my mercy," he said.  "'accept only
candy and flowers from gentlemen, dearie,'" he mimicked, and she
burst into a giggle.

"you are a clever, black-hearted wretch, rhett butler, and you
know very well this bonnet's too pretty to be refused."

his eyes mocked her, even while they complimented her beauty.

"of course, you can tell miss pitty that you gave me a sample of
taffeta and green silk and drew a picture of the bonnet and i
extorted fifty dollars from you for it."

"no.  i shall say one hundred dollars and she'll tell everybody in
town and everybody will be green with envy and talk about my
extravagance.  but rhett, you mustn't bring me anything else so
expensive
 
 ___________________________
 
might
jerk the bonnet right off her head and give it to some other girl.
on the other hand, if she permitted one chaste peck, he might
bring her other lovely presents in the hope of getting another
kiss.  men set such a store by kisses, though heaven alone knew
why.  and lots of times, after one kiss they fell completely in
love with a girl and made most entertaining spectacles of
themselves, provided the girl was clever and withheld her kisses
after the first one.  it would be exciting to have rhett butler in
love with her and admitting it and begging for a kiss or a smile.
yes, she would let him kiss her.

but he made no move to kiss her.  she gave him a sidelong glance
from under her lashes and murmured encouragingly.

"so you always get paid, do you?  and what do you expect to get
from me?"

"that remains to be seen."

"well, if you think i'll marry you to pay for the bonnet, i
won't," she said daringly and gave her head a saucy flirt that set
the plume to bobbing.

his white teeth gleamed und
 
 ___________________________
 
think it's all right to use this kind--well, money made--er--this
way for the boys?  don't you think that maybe god will understand
that she wanted to help and won't care if it is tainted?  when i
think of how many things the hospital needs--"

but scarlett was not listening.  she was looking at the dirty
handkerchief, and humiliation and fury were filling her.  there
was a monogram in the corner in which were the initials "r. k. b."
in her top drawer was a handkerchief just like this, one that
rhett butler had lent her only yesterday to wrap about the stems
of wild flowers they had picked.  she had planned to return it to
him when he came to supper tonight.

so rhett consorted with that vile watling creature and gave her
money.  that was where the contribution to the hospital came from.
blockade gold.  and to think that rhett would have the gall to
look a decent woman in the face after being with that creature!
and to think that she could have believed he was in love with her!
this proved he coul
 
 ___________________________
 
 real beau at the front that no one suspected?)
mrs. merriwether sat in her carriage patting maybelle's hand.
maybelle looked so very pregnant it was a disgrace for her to be
out in public, even if she did have her shawl carefully draped over
her.  why should she be so worried?  nobody had heard that the
louisiana troops were in pennsylvania.  probably her hairy little
zouave was safe in richmond this very minute.

there was a movement on the outskirts of the crowd and those on
foot gave way as rhett butler carefully edged his horse toward aunt
pitty's carriage.  scarlett thought:  he's got courage, coming here
at this time when it wouldn't take anything to make this mob tear
him to pieces because he isn't in uniform.  as he came nearer, she
thought she might be the first to rend him.  how dared he sit there
on that fine horse, in shining boots and handsome white linen suit,
so sleek and well fed, smoking an expensive cigar, when ashley and
all the other boys were fighting the yankees, barefooted,
 
 ___________________________
 
mething a wife could give a husband, a
shirt, a pair of gauntlets, a hat.  oh, yes, a hat by all means.
that little flat-topped forage cap ashley was wearing looked
ridiculous.  scarlett had always hated them.  what if stonewall
jackson had worn one in preference to a slouch felt?  that didn't
make them any more dignified looking.  but the only hats obtainable
in atlanta were crudely made wool hats, and they were tackier than
the monkey-hat forage caps.

when she thought of hats, she thought of rhett butler.  he had so
many hats, wide panamas for summer, tall beavers for formal
occasions, hunting hats, slouch hats of tan and black and blue.
what need had he for so many when her darling ashley rode in the
rain with moisture dripping down his collar from the back of his
cap?

"i'll make rhett give me that new black felt of his," she decided.
"and i'll put a gray ribbon around the brim and sew ashley's wreath
on it and it will look lovely."

she paused and thought it might be difficult to get the hat
 
 ___________________________
 
u saying good-by to me here than shivering at
the depot.  there's so much to memories."

instantly she abandoned her plan.  if india and honey who disliked
her so much were to be present at the leave taking, she would have
no chance for a private word.

"then i won't go," she said.  "see, ashley!  i've another present
for you."

a little shy, now that the time had come to give it to him, she
unrolled the package.  it was a long yellow sash, made of thick
china silk and edged with heavy fringe.  rhett butler had brought
her a yellow shawl from havana several months before, a shawl
gaudily embroidered with birds and flowers in magenta and blue.
during this last week, she had patiently picked out all the
embroidery and cut up the square of silk and stitched it into a
sash length.

"scarlett, it's beautiful!  did you make it yourself?  then i'll
value it all the more.  put it on me, my dear.  the boys will be
green with envy when they see me in the glory of my new coat and
sash."

she wrapped the brig
 
 ___________________________
 
and prices rose higher and higher, the public
outcry against the speculators grew louder and more venomous.  in
those early days of 1864, no newspaper could be opened that did not
carry scathing editorials denouncing the speculators as vultures
and bloodsucking leeches and calling upon the government to put
them down with a hard hand.  the government did its best, but the
efforts came to nothing, for the government was harried by many
things.

against no one was feeling more bitter than against rhett butler.
he had sold his boats when blockading grew too hazardous, and he
was now openly engaged in food speculation.  the stories about him
that came back to atlanta from richmond and wilmington made those
who had received him in other days writhe with shame.

in spite of all these trials and tribulations, atlanta's ten
thousand population had grown to double that number during the war.
even the blockade had added to atlanta's prestige.  from time
immemorial, the coast cities had dominated the south, 
 
 ___________________________
 
d hardly be
dragged away from the telegraph office and she met every train
hoping for letters.  she was sick now, her pregnancy making itself
felt in many unpleasant ways, but she refused to obey dr. meade's
commands and stay in bed.  a feverish energy possessed her and
would not let her be still; and at night, long after scarlett had
gone to bed, she could hear her walking the floor in the next room.

one afternoon, she came home from town, driven by the frightened
uncle peter and supported by rhett butler.  she had fainted at the
telegraph office and rhett, passing by and observing the
excitement, had escorted her home.  he carried her up the stairs to
her bedroom and while the alarmed household fled hither and yon for
hot bricks, blankets and whisky, he propped her on the pillows of
her bed.

"mrs. wilkes," he questioned abruptly, "you are going to have a
baby, are you not?"

had melanie not been so faint, so sick, so heartsore, she would
have collapsed at his question.  even with women friends
 
 ___________________________
 
shley wilkes' capture, though the connection
between the two events did not occur to him.  scarlett and melanie
both were thinking of ashley, as they always did when urgent tasks
or the necessity of carrying on a conversation did not divert them.
scarlett was thinking bitterly, sorrowfully:  he must be dead or
else we would have heard.  melanie, stemming the tide of fear again
and again, through endless hours, was telling herself:  "he can't
be dead.  i'd know it--i'd feel it if he were dead."  rhett butler
lounged in the shadows, his long legs in their elegant boots
crossed negligently, his dark face an unreadable blank.  in his
arms wade slept contentedly, a cleanly picked wishbone in his small
hand.  scarlett always permitted wade to sit up late when rhett
called because the shy child was fond of him, and rhett oddly
enough seemed to be fond of wade.  generally scarlett was annoyed
by the child's presence, but he always behaved nicely in rhett's
arms.  as for aunt pitty, she was nervously tryin
 
 ___________________________
 
'm going to ask fanny elsing, too.  mrs. elsing
begged me to try to do something to arouse her and make her see
people--"

"oh, but auntie, it's cruel to force her when poor dallas has only
been dead--"

"now, melly, i shall cry with vexation if you argue with me.  i
guess i'm your auntie and i know what's what.  and i want a party."

so aunt pitty had her party, and, at the last minute, a guest she
did not expect, or desire, arrived.  just when the smell of roast
rooster was filling the house, rhett butler, back from one of his
mysterious trips, knocked at the door, with a large box of bonbons
packed in paper lace under his arm and a mouthful of two-edged
compliments for her.  there was nothing to do but invite him to
stay, although aunt pitty knew how the doctor and mrs. meade felt
about him and how bitter fanny was against any man not in uniform.
neither the meades nor the elsings would have spoken to him on the
street, but in a friend's home they would, of course, have to be
polite to him.  be
 
 ___________________________
 
  it was an imposition on her and she knew that
when the wounded came in on the noon train there would be enough
work to keep her busy until night-fall--and probably without
anything to eat.

she went hastily up the two short blocks to peachtree street,
breathing the unfouled air in as deep gulps as her tightly laced
corset would permit.  she was standing on the corner, uncertain as
to what she would do next, ashamed to go home to aunt pitty's but
determined not to go back to the hospital, when rhett butler drove
by.

"you look like the ragpicker's child," he observed, his eyes taking
in the mended lavender calico, streaked with perspiration and
splotched here and there with water which had slopped from the
basin.  scarlett was furious with embarrassment and indignation.
why did he always notice women's clothing and why was he so rude as
to remark upon her present untidiness?

"i don't want to hear a word out of you.  you get out and help me
in and drive me somewhere where nobody will see me.  i w
 
 ___________________________
 
upon the
town.  aunt pitty disapproved highly of these last, for she felt
they had come to atlanta for no reason at all except to catch
husbands, and the shamelessness of it made her wonder what the
world was coming to.  scarlett disapproved, too.  she did not care
for the eager competition furnished by the sixteen-year-olds whose
fresh cheeks and bright smiles made one forget their twice-turned
frocks and patched shoes.  her own clothes were prettier and newer
than most, thanks to the material rhett butler had brought her on
the last boat he ran in, but, after all, she was nineteen and
getting along and men had a way of chasing silly young things.

a widow with a child was at a disadvantage with these pretty
minxes, she thought.  but in these exciting days her widowhood and
her motherhood weighed less heavily upon her than ever before.
between hospital duties in the day time and parties at night, she
hardly ever saw wade.  sometimes she actually forgot, for long
stretches, that she had a child.


 
 ___________________________
 
se as her heart
quickened and she tried to draw back her hand.  she had not
bargained on this--this treacherous warm tide of feeling that made
her want to run her hands through his hair, to feel his lips upon
her mouth.

she wasn't in love with him, she told herself confusedly.  she was
in love with ashley.  but how to explain this feeling that made her
hands shake and the pit of her stomach grow cold?

he laughed softly.

"don't pull away!  i won't hurt you!"

"hurt me?  i'm not afraid of you, rhett butler, or of any man in
shoe leather!" she cried, furious that her voice shook as well as
her hands.

"an admirable sentiment, but do lower your voice.  mrs. wilkes
might hear you.  and pray compose yourself."  he sounded as though
delighted at her flurry.

"scarlett, you do like me, don't you?"

that was more like what she was expecting.

"well, sometimes," she answered cautiously.  "when you aren't
acting like a varmint."

he laughed again and held the palm of her hand against his hard
cheek.

"i t
 
 ___________________________
 
 her suddenly bumping heart thudded out with each
beat.  the yankees are coming!

"de yankees is comin'!" bawled prissy, shrinking close to her.
"oh, miss scarlett, dey'll kill us all!  dey'll run dey baynits in
our stummicks!  dey'll--"

"oh, hush!"  it was terrifying enough to think these things without
hearing them put into trembling words.  renewed fear swept her.
what could she do?  how could she escape?  where could she turn for
help?  every friend had failed her.

suddenly she thought of rhett butler and calm dispelled her fears.
why hadn't she thought of him this morning when she had been
tearing about like a chicken with its head off?  she hated him, but
he was strong and smart and he wasn't afraid of the yankees.  and
he was still in town.  of course, she was mad at him.  but she
could overlook such things at a time like this.  and he had a horse
and carriage, too.  oh, why hadn't she thought of him before!  he
could take them all away from this doomed place, away from the
yankees, somew
 
 ___________________________
 
 one lef.  an' he say,
ah done stole hawses befo' dis night.  tell her ah git her a hawse
effen ah gits shot fer it.  den he laugh agin an' say, cut an' run
home.  an' befo' ah gits started ker-bboom!  off goes a noise an'
ah lak ter drap in mah tracks an' he tell me twain't nuthin' but de
ammernition our gempmums blown' up so's de yankees don't git it
an'--"

"he is coming?  he's going to bring a horse?"

"so he say."

she drew a long breath of relief.  if there was any way of getting
a horse, rhett butler would get one.  a smart man, rhett.  she
would forgive him anything if he got them out of this mess.
escape!  and with rhett she would have no fear.  rhett would
protect them.  thank god for rhett!  with safety in view she turned
practical.

"wake wade up and dress him and pack some clothes for all of us.
put them in the small trunk.  and don't tell miss mellie we're
going.  not yet.  but wrap the baby in a couple of thick towels and
be sure and pack his clothes."

prissy still clung to her ski
 
 ___________________________
 
home!"

tears of fright and hysteria streamed down her face as she finally
gave way under the long strain.  she beat on his chest with her
fists and screamed again:  "i will!  i will!  if i have to walk
every step of the way!"

suddenly she was in his arms, her wet cheek against the starched
ruffle of his shirt, her beating hands stilled against him.  his
hands caressed her tumbled hair gently, soothingly, and his voice
was gentle too.  so gentle, so quiet, so devoid of mockery, it did
not seem rhett butler's voice at all but the voice of some kind
strong stranger who smelled of brandy and tobacco and horses,
comforting smells because they reminded her of gerald.

"there, there, darling," he said softly.  "don't cry.  you shall go
home, my brave little girl.  you shall go home.  don't cry."

she felt something brush her hair and wondered vaguely through her
tumult if it were his lips.  he was so tender, so infinitely
soothing, she longed to stay in his arms forever.  with such strong
arms about he
 
 ___________________________
 
under her chin by a piece of twine.  she rode
up to the front porch but did not dismount, and scarlett and
melanie, who had been watching the sunset, went down the steps to
meet her.  cathleen was as white as cade had been the day scarlett
called, white and hard and brittle, as if her face would shatter if
she spoke.  but her back was erect and her head was high as she
nodded to them.

scarlett suddenly remembered the day of the wilkes barbecue when
she and cathleen had whispered together about rhett butler.  how
pretty and fresh cathleen had been that day in a swirl of blue
organdie with fragrant roses at her sash and little black velvet
slippers laced about her small ankles.  and now there was not a
trace of that girl in the stiff figure sitting on the mule.

"i won't get down, thank you," she said.  "i just came to tell you
that i'm going to be married."

"what!"

"who to?"

"cathy, how grand!"

"when?"

"tomorrow," said cathleen quietly and there was something in her
voice which took the eager
 
 ___________________________
 
but, seeing her
shiver, he took his coat and placed it about her shoulders.

"well," she said finally, "doesn't it occur to you that we'll have
to get the money somewhere?"

"yes," he said, "but where?"

"i'm asking you," she replied, annoyed.  the sense of relief at
unburdening herself had disappeared.  even if he couldn't help, why
didn't he say something comforting, even if it was only:  "oh, i'm
so sorry."

he smiled.

"in all these months since i've been home i've only heard of one
person, rhett butler, who actually has money," he said.

aunt pittypat had written melanie the week before that rhett was
back in atlanta with a carriage and two fine horses and pocketfuls
of greenbacks.  she had intimated, however, that he didn't come by
them honestly.  aunt pitty had a theory, largely shared by atlanta,
that rhett had managed to get away with the mythical millions of
the confederate treasury.

"don't let's talk about him," said scarlett shortly.  "he's a skunk
if ever there was one.  what's to be
 
 ___________________________
 
f the possibility of this final insult to tara,
her heart pounded so hard she could scarcely breathe.  she was
trying to get her mind on her problem, trying to figure some way
out, but each time she collected her thoughts, fresh gusts of rage
and fear shook her.  there must be some way out, there must be
someone somewhere who had money she could borrow.  money couldn't
just dry up and blow away.  somebody had to have money.  then the
laughing words of ashley came back to her:

"only one person, rhett butler . . . who has money."

rhett butler.  she walked quickly into the parlor and shut the door
behind her.  the dim gloom of drawn blinds and winter twilight
closed about her.  no one would think of hunting for her here and
she wanted time to think, undisturbed.  the idea which had just
occurred to her was so simple she wondered why she had not thought
of it before.

"i'll get the money from rhett.  i'll sell him the diamond earbobs.
or i'll borrow the money from him and let him keep the earbobs ti
 
 ___________________________
 
s just upset and frightened that night.  oh, men
are so conceited they'll believe anything that flatters them. . . .
i must never let him dream what straits we're in, not till i've got
him.  oh, he mustn't know!  if he even suspected how poor we are,
he'd know it was his money i wanted and not himself.  after all,
there's no way he could know, for even aunt pitty doesn't know the
worst.  and after i've married him, he'll have to help us.  he
can't let his wife's people starve."

his wife.  mrs. rhett butler.  something of repulsion, buried deep
beneath her cold thinking, stirred faintly and then was stilled.
she remembered the embarrassing and disgusting events of her brief
honeymoon with charles, his fumbling hands, his awkwardness, his
incomprehensible emotions--and wade hampton.

"i won't think about it now.  i'll bother about it after i've
married him. . . ."

after she had married him.  memory rang a bell.  a chill went down
her spine.  she remembered again that night on aunt pitty's porch,
r
 
 ___________________________
 
ng the flounced green dress she had worn when she first
came out of mourning, the dress she wore with the green plumed
bonnet he had brought her and she recalled the approving
compliments he had paid her.  she remembered, too, with hate
sharpened by envy the red plaid dress, the red-topped boots with
tassels and the pancake hat of emmie slattery.  they were gaudy but
they were new and fashionable and certainly they caught the eye.
and, oh, how she wanted to catch the eye!  especially the eye of
rhett butler!  if he should see her in her old clothes, he'd know
everything was wrong at tara.  and he must not know.

what a fool she had been to think she could go to atlanta and have
him for the asking, she with her scrawny neck and hungry cat eyes
and raggedy dress!  if she hadn't been able to pry a proposal from
him at the height of her beauty, when she had her prettiest
clothes, how could she expect to get one now when she was ugly and
dressed tackily?  if miss pitty's story was true, he must have mo
 
 ___________________________
 
 making a ball dress of their own.

scarlett was going to atlanta to borrow money or to mortgage tara
if necessary.  but what was a mortgage, after all?  scarlett said
they could easily pay it off out of next year's cotton and have
money left over, and she said it with such finality they did not
think to question.  and when they asked who was going to lend the
money she said:  "layovers catch meddlers," so archly they all
laughed and teased her about her millionaire friend.

"it must be captain rhett butler," said melanie slyly and they
exploded with mirth at this absurdity, knowing how scarlett hated
him and never failed to refer to him as "that skunk, rhett butler."

but scarlett did not laugh at this and ashley, who had laughed,
stopped abruptly as he saw mammy shoot a quick, guarded glance at
scarlett.

suellen, moved to generosity by the party spirit of the occasion,
produced her irish-lace collar, somewhat worn but still pretty, and
carreen insisted that scarlett wear her slippers to atlanta
 
 ___________________________
 
ntleman he
was when he had all twelve oaks behind him.  will is different.  he
knows how things really are but then will never had anything much
to lose.  and as for suellen and carreen--they think all this is
just a temporary matter.  they don't change to meet changed
conditions because they think it'll all be over soon.  they think
god is going to work a miracle especially for their benefit.  but
he won't.  the only miracle that's going to be worked around here
is the one i'm going to work on rhett butler. . . .  they won't
change.  maybe they can't change.  i'm the only one who's changed--
and i wouldn't have changed if i could have helped it."

mammy finally turned the men out of the dining room and closed the
door, so the fitting could begin.  pork helped gerald upstairs to
bed and ashley and will were left alone in the lamplight in the
front hall.  they were silent for a while and will chewed his
tobacco like a placid ruminant animal.  but his mild face was far
from placid.

"this goin' to a
 
 ___________________________
 
tlanta," he said at last in a slow voice, "i don't
like it.  not one bit."

ashley looked at will quickly and then looked away, saying nothing
but wondering if will had the same awful suspicion which was
haunting him.  but that was impossible.  will didn't know what had
taken place in the orchard that afternoon and how it had driven
scarlett to desperation.  will couldn't have noticed mammy's face
when rhett butler's name was mentioned and, besides, will didn't
know about rhett's money or his foul reputation.  at least, ashley
did not think he could know these things, but since coming back to
tara he had realized that will, like mammy, seemed to know things
without being told, to sense them before they happened.  there was
something ominous in the air, exactly what ashley did not know, but
he was powerless to save scarlett from it.  she had not met his
eyes once that evening and the hard bright gaiety wit
 
 ___________________________
 
er has much more sense than any republican i ever saw
and much better manners but, of course, uncle peter is far too well
bred to want to vote.  but the very notion has upset the darkies
till they're right addled.  and some of them are so insolent.  your
life isn't safe on the streets after dark and even in the broad
daylight they push ladies off the sidewalks into the mud.  and if
any gentleman dares to protest, they arrest him and--  my dear, did
i tell you that captain butler was in jail?"

"rhett butler?"

even with this startling news, scarlett was grateful that aunt
pitty had saved her the necessity of bringing his name into the
conversation herself.

"yes, indeed!"  excitement colored pitty's cheeks pink and she sat
upright.  "he's in jail this very minute for killing a negro and
they may hang him!  imagine captain butler hanging!"

for a moment, the breath went out of scarlett's lungs in a
sickening gasp and she could only stare at the fat old lady who was
so obviously pleased at the effec
 
 ___________________________
 
.  she had a confused impression of bare walls with torn
wallpaper, rows of blue overcoats and slouch hats hung on nails, a
roaring fire, a long table covered with papers and a group of
officers in blue uniforms with brass buttons.

she gulped once and found her voice.  she mustn't let these yankees
know she was afraid.  she must look and be her prettiest and most
unconcerned self.

"the captain?"

"i'm one captain," said a fat man whose tunic was unbuttoned.

"i want to see a prisoner, captain rhett butler."

"butler again?  he's popular, that man," laughed the captain,
taking a chewed cigar from his mouth.  "you a relative, ma'm?"

"yes--his--his sister."

he laughed again.

"he's got a lot of sisters, one of them here yesterday."

scarlett flushed.  one of those creatures rhett consorted with,
probably that watling woman.  and these yankees thought she was
another one.  it was unendurable.  not even for tara would she stay
here another minute and be insulted.  she turned to the door and
reached
 
 ___________________________
 
ice at the last words or emphasize them in
any way but to scarlett they cracked like a whiplash, and with
despair she saw the end of her hopes of getting him to propose
marriage.  had he exploded with rage and injured vanity or
upbraided her, as other men would have done, she could have handled
him.  but the deadly quietness of his voice frightened her, left
her utterly at a loss as to her next move.  although he was a
prisoner and the yankees were in the next room, it came to her
suddenly that rhett butler was a dangerous man to run afoul of.

"i suppose my memory is getting faulty.  i should have recalled
that you are just like me and that you never do anything without an
ulterior motive.  now, let me see.  what could you have had up your
sleeve, mrs. hamilton?  it isn't possible that you were so
misguided as to think i would propose matrimony?"

her face went crimson and she did not answer.

"but you can't have forgotten my oft-repeated remark that i am not
a marrying man?"

when she did not sp
 
 ___________________________
 
of her
last hope.  this was the end of tara, the end of them all.  for a
long time she lay back with her eyes closed, hearing his heavy
breathing near her, and the glow of the brandy crept gradually over
her, giving a false strength and warmth.  when finally she opened
her eyes and looked him in the face, anger had roused again.  as
her slanting eyebrows rushed down together in a frown rhett's old
smile came back.

"now you are better.  i can tell it by your scowl."

"of course, i'm all right.  rhett butler, you are hateful, a skunk,
if ever i saw one!  you knew very well what i was going to say as
soon as i started talking and you knew you weren't going to give me
the money.  and yet you let me go right on.  you could have spared
me--"

"spared you and missed hearing all that?  not much.  i have so few
diversions here.  i don't know when i've ever heard anything so
gratifying."  he laughed his sudden mocking laugh.  at the sound
she leaped to her feet, snatching up her bonnet.

he suddenly had he
 
 ___________________________
 
 her skirts for him to sit by her and waved her handkerchief
idly so that the faint sweet smell of the cologne could reach his
nose.  she was proud of the cologne, for no other woman in the room
was wearing any and frank had noticed it.  in a fit of daring he
had whispered to her that she was as pink and fragrant as a rose.

if only he were not so shy!  he reminded her of a timid old brown
field rabbit.  if only he had the gallantry and ardor of the
tarleton boys or even the coarse impudence of rhett butler.  but,
if he possessed those qualities, he'd probably have sense enough to
feel the desperation that lurked just beneath her demurely
fluttering eyelids.  as it was, he didn't know enough about women
even to suspect what she was up to.  that was her good fortune but
it did not increase her respect for him.



chapter xxxvi


she married frank kennedy two weeks later after a whirlwind
courtship which she blushingly told him left her too breathless to
oppose his ardor any longer.

he did not know
 
 ___________________________
 
or for friendship's sake but i'm not.
frank will never get anywhere if he doesn't get up some gumption.
and he's got to get somewhere!  he's got to make money, even if
i've got to wear the pants in the family to make him do.

she was writing busily, her face screwed up with the effort, her
tongue clamped between her teeth, when the front door opened and a
great draft of cold wind swept the store.  a tall man came into the
dingy room walking with a light indian-like tread, and looking up
she saw rhett butler.

he was resplendent in new clothes and a greatcoat with a dashing
cape thrown back from his heavy shoulders.  his tall hat was off in
a deep bow when her eyes met his and his hand went to the bosom of
a spotless pleated shirt.  his white teeth gleamed startlingly
against his brown face and his bold eyes raked her.

"my dear mrs. kennedy," he said, walking toward her.  "my very dear
mrs. kennedy!" and he broke into a loud merry laugh.

at first she was as startled as if a ghost had invaded the 
 
 ___________________________
 
elt a pang of almost physical
sickness at the thought of so much money.  his jeering words passed
over her head and she did not even hear them.  it was hard to
believe there was so much money in all this bitter and poverty-
stricken world.  so much money, so very much money, and someone
else had it, someone who took it lightly and didn't need it.  and
she had only a sick elderly husband and this dirty, piddling,
little store between her and a hostile world.  it wasn't fair that
a reprobate like rhett butler should have so much and she, who
carried so heavy a load, should have so little.  she hated him,
sitting there in his dandified attire, taunting her.  well, she
wouldn't swell his conceit by complimenting him on his cleverness.
she longed viciously for sharp words with which to cut him.

"i suppose you think it's honest to keep the confederate money.
well, it isn't.  it's plain out and out stealing and you know it.
i wouldn't have that on my conscience."

"my!  how sour the grapes are today!" h
 
 ___________________________
 
im with you because you can't understand him or his kind
of love.  the only kind of love you know about is just--well, the
kind you carry on with creatures like that watling woman."

"oh," said rhett softly.  "so i am only capable of carnal lusts?"

"well, you know it's true."

"now i appreciate your hesitance in discussing the matter with me.
my unclean hands and lips besmirch the purity of his love."

"well, yes--something like that."

"i'm interested in this pure love--"

"don't be so nasty, rhett butler.  if you are vile enough to think
there's ever been anything wrong between us--"

"oh, the thought never entered my head, really.  that's why it all
interests me.  just why hasn't there been anything wrong between
you?"

"if you think that ashley would--"

"ah, so it's ashley, and not you, who has fought the fight for
purity.  really, scarlett, you should not give yourself away so
easily."

scarlett looked into his smooth unreadable face in confusion and
indignation.

"we won't go any further w
 
 ___________________________
 
 honor.  yet--was rhett
right?  should ashley have known her mind?  swiftly she put the
disloyal thought from her.  of course, he didn't suspect.  ashley
would never suspect that she would even think of doing anything so
immoral.  ashley was too fine to have such thoughts.  rhett was
just trying to spoil her love.  he was trying to tear down what was
most precious to her.  some day, she thought viciously, when the
store was on its feet and the mill doing nicely and she had money,
she would make rhett butler pay for the misery and humiliation he
was causing her.

he was standing over her, looking down at her, faintly amused.  the
emotion which had stirred him was gone.

"what does it all matter to you anyway?" she asked.  "it's my
business and ashley's and not yours."

he shrugged.

"only this.  i have a deep and impersonal admiration for your
endurance, scarlett, and i do not like to see your spirit crushed
beneath too many millstones.  there's tara.  that's a man-sized job
in itself.  there's you
 
 ___________________________
 
htly painted, and comported themselves more quietly
than those of other houses.  at least, the police were seldom
summoned to belle's.

this house was something that the matrons of atlanta whispered
about furtively and ministers preached against in guarded terms as
a cesspool of iniquity, a hissing and a reproach.  everyone knew
that a woman of belle's type couldn't have made enough money by
herself to set up such a luxurious establishment.  she had to have
a backer and a rich one at that.  and rhett butler had never had
the decency to conceal his relations with her, so it was obvious
that he and no other must be that backer.  belle herself presented
a prosperous appearance when glimpsed occasionally in her closed
carriage driven by an impudent yellow negro.  when she drove by,
behind a fine pair of bays, all the little boys along the street
who could evade their mothers ran to peer at her and whisper
excitedly:  "that's her!  that's ole belle!  i seen her red hair!"

shouldering the shell-pitted 
 
 ___________________________
 
ave her palms came back again.

so the spring months went by, the cool rains of april passing into
the warm balm of green may weather.  the weeks were packed with
work and worry and the handicaps of increasing pregnancy, with old
friends growing cooler and her family increasingly more kind, more
maddeningly solicitous and more completely blind to what was
driving her.  during those days of anxiety and struggle there was
only one dependable, understanding person in her world, and that
person was rhett butler.  it was odd that he of all people should
appear in this light, for he was as unstable as quicksilver and as
perverse as a demon fresh from the pit.  but he gave her sympathy,
something she had never had from anyone and never expected from
him.

frequently he was out of town on those mysterious trips to new
orleans which he never explained but which she felt sure, in a
faintly jealous way, were connected with a woman--or women.  but
after uncle peter's refusal to drive her, he remained in atlan
 
 ___________________________
 
 days, they could forget, for a moment, the
traitors within their own class who were causing fury, fear and
heartbreak.  and there were many such.  there were men of good
family, driven to desperation by poverty, who had gone over to the
enemy, become republicans and accepted positions from the
conquerors, so their families would not be on charity.  there were
young ex-soldiers who lacked the courage to face the long years
necessary to build up fortunes.  these youngsters, following the
lead of rhett butler, went hand in hand with the carpetbaggers in
money-making schemes of unsavory kinds.

worst of all the traitors were the daughters of some of atlanta's
most prominent families.  these girls who had come to maturity
since the surrender had only childish memories of the war and
lacked the bitterness that animated their elders.  they had lost no
husbands, no lovers.  they had few recollections of past wealth and
splendor--and the yankee officers were so handsome and finely
dressed and so carefree.
 
 ___________________________
 
 wearing a new green challis dress trimmed with
yards and yards of black rickrack braid and a new lace house cap
which aunt pitty had made for her.  both were very becoming to her
and she knew it and took great pleasure in them.  how good it was
to look pretty again after the long months of looking so dreadful!

as she sat rocking the baby and humming to herself, she heard the
sound of hooves coming up the side street and, peering curiously
through the tangle of dead vines on the porch, she saw rhett butler
riding toward the house.

he had been away from atlanta for months, since just after gerald
died, since long before ella lorena was born.  she had missed him
but she now wished ardently that there was some way to avoid seeing
him.  in fact, the sight of his dark face brought a feeling of
guilty panic to her breast.  a matter in which ashley was concerned
lay on her conscience and she did not wish to discuss it with
rhett, but she knew he would force the discussion, no matter how
disinclined she
 
 ___________________________
 
now," cried india.  "they are men, aren't they?  and white
men and southerners.  you should have been proud of him instead of
making him sneak out as though it were something shameful and--"

"you all have known all along and i didn't--"

"we were afraid it would upset you," said melanie sorrowfully.

"then that's where they go when they're supposed to be at the
political meetings?  oh, he promised me!  now, the yankees will
come and take my mills and the store and put him in jail--oh, what
did rhett butler mean?"

india's eyes met melanie's in wild fear.  scarlett rose, flinging
her sewing down.

"if you don't tell me, i'm going downtown and find out.  i'll ask
everybody i see until i find--"

"set," said archie, fixing her with his eye.  "i'll tell you.
because you went gallivantin' this afternoon and got yoreself into
trouble through yore own fault, mr. wilkes and mr. kennedy and the
other men are out tonight to kill that thar nigger and that thar
white man, if they can catch them, and wipe out
 
 ___________________________
 
dn't
pay for the damage to the mirrors in the upper hall, she was going
to have the law on them.  she kept a respectable house and--  oh,
their names?  belle unhesitatingly reeled off the names of twelve
under suspicion, captain jaffery smiled sourly.

"these damned rebels are as efficiently organized as our secret
service," he said.  "you and your girls will have to appear before
the provost marshal tomorrow."

"will the provost make them pay for my mirrors?"

"to hell with your mirrors!  make rhett butler pay for them.  he
owns the place, doesn't he?"

before dawn, every ex-confederate family in town knew everything.
and their negroes, who had been told nothing, knew everything too,
by that black grapevine telegraph system which defies white
understanding.  everyone knew the details of the raid, the killing
of frank kennedy and crippled tommy wellburn and how ashley was
wounded in carrying frank's body away.

some of the feeling of bitter hatred the women bore scarlett for
her share in the trage
 
 ___________________________
 
efore dawn the news had trickled about that the military inquiry
would take place that day.  the townspeople, heavy eyed from
sleeplessness and anxious waiting, knew that the safety of some of
their most prominent citizens rested on three things--the ability
of ashley wilkes to stand on his feet and appear before the
military board, as though he suffered nothing more serious than a
morning-after headache, the word of belle watling that these men
had been in her house all evening and the word of rhett butler that
he had been with them.

the town writhed at these last two!  belle watling!  to owe their
men's lives to her!  it was intolerable!  women who had
ostentatiously crossed the street when they saw belle coming,
wondered if she remembered and trembled for fear she did.  the men
felt less humiliation at taking their lives from belle than the
women did, for many of them thought her a good sort.  but they were
stung that they must owe lives and freedom to rhett butler, a
speculator and a scallawa
 
 ___________________________
 
ugh he were
discussing the weather, and his smooth drawl fell on her ears with
no particular emphasis.

"i always intended having you, scarlett, since that first day i saw
you at twelve oaks when you threw that vase and swore and proved
that you weren't a lady.  i always intended having you, one way or
another.  but as you and frank have made a little money, i know
you'll never be driven to me again with any interesting propositions
of loans and collaterals.  so i see i'll have to marry you."

"rhett butler, is this one of your vile jokes?"

"i bare my soul and you are suspicious!  no, scarlett, this is a
bona fide honorable declaration.  i admit that it's not in the best
of taste, coming at this time, but i have a very good excuse for my
lack of breeding.  i'm going away tomorrow for a long time and i
fear that if i wait till i return you'll have married some one else
with a little money.  so i thought, why not me and my money?
really, scarlett, i can't go all my life, waiting to catch you
betwee
 
 ___________________________
 
andidate.  opposing him was a
republican named bullock.  the election had lasted three days
instead of one.  trainloads of negroes had been rushed from town to
town, voting at every precinct along the way.  of course, bullock
had won.

if the capture of georgia by sherman had caused bitterness, the
final capture of the state's capitol by the carpetbaggers, yankees
and negroes caused an intensity of bitterness such as the state had
never known before.  atlanta and georgia seethed and raged.

and rhett butler was a friend of the hated bullock!

scarlett, with her usual disregard of all matters not directly
under her nose, had scarcely known an election was being held.
rhett had taken no part in the election and his relations with the
yankees were no different from what they had always been.  but the
fact remained that rhett was a scallawag and a friend of bullock.
and, if the marriage went through, scarlett also would be turning
scallawag.  atlanta was in no mood to be tolerant or charitable
toward 
 
 ___________________________
 
 pitty, not being a
matron, is not qualified to--er, well, to talk to you upon such a
subject, i feel that i must warn you, scarlett, captain butler is
not the kind of a man for any woman of good family to marry.  he is
a--"

"he managed to save grandpa merriwether's neck and your nephew's,
too."

mrs. merriwether swelled.  hardly an hour before she had had an
irritating talk with grandpa.  the old man had remarked that she
must not value his hide very much if she did not feel some
gratitude to rhett butler, even if the man was a scallawag and a
scoundrel.

"he only did that as a dirty trick on us all, scarlett, to
embarrass us in front of the yankees," mrs. merriwether continued.
"you know as well as i do that the man is a rogue.  he always has
been and now he's unspeakable.  he is simply not the kind of man
decent people receive."

"no?  that's strange, mrs. merriwether.  he was in your parlor
often enough during the war.  and he gave maybelle her white satin
wedding dress, didn't he?  or is my 
 
 ___________________________
 
-"you have
no instinct about people, no discrimination between the cheap and
the great.  sometimes, i think that the only great ladies you've
ever associated with were your mother and miss melly and neither
seems to have made any impression on you."

"melly!  why she's as plain as an old shoe and her clothes always
look tacky and she never has two words to say for herself!"

"spare me your jealousy, madam.  beauty doesn't make a lady, nor
clothes a great lady!"

"oh, don't they!  just you wait, rhett butler, and i'll show you.
now that i've--we've got money, i'm going to be the greatest lady
you ever saw!"

"i shall wait with interest," he said.

more exciting than the people she met were the frocks rhett bought
her, superintending the choice of colors, materials and designs
himself.  hoops were out now, and the new styles were charming with
the skirts pulled back from the front and draped over bustles, and
on the bustles were wreaths of flowers and bows and cascades of
lace.  she thought of the m