len's voice, low but stern, came to
her ears.

"mr. o'hara, you must dismiss jonas wilkerson."

gerald exploded.  "and where will i be getting another overseer
who wouldn't be cheating me out of my eyeteeth?"

"he must be dismissed, immediately, tomorrow morning.  big sam is
a good foreman and he can take over the duties until you can hire
another overseer."

"ah, ha!" came gerald's voice.  "so, i understand!  then the
worthy jonas sired the--"

"he must be dismissed."

"so, he is the father of emmie slattery's baby," thought scarlett.
"oh, well, what else can you expect from a yankee man and a white-
trash girl?"

then, after a discreet pause which gave gerald's splutterings time
to die away, she knocked on the door and handed the dress to her
mother.

by the time scarlett had undressed and blown out the candle, her
plan for tomorrow had worked itself out in every detail.  it was a
simple plan, for, with gerald's single-mindedness of purpose, her
eyes were centered on the goal and she thought only 
 
 ___________________________
 
velvet affair,
perched on the top of the woman's head like a stiffened pancake.
the ribbons did not tie under the chin as bonnet ribbons tied but
in the back under the massive bunch of curls which fell from the
rear of the hat, curls which scarlett could not help noticing did
not match the woman's hair in either color or texture.

as the woman stepped to the ground and looked toward the house,
scarlett saw there was something familiar about the rabbity face,
caked with white powder.

"why, it's emmie slattery!" she cried, so surprised she spoke the
words aloud.

"yes'm, it's me," said emmie, tossing her head with an ingratiating
smile and starting toward the steps.

emmie slattery!  the dirty tow-headed slut whose illegitimate baby
ellen had baptized, emmie who had given typhoid to ellen and killed
her.  this overdressed, common, nasty piece of poor white trash was
coming up the steps of tara, bridling and grinning as if she
belonged here.  scarlett thought of ellen and, in a rush, feeling
came back
 
 ___________________________
 
ve at tara!

then, sudden terror struck her and her rage melted.  god's
nightgown!  they will come and live here!  there was nothing she
could do to keep them from buying tara, nothing to keep them from
levying on every mirror and table and bed, on ellen's shining
mahogany and rosewood, and every bit of it precious to her, scarred
though it was by the yankee raiders.  and the robillard silver too.
i won't let them do it, thought scarlett vehemently.  no, not if
i've got to burn the place down!  emmie slattery will never set her
foot on a single bit of flooring mother ever walked on!

she closed the door and leaned against it and she was very
frightened.  more frightened even than she had been that day when
sherman's army was in the house.  that day the worst she could fear
was that tara would be burned over her head.  but this was worse--
these low common creatures living in this house, bragging to their
low common friends how they had turned the proud o'haras out.
perhaps they'd even bring negroes 
 
 ___________________________
 
 looked down at her dress,
spreading its mended folds wide between her hands.  rhett liked
women who were well dressed, fashionably dressed.  she remembered
with longing the flounced green dress she had worn when she first
came out of mourning, the dress she wore with the green plumed
bonnet he had brought her and she recalled the approving
compliments he had paid her.  she remembered, too, with hate
sharpened by envy the red plaid dress, the red-topped boots with
tassels and the pancake hat of emmie slattery.  they were gaudy but
they were new and fashionable and certainly they caught the eye.
and, oh, how she wanted to catch the eye!  especially the eye of
rhett butler!  if he should see her in her old clothes, he'd know
everything was wrong at tara.  and he must not know.

what a fool she had been to think she could go to atlanta and have
him for the asking, she with her scrawny neck and hungry cat eyes
and raggedy dress!  if she hadn't been able to pry a proposal from
him at the height of her be
 
 ___________________________
 


"well, if you heard all that, i suppose you heard jonas wilkerson
and that emmie--"

"yas'm," said mammy with smoldering eyes.

"well, don't be a mule, mammy.  don't you see i've got to go to
atlanta and get money for the taxes?  i've got to get some money.
i've got to do it!"  she hammered one small fist into the other.
"name of god, mammy, they'll turn us all out into the road and then
where'll we go?  are you going to argue with me about a little
matter of mother's curtains when that trash emmie slattery who
killed mother is fixing to move into this house and sleep in the
bed mother slept in?"

mammy shifted from one foot to another like a restive elephant.
she had a dim feeling that she was being got around.

"no'm, ah ain' wantin' ter see trash in miss ellen's house or us
all in de road but--"  she fixed scarlett with a suddenly accusing
eye:  "who is you fixin' ter git money frum dat you needs a new
dress?"

"that," said scarlett, taken aback, "is my own business."

mammy looked at her pierc