,
ordinarily, scarlett loved the quiet hours which the family spent
there after supper; but tonight she hated the sight of it and, if
she had not feared her father's loudly bawled questions, she would
have slipped away, down the dark hall to ellen's little office and
cried out her sorrow on the old sofa.

that was the room that scarlett liked the best in all the house.
there, ellen sat before her tall secretary each morning, keeping
the accounts of the plantation and listening to the reports of
jonas wilkerson, the overseer.  there also the family idled while
ellen's quill scratched across her ledgers.  gerald in the old
rocker, the girls on the sagging cushions of the sofa that was too
battered and worn for the front of the house.  scarlett longed to
be there now, alone with ellen, so she could put her head in her
mother's lap and cry in peace.  wouldn't mother ever come home?

then, wheels ground sharply on the graveled driveway, and the soft
murmur of ellen's voice dismissing the coachman floated 
 
 ___________________________
 
ning, and
gerald wagged his head philosophically.

"well, 'tis better so that the brat is dead, no doubt, poor
fatherle--"

"it is late.  we had better have prayers now," interrupted ellen
so smoothly that, if scarlett had not known her mother well, the
interruption would have passed unnoticed.

it would be interesting to know who was the father of emmie
slattery's baby, but scarlett knew she would never learn the truth
of the matter if she waited to hear it from her mother.  scarlett
suspected jonas wilkerson, for she had frequently seen him walking
down the road with emmie at nightfall.  jonas was a yankee and a
bachelor, and the fact that he was an overseer forever barred him
from any contact with the county social life.  there was no family
of any standing into which he could marry, no people with whom he
could associate except the slatterys and riffraff like them.  as
he was several cuts above the slatterys in education, it was only
natural that he should not want to marry emmie, no matter how
o
 
 ___________________________
 
light high above his head.
ellen, on gerald's arm, followed him, and the girls, each taking
her own candlestick, mounted after them.

scarlett entered her room, set the candle on the tall chest of
drawers and fumbled in the dark closet for the dancing dress that
needed stitching.  throwing it across her arm, she crossed the
hall quietly.  the door of her parents' bedroom was slightly ajar
and, before she could knock, ellen's voice, low but stern, came to
her ears.

"mr. o'hara, you must dismiss jonas wilkerson."

gerald exploded.  "and where will i be getting another overseer
who wouldn't be cheating me out of my eyeteeth?"

"he must be dismissed, immediately, tomorrow morning.  big sam is
a good foreman and he can take over the duties until you can hire
another overseer."

"ah, ha!" came gerald's voice.  "so, i understand!  then the
worthy jonas sired the--"

"he must be dismissed."

"so, he is the father of emmie slattery's baby," thought scarlett.
"oh, well, what else can you expect from a yankee 
 
 ___________________________
 
r
her mother nor mammy was with the party.  there would be no one at
the barbecue who, by delicately lifted brows or out-thrust
underlip, could interfere with her plan of action.  of course,
suellen would be certain to tell tales tomorrow, but if all went
as scarlett hoped, the excitement of the family over her
engagement to ashley or her elopement would more than overbalance
their displeasure.  yes, she was very glad ellen had been forced
to stay at home.

gerald, primed with brandy, had given jonas wilkerson his
dismissal that morning, and ellen had remained at tara to go over
the accounts of the plantation before he took his departure.
scarlett had kissed her mother good-by in the little office where
she sat before the tall secretary with its paper-stuffed
pigeonholes.  jonas wilkerson, hat in hand, stood beside her, his
sallow tight-skinned face hardly concealing the fury of hate that
possessed him at being so unceremoniously turned out of the best
overseer's job in the county.  and all because o
 
 ___________________________
 
no time to sit by ellen while she sewed, smelling the
faint fragrance of lemon verbena sachet as her skirts rustled,
feeling her soft hands on her cheek in a gentle caress.

ellen was thin and preoccupied now and on her feet from morning
until long after the plantation was asleep.  the demands of the
confederate commissary were growing heavier by the month, and hers
was the task of making tara produce.  even gerald was busy, for
the first time in many years, for he could get no overseer to take
jonas wilkerson's place and he was riding his own acres.  with
ellen too busy for more than a goodnight kiss and gerald in the
fields all day, scarlett found tara boring.  even her sisters were
taken up with their own concerns.  suellen had now come to an
"understanding" with frank kennedy and sang "when this cruel war
is over" with an arch meaning scarlett found well-nigh
unendurable, and carreen was too wrapped up in dreams of brent
tarleton to be interesting company.

though scarlett always went home to tar
 
 ___________________________
 
 in them scarlett
read knowledge and bitter despair.  cade might not know but
cathleen knew.  pine bloom looked straggly and overgrown with
weeds, seedling pines were beginning to show in the fields and the
house was sagging and untidy.  cathleen was thin and taut.

the two of them, with their yankee stepmother, their four little
half-sisters, and hilton, the yankee overseer, remained in the
silent, oddly echoing house.  scarlett had never liked hilton any
more than she liked their own overseer jonas wilkerson, and she
liked him even less now, as he sauntered forward and greeted her
like an equal.  formerly he had the same combination of servility
and impertinence which wilkerson possessed but now, with mr.
calvert and raiford dead in the war and cade sick, he had dropped
all servility.  the second mrs. calvert had never known how to
compel respect from negro servants and it was not to be expected
that she could get it from a white man.

"mr. hilton has been so kind about staying with us through thes
 
 ___________________________
 
ually under martial law now.  the yankee soldiers
garrisoned throughout the section and the freedmen's bureau were in
complete command of everything and they were fixing the rules to
suit themselves.

this bureau, organized by the federal government to take care of
the idle and excited ex-slaves, was drawing them from the
plantations into the villages and cities by the thousands.  the
bureau fed them while they loafed and poisoned their minds against
their former owners.  gerald's old overseer, jonas wilkerson, was
in charge of the local bureau, and his assistant was hilton,
cathleen calvert's husband.  these two industriously spread the
rumor that the southerners and democrats were just waiting for a
good chance to put the negroes back into slavery and that the
negroes' only hope of escaping this fate was the protection given
them by the bureau and the republican party.

wilkerson and hilton furthermore told the negroes they were as good
as the whites in every way and soon white and negro marriages 
 
 ___________________________
 
  i could vote if i took their damned oath.  i didn't have any
money in 'sixty-five and i certainly warn't a colonel or nothin'
remarkable.  but i ain't goin' to take their oath.  not by a dinged
sight!  if the yankees had acted right, i'd have taken their oath
of allegiance but i ain't now.  i can be restored to the union but
i can't be reconstructed into it.  i ain't goin' to take their oath
even if i don't never vote again--  but scum like that hilton
feller, he can vote, and scoundrels like jonas wilkerson and pore
whites like the slatterys and no-counts like the macintoshes, they
can vote.  and they're runnin' things now.  and if they want to
come down on you for extra taxes a dozen times, they can do it.
just like a nigger can kill a white man and not get hung or--"  he
paused, embarrassed, and the memory of what had happened to a lone
white woman on an isolated farm near lovejoy was in both their
minds. . . .  "those niggers can do anything against us and the
freedmen's bureau and the soldiers
 
 ___________________________
 
 times was too much.  she'd hurry to
her room and plead a headache.

but when the carriage came nearer, her flight was checked by her
amazement.  it was a new carriage, shiny with varnish, and the
harness was new too, with bits of polished brass here and there.
strangers, certainly.  no one she knew had the money for such a
grand new turn-out as this.

she stood in the doorway watching, the cold draft blowing her
skirts about her damp ankles.  then the carriage stopped in front
of the house and jonas wilkerson alighted.  scarlett was so
surprised at the sight of their former overseer driving so fine a
rig and in so splendid a greatcoat she could not for a moment
believe her eyes.  will had told her he looked quite prosperous
since he got his new job with the freedmen's bureau.  made a lot of
money, will said, swindling the niggers or the government, one or
tuther, or confiscating folks' cotton and swearing it was
confederate government cotton.  certainly he never came by all that
money honestly in th
 
 ___________________________
 
 this place!"

"oh, you won't sing that way very long.  i know you're broke.  i
know you can't even pay your taxes.  i came out here to offer to
buy this place from you--to make you a right good offer.  emmie had
a hankering to live here.  but, by god, i won't give you a cent
now!  you highflying, bog-trotting irish will find out who's
running things around here when you get sold out for taxes.  and
i'll buy this place, lock, stock and barrel--furniture and all--and
i'll live in it."

so it was jonas wilkerson who wanted tara--jonas and emmie, who in
some twisted way thought to even past slights by living in the home
where they had been slighted.  all her nerves hummed with hate, as
they had hummed that day when she shoved the pistol barrel into the
yankee's bearded face and fired.  she wished she had that pistol
now.

"i'll tear this house down, stone by stone, and burn it and sow
every acre with salt before i see either of you put foot over this
threshold," she shouted.  "get out, i tell you!  get 
 
 ___________________________
 
 gloom of drawn blinds and winter twilight
closed about her.  no one would think of hunting for her here and
she wanted time to think, undisturbed.  the idea which had just
occurred to her was so simple she wondered why she had not thought
of it before.

"i'll get the money from rhett.  i'll sell him the diamond earbobs.
or i'll borrow the money from him and let him keep the earbobs till
i can pay him back."

for a moment, relief was so great she felt weak.  she would pay the
taxes and laugh in jonas wilkerson's face.  but close on this happy
thought came relentless knowledge.

"it's not only for this year that i'll need tax money.  there's
next year and all the years of my life.  if i pay up this time,
they'll raise the taxes higher next time till they drive me out.
if i make a good cotton crop, they'll tax it till i'll get nothing
for it or maybe confiscate it outright and say it's confederate
cotton.  the yankees and the scoundrels teamed up with them have
got me where they want me.  all my life, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ted for any woman."

"i'll marry him," she thought coolly.  "and then i'll never have to
bother about money again."

oh, blessed thought, sweeter than hope of heaven, never to worry
about money again, to know that tara was safe, that the family was
fed and clothed, that she would never again have to bruise herself
against stone walls!

she felt very old.  the afternoon's events had drained her of all
feeling, first the startling news about the taxes, then ashley and,
last, her murderous rage at jonas wilkerson.  no, there was no
emotion left in her.  if all her capacity to feel had not been
utterly exhausted, something in her would have protested against
the plan taking form in her mind, for she hated rhett as she hated
no other person in all the world.  but she could not feel.  she
could only think and her thoughts were very practical.

"i said some terrible things to him that night when he deserted us
on the road, but i can make him forget them," she thought
contemptuously, still sure of her power 
 
 ___________________________
 
and the
terrors of reconstruction had taken away all warmth and youth and
softness.  about the core of her being, a shell of hardness had
formed and, little by little, layer by layer, the shell had
thickened during the endless months.

but until this very day, two hopes had been left to sustain her.
she had hoped that the war being over, life would gradually resume
its old face.  she had hoped that ashley's return would bring back
some meaning into life.  now both hopes were gone.  the sight of
jonas wilkerson in the front walk of tara had made her realize that
for her, for the whole south, the war would never end.  the
bitterest fighting, the most brutal retaliations, were just
beginning.  and ashley was imprisoned forever by words which were
stronger than any jail.

peace had failed her and ashley had failed her, both in the same
day, and it was as if the last crevice in the shell had been
sealed, the final layer hardened.  she had become what grandma
fontaine had counseled against, a woman who had
 
 ___________________________
 
t i've got to have a new dress!  mammy, you don't know how we
need money.  the taxes--"

"yas'm, ah knows all 'bout de taxes but--"

"you do?"

"well'm, gawd give me ears, din' he, an' ter hear wid?  specially
w'en mist' will doan never tek trouble ter close de do'."

was there nothing mammy did not overhear?  scarlett wondered how
that ponderous body which shook the floors could move with such
savage stealth when its owner wished to eavesdrop.

"well, if you heard all that, i suppose you heard jonas wilkerson
and that emmie--"

"yas'm," said mammy with smoldering eyes.

"well, don't be a mule, mammy.  don't you see i've got to go to
atlanta and get money for the taxes?  i've got to get some money.
i've got to do it!"  she hammered one small fist into the other.
"name of god, mammy, they'll turn us all out into the road and then
where'll we go?  are you going to argue with me about a little
matter of mother's curtains when that trash emmie slattery who
killed mother is fixing to move into this house 
 
 ___________________________
 
me.

as scarlett thought of suellen's secure future and the precarious
one of herself and tara, anger flamed in her at the unfairness of
life.  hastily she looked out of the buggy into the muddy street,
lest frank should see her expression.  she was going to lose
everything she had, while sue--  suddenly a determination was born
in her.

suellen should not have frank and his store and his mill!

suellen didn't deserve them.  she was going to have them herself.
she thought of tara and remembered jonas wilkerson, venomous as a
rattler, at the foot of the front steps, and she grasped at the
last straw floating above the shipwreck of her life.  rhett had
failed her but the lord had provided frank.

but can i get him?  her fingers clenched as she looked unseeingly
into the rain.  can i make him forget sue and propose to me real
quick?  if i could make rhett almost propose, i know i could get
frank!  her eyes went over him, her lids flickering.  certainly,
he's no beauty, she thought coolly, and he's got v
 
 ___________________________
 
nts, praying that no untimely letter from
suellen would reach him and ruin her plans.  she thanked god that
her sister was the poorest of correspondents, delighting to receive
letters and disliking to write them.  but there was always a
chance, always a chance, she thought in the long night hours as she
padded back and forth across the cold floor of her bedroom, with
ellen's faded shawl clutched about her nightdress.  frank did not
know she had received a laconic letter from will, relating that
jonas wilkerson had paid another call at tara and, finding her gone
to atlanta, had stormed about until will and ashley threw him
bodily off the place.  will's letter hammered into her mind the
fact she knew only too well--that time was getting shorter and
shorter before the extra taxes must be paid.  a fierce desperation
drove her as she saw the days slipping by and she wished she might
grasp the hourglass in her hands and keep the sands from running.

but so well did she conceal her feelings, so well did she
 
 ___________________________
 
 and sweet enough these days, but there was a pleased
complacency in her eyes which annoyed people and she carried a chip
on her shoulder which no one cared to disturb.

she knew atlanta was talking but she did not care.  alter all,
there wasn't anything immoral in marrying a man.  tara was safe.
let people talk.  she had too many other matters to occupy her
mind.  the most important was how to make frank realize, in a
tactful manner, that his store should bring in more money.  after
the fright jonas wilkerson had given her, she would never rest easy
until she and frank had some money ahead.  and even if no emergency
developed, frank would need to make more money, if she was going to
save enough for next year's taxes.  moreover, what frank had said
about the sawmill stuck in her mind.  frank could make lots of
money out of a mill.  anybody could, with lumber selling at such
outrageous prices.  she fretted silently because frank's money had
not been enough to pay the taxes on tara and buy the mill as 
 
 ___________________________
 
then for the second time in
four months, scarlett was made to feel acutely what reconstruction
in all its implications meant, made to understand more completely
what was in will's mind when he said "our troubles have just
begun," to know that the bleak words of ashley, spoken in the wind-
swept orchard of tara, were true:  "this that's facing all of us is
worse than war--worse than prison--worse than death."

the first time she had come face to face with reconstruction was
when she learned that jonas wilkerson with the aid of the yankees
could evict her from tara.  but tony's advent brought it all home
to her in a far more terrifying manner.  tony came in the dark and
the lashing rain and in a few minutes he was gone back into the
night forever, but in the brief interval between he raised the
curtain on a scene of new horror, a curtain that she felt
hopelessly would never be lowered again.

that stormy night when the knocker hammered on the door with such
hurried urgency, she stood on the landing, cl
 
 ___________________________
 
e and making me
get on my horse, i'd have stayed there like a fool and probably had
my neck stretched by now.  good fellow, ashley."

so ashley was mixed up in this frightening puzzle.  scarlett went
cold, her hand at her throat.  did the yankees have ashley now?
why, why didn't frank ask what it was all about?  why did he take
it all so coolly, so much as a matter of course?  she struggled to
get the question to her lips.

"what--" she began.  "who--"

"your father's old overseer--that damned--jonas wilkerson."

"did you--is he dead?"

"my god, scarlett o'hara!" said tony peevishly.  "when i start out
to cut somebody up, you don't think i'd be satisfied with
scratching him with the blunt side of my knife, do you?  no, by
god, i cut him to ribbons."

"good," said frank casually.  "i never liked the fellow."

scarlett looked at him.  this was not the meek frank she knew, the
nervous beard clawer who she had learned could be bullied with such
ease.  there was an air about him that was crisp and cool an
 
 ___________________________
 
 are shaking."

"when will it all end?"

"when we can all vote again, sugar.  when every man who fought for
the south can put a ballot in the box for a southerner and a
democrat."

"a ballot?" she cried despairingly.  "what good's a ballot when the
darkies have lost their minds--when the yankees have poisoned them
against us?"

frank went on to explain in his patient manner, but the idea that
ballots could cure the trouble was too complicated for her to
follow.  she was thinking gratefully that jonas wilkerson would
never again be a menace of tara and she was thinking about tony.

"oh, the poor fontaines!" she exclaimed.  "only alex left and so
much to do at mimosa.  why didn't tony have sense enough to--to do
it at night when no one would know who it was?  a sight more good
he'd do helping with the spring plowing than in texas."

frank put an arm about her.  usually he was gingerly when he did
this, as if he anticipated being impatiently shaken off, but
tonight there was a far-off look in his eyes a
 
 ___________________________
 
 respected,
cherished.  and suddenly her heart was sick.

"if you are trying to devil me," she said tiredly, "it's no use.  i
know i'm not as--scrupulous as i should be these days.  not as kind
and as pleasant as i was brought up to be.  but i can't help it,
rhett.  truly, i can't.  what else could i have done?  what would
have happened to me, to wade, to tara and all of us if i'd been--
gentle when that yankee came to tara?  i should have been--but i
don't even want to think of that.  and when jonas wilkerson was
going to take the home place, suppose i'd been--kind and
scrupulous?  where would we all be now?  and if i'd been sweet and
simple minded and not nagged frank about bad debts we'd--oh, well.
maybe i am a rogue, but i won't be a rogue forever, rhett.  but
during these past years--and even now--what else could i have done?
how else could i have acted?  i've felt that i was trying to row a
heavily loaded boat in a storm.  i've had so much trouble just
trying to keep afloat that i couldn't be b