ors what a sly boots scarlett
was to sit there and listen to her talk about melanie when all the
time she and ashley--  she dimpled at her own thoughts and betty,
who had been watching sharply the effect of her mother's words,
sank back with a small puzzled frown.

"i don't care what you say, mr. o'hara," mrs. tarleton was saying
emphatically.  "it's all wrong, this marrying of cousins.  it's
bad enough for ashley to be marrying the hamilton child, but for
honey to be marrying that pale-looking charles hamilton--"

"honey'll never catch anybody else if she doesn't marry charlie,"
said randa, cruel and secure in her own popularity.  "she's never
had another beau except him.  and he's never acted very sweet on
her, for all that they're engaged.  scarlett, you remember how he
ran after you last christmas--"

"don't be a cat, miss," said her mother.  "cousins shouldn't
marry, even second cousins.  it weakens the strain.  it isn't like
horses.  you can breed a mare to a brother or a sire to a daughter
and 
 
 ___________________________
 
old maid in the bargain.  she
wondered if india resented very much her taking stuart away from
her.  lots of people said she was still in love with him, but then
you could never tell what a wilkes was thinking about.  if she did
resent it, she never gave any sign of it, treating scarlett with the
same slightly aloof, kindly courtesy she had always shown her.

scarlett spoke pleasantly to her and started up the wide stairs.
as she did, a shy voice behind her called her name and, turning,
she saw charles hamilton.  he was a nice-looking boy with a riot
of soft brown curls on his white forehead and eyes as deep brown,
as clean and as gentle as a collie dog's.  he was well turned out
in mustard-colored trousers and black coat and his pleated shirt
was topped by the widest and most fashionable of black cravats.
a faint blush was creeping over his face as she turned for he was
timid with girls.  like most shy men he greatly admired airy,
vivacious, always-at-ease girls like scarlett.  she had never
given hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m more than perfunctory courtesy before, and so the
beaming smile of pleasure with which she greeted him and the two
hands outstretched to his almost took his breath away.

"why charles hamilton, you handsome old thing, you!  i'll bet you
came all the way down here from atlanta just to break my poor
heart!"

charles almost stuttered with excitement, holding her warm little
hands in his and looking into the dancing green eyes.  this was
the way girls talked to other boys but never to him.  he never
knew why but girls always treated him like a younger brother and
were very kind, but never bothered to tease him.  he had always
wanted girls to flirt and frolic with him as they did with boy
 
 ___________________________
 
hley did not seem to notice her at all.  he only looked up at
melanie and talked on, and melanie looked down at him with an
expression that radiated the fact that she belonged to him.

so, scarlett was miserable.

to the outward eye, never had a girl less cause to be miserable.
she was undoubtedly the belle of the barbecue, the center of
attention.  the furore she was causing among the men, coupled with
the heart burnings of the other girls, would have pleased her
enormously at any other time.

charles hamilton, emboldened by her notice, was firmly planted on
her right, refusing to be dislodged by the combined efforts of the
tarleton twins.  he held her fan in one hand and his untouched
plate of barbecue in the other and stubbornly refused to meet the
eyes of honey, who seemed on the verge of an outburst of tears.
cade lounged gracefully on her left, plucking at her skirt to
attract her attention and staring up with smoldering eyes at
stuart.  already the air was electric between him and the twins
and
 
 ___________________________
 
ett could hear was "states' rights, by god!" shouted over
and over.  gerald was having an excellent time, but not his
daughter.

secession, war--these words long since had become acutely boring
to scarlett from much repetition, but now she hated the sound of
them, for they meant that the men would stand there for hours
haranguing one another and she would have no chance to corner
ashley.  of course there would be no war and the men all knew it.
they just loved to talk and hear themselves talk.

charles hamilton had not risen with the others and, finding
himself comparatively alone with scarlett, he leaned closer and,
with the daring born of new love, whispered a confession.

"miss o'hara--i--i had already decided that if we did fight, i'd
go over to south carolina and join a troop there.  it's said that
mr. wade hampton is organizing a cavalry troop, and of course i
would want to go with him.  he's a splendid person and was my
father's best friend."

scarlett thought, "what am i supposed to do--give t
 
 ___________________________
 
ashley, and she
looked at charles with poorly concealed irritation.  why must this
calf-like fool intrude his feelings on this particular day when
she was so worried she was about to lose her mind?  she looked
into the pleading brown eyes and she saw none of the beauty of a
shy boy's first love, of the adoration of an ideal come true or
the wild happiness and tenderness that were sweeping through him
like a flame.  scarlett was used to men asking her to marry them,
men much more attractive than charles hamilton, and men who had
more finesse than to propose at a barbecue when she had more
important matters on her mind.  she only saw a boy of twenty, red
as a beet and looking very silly.  she wished that she could tell
him how silly he looked.  but automatically, the words ellen had
taught her to say in such emergencies rose to her lips and casting
down her eyes, from force of long habit, she murmured:  "mr.
hamilton, i am not unaware of the honor you have bestowed on me in
wanting me to become your wif
 
 ___________________________
 
cue
she realized just what she had brought on herself.  the thought of
this strange boy whom she hadn't really wanted to marry getting
into bed with her, when her heart was breaking with an agony of
regret at her hasty action and the anguish of losing ashley
forever, was too much to be borne.  as he hesitatingly approached
the bed she spoke in a hoarse whisper.

"i'll scream out loud if you come near me.  i will!  i will--at
the top of my voice!  get away from me!  don't you dare touch me!"

so charles hamilton spent his wedding night in an armchair in the
corner, not too unhappily, for he understood, or thought he
understood, the modesty and delicacy of his bride.  he was willing
to wait until her fears subsided, only--only--  he sighed as he
twisted about seeking a comfortable position, for he was going
away to the war so very soon.

nightmarish as her own wedding had been, ashley's wedding was even
worse.  scarlett stood in her apple-green "second-day" dress in
the parlor of twelve oaks amid the bl
 
 ___________________________
 
own, when men, attractive
ones, too, came to their booth.

every girl in atlanta was three deep in men.  even the plainest
girls were carrying on like belles--and, oh, worst of all, they
were carrying on in such lovely, lovely dresses!

here she sat like a crow with hot black taffeta to her wrists and
buttoned up to her chin, with not even a hint of lace or braid,
not a jewel except ellen's onyx mourning brooch, watching tacky-
looking girls hanging on the arms of good-looking men.  all
because charles hamilton had had the measles.  he didn't even die
in a fine glow of gallantry in battle, so she could brag about
him.

rebelliously she leaned her elbows on the counter and looked at
the crowd, flouting mammy's oft-repeated admonition against
leaning on elbows and making them ugly and wrinkled.  what did it
matter if they did get ugly?  she'd probably never get a chance to
show them again.  she looked hungrily at the frocks floating by,
butter-yellow watered silks with garlands of rosebuds; pink satins

 
 ___________________________
 
 not, fair
lady!  your guilty secret is safe with me!"

"oh," she whispered, feverishly, "how can you say such things!"

"i only thought to ease your mind.  what would you have me say?
'be mine, beautiful female, or i will reveal all?'"

she met his eyes unwillingly and saw they were as teasing as a
small boy's.  suddenly she laughed.  it was such a silly
situation, after all.  he laughed too, and so loudly that several
of the chaperons in the corner looked their way.  observing how
good a time charles hamilton's widow appeared to be having with a
perfect stranger, they put their heads together disapprovingly.



there was a roll of drums and many voices cried "sh!" as dr. meade
mounted the platform and spread out his arms for quiet.

"we must all give grateful thanks to the charming ladies whose
indefatigable and patriotic efforts have made this bazaar not only
a pecuniary success," he began, "but have transformed this rough
hall into a bower of loveliness, a fit garden for the charming
rosebuds i se
 
 ___________________________
 
night the intrepid captain who has so
successfully run the blockade for a year and who will run it again
to bring us the drugs we need.  captain rhett butler!"

though caught unawares, the blockader made a graceful bow--too
graceful, thought scarlett, trying to analyze it.  it was almost
as if he overdid his courtesy because his contempt for everybody
present was so great.  there was a loud burst of applause as he
bowed and a craning of necks from the ladies in the corner.  so
that was who poor charles hamilton's widow was carrying on with!
and charlie hardly dead a year!

"we need more gold and i am asking you for it," the doctor
continued.  "i am asking a sacrifice but a sacrifice so small
compared with the sacrifices our gallant men in gray are making
that it will seem laughably small.  ladies, i want your jewelry.
_i_ want your jewelry?  no, the confederacy wants your jewelry,
the confederacy calls for it and i know no one will hold back.
how fair a gem gleams on a lovely wrist!  how beautifully g
 
 ___________________________
 
te paper money.

now, they would all dance--except her and the old ladies.  now
everyone would have a good time, except her.  she saw rhett butler
standing just below the doctor and, before she could change the
expression of her face, he saw her and one corner of his mouth
went down and one eyebrow went up.  she jerked her chin up and
turned away from him and suddenly she heard her own name called--
called in an unmistakable charleston voice that rang out above the
hubbub of other names.

"mrs. charles hamilton--one hundred and fifty dollars--in gold."

a sudden hush fell on the crowd both at the mention of the sum and
at the name.  scarlett was so startled she could not even move.
she remained sitting with her chin in her hands, her eyes wide
with astonishment.  everybody turned to look at her.  she saw the
doctor lean down from the platform and whisper something to rhett
butler.  probably telling him she was in mourning and it was
impossible for her to appear on the floor.  she saw rhett's
shoulders
 
 ___________________________
 
start.  "be a little
man, wade, and stop crying or i will come over there and slap you."

why had god invented children, she thought savagely as she turned
her ankle cruelly on the dark road--useless, crying nuisances they
were, always demanding care, always in the way.  in her exhaustion,
there was no room for compassion for the frightened child, trotting
by prissy's side, dragging at her hand and sniffling--only a
weariness that she had borne him, only a tired wonder that she had
ever married charles hamilton.

"miss scarlett," whispered prissy, clutching her mistress' arm,
"doan le's go ter tara.  dey's not dar.  dey's all done gone.
maybe dey daid--maw an' all'm."

the echo of her own thoughts infuriated her and scarlett shook off
the pinching fingers.

"then give me wade's hand.  you can sit right down here and stay."

"no'm!  no'm!"

"then hush!"

how slowly the horse moved!  the moisture from his slobbering mouth
dripped down upon her hand.  through her mind ran a few words of
the song she had 
 
 ___________________________
 
ff the place.  will's letter hammered into her mind the
fact she knew only too well--that time was getting shorter and
shorter before the extra taxes must be paid.  a fierce desperation
drove her as she saw the days slipping by and she wished she might
grasp the hourglass in her hands and keep the sands from running.

but so well did she conceal her feelings, so well did she enact her
role, frank suspected nothing, saw no more than what lay on the
surface--the pretty and helpless young widow of charles hamilton
who greeted him every night in miss pittypat's parlor and listened,
breathless with admiration, as he told of future plans for his
store and how much money he expected to make when he was able to
buy the sawmill.  her sweet sympathy and her bright-eyed interest
in every word he uttered were balm upon the wound left by suellen's
supposed defection.  his heart was sore and bewildered at suellen's
conduct and his vanity, the shy, touchy vanity of a middle-aged
bachelor who knows himself to be unat