ght by a figure on the
sidewalk in a brightly colored dress--too bright for street wear--
covered by a paisley shawl with fringes to the heels.  turning she
saw a tall handsome woman with a bold face and a mass of red hair,
too red to be true.  it was the first time she had ever seen any
woman who she knew for certain had "done something to her hair"
and she watched her, fascinated.

"uncle peter, who is that?" she whispered.

"ah doan know."

"you do, too.  i can tell.  who is she?"

"her name belle watling," said uncle peter, his lower lip
beginning to protrude.

scarlett was quick to catch the fact that he had not preceded the
name with "miss" or "mrs."

"who is she?"

"miss scarlett," said peter darkly, laying the whip on the
startled horse, "miss pitty ain' gwine ter lak it you astin'
questions dat ain' none of yo' bizness.  dey's a passel of no-
count folks in dis town now dat it ain' no use talkin' about."

"good heavens!" thought scarlett, reproved into silence.  "that
must be a bad woman!"
 
 ___________________________
 
 she was clutching
something in her hand, and the reek of heavy cheap perfume came
into the room with her.

"oh, scarlett!" she cried, shutting the door and sinking on the
bed.  "is auntie home yet?  she isn't?  oh, thank the lord!
scarlett, i'm so mortified i could die!  i nearly swooned and,
scarlett, uncle peter is threatening to tell aunt pitty!"

"tell what?"

"that i was talking to that--to miss--mrs.--"  melanie fanned her
hot face with her handkerchief.  "that woman with red hair, named
belle watling!"

"why, melly!" cried scarlett, so shocked she could only stare.

belle watling was the red-haired woman she had seen on the street
the first day she came to atlanta and by now, she was easily the
most notorious woman in town.  many prostitutes had flocked into
atlanta, following the soldiers, but belle stood out above the
rest, due to her flaming hair and the gaudy, overly fashionable
dresses she wore.  she was seldom seen on peachtree street or in
any nice neighborhood, but when she did appe
 
 ___________________________
 
ver seen so many
soldiers together before.  retreat!  retreat!  the army was moving
out.

the hurrying lines pushed her back onto the packed sidewalk and she
smelled the reek of cheap corn whisky.  there were women in the mob
near decatur street, garishly dressed women whose bright finery and
painted faces gave a discordant note of holiday.  most of them were
drunk and the soldiers on whose arms they hung were drunker.  she
caught a fleeting glimpse of a head of red curls and saw that
creature, belle watling, heard her shrill drunken laughter as she
clung for support to a one-armed soldier who reeled and staggered.

when she had shoved and pushed her way through the mob for a block
beyond five points the crowd thinned a little and, gathering up her
skirts, she began to run again.  when she reached wesley chapel,
she was breathless and dizzy and sick at her stomach.  her stays
were cutting her ribs in two.  she sank down on the steps of the
church and buried her head in her hands until she could bre
 
 ___________________________
 
 here.  go, now.  hurry!"

she sat upright and gave prissy a push to speed her feet.

"gawdlmighty, miss scarlett!  ah's sceered ter go runnin' roun' in
de dahk by mahseff!  spose de yankees gits me?"

"if you run fast you can catch up with those soldiers and they
won't let the yankees get you.  hurry!"

"ah's sceered!  sposin' cap'n butler ain' at de hotel?"

"then ask where he is.  haven't you any gumption?  if he isn't at
the hotel, go to the barrooms on decatur street and ask for him.
go to belle watling's house.  hunt for him.  you fool, don't you
see that if you don't hurry and find him the yankees will surely
get us all?"

"miss scarlett, maw would weah me out wid a cotton stalk, did ah go
in a bahroom or a ho' house."

scarlett pulled herself to her feet.

"well, i'll wear you out if you don't.  you can stand outside in
the street and yell for him, can't you?  or ask somebody if he's
inside.  get going."

when prissy still lingered, shuffling her feet and mouthing,
scarlett gave her another
 
 ___________________________
 
 be afraid
of anything except poverty.

up peachtree came a closed carriage and scarlett went to the curb
eagerly to see if she knew the occupant, for aunt pitty's house was
still several blocks away.  she and mammy leaned forward as the
carriage came abreast and scarlett, with a smile arranged, almost
called out when a woman's head appeared for a moment at the window--
a too bright red head beneath a fine fur hat.  scarlett took a
step back as mutual recognition leaped into both faces.  it was
belle watling and scarlett had a glimpse of nostrils distended with
dislike before she disappeared again.  strange that belle's should
be the first familiar face she saw.

"who dat?" questioned mammy suspiciously.  "she knowed you but she
din' bow.  ah ain' never seed ha'r dat color in mah life.  not even
in de tarleton fambly.  it look--well, it look dyed ter me!"

"it is," said scarlett shortly, walking faster.

"does you know a dyed-ha'rd woman?  ah ast you who she is."

"she's the town bad woman," said s
 
 ___________________________
 
.  all night long pianos jangled from
behind drawn shades and rowdy songs and laughter floated out,
punctuated by occasional screams and pistol shots.  the inmates of
these houses were bolder than the prostitutes of the war days and
brazenly hung out of their windows and called to passers-by.  and
on sunday afternoons, the handsome closed carriages of the madams
of the district rolled down the main streets, filled with girls in
their best finery, taking the air from behind lowered silk shades.

belle watling was the most notorious of the madams.  she had opened
a new house of her own, a large two-story building that made
neighboring houses in the district look like shabby rabbit warrens.
there was a long barroom downstairs, elegantly hung with oil
paintings, and a negro orchestra played every night.  the upstairs,
so rumor said, was fitted out with the finest of plush upholstered
furniture, heavy lace curtains and imported mirrors in gilt frames.
the dozen young ladies with whom the house was furni
 
 ___________________________
 
e pit.  but he gave her sympathy,
something she had never had from anyone and never expected from
him.

frequently he was out of town on those mysterious trips to new
orleans which he never explained but which she felt sure, in a
faintly jealous way, were connected with a woman--or women.  but
after uncle peter's refusal to drive her, he remained in atlanta
for longer and longer intervals.

while in town, he spent most of his time gambling in the rooms
above the girl of the period saloon, or in belle watling's bar
hobnobbing with the wealthier of the yankees and carpetbaggers in
money-making schemes which made the townspeople detest him even
more than his cronies.  he did not call at the house now, probably
in deference to the feelings of frank and pitty who would have been
outraged at a male caller while scarlett was in a delicate
condition.  but she met him by accident almost every day.  time and
again, he came riding up to her buggy when she was passing through
lonely stretches of peachtree road
 
 ___________________________
 
forehead
and he looked uncertainly at the snoring ashley and his weeping
wife.  "but--where were you?"

"i don't like to say," and rhett shot a look of drunken cunning at
melanie.

"you'd better say!"

"le's go out on the porch and i'll tell you where we were."

"you'll tell me now."

"hate to say it in front of ladies.  if you ladies'll step out of
the room--"

"i won't go," cried melanie, dabbing angrily at her eyes with her
handkerchief.  "i have a right to know.  where was my husband?"

"at belle watling's sporting house," said rhett, looking abashed.
"he was there and hugh and frank kennedy and dr. meade and--and a
whole lot of them.  had a party.  big party.  champagne.  girls--"

"at--at belle watling's?"

melanie's voice rose until it cracked with such pain that all eyes
turned frightenedly to her.  her hand went clutching at her bosom
and, before archie could catch her, she had fainted.  then a hubbub
ensued, archie picking her up, india running to the kitchen for
water, pitty and scarlett
 
 ___________________________
 
riends used.

"i beg your pardon, i mean, mrs. wilkes. . . ."

"oh, captain butler, do not ask my pardon!  i should feel honored
if you called me 'melly' without the miss!  i feel as though you
were my--my brother or--or my cousin.  how kind you are and how
clever!  how can i ever thank you enough?"

"thank you," said rhett and for a moment he looked almost
embarrassed.  "i should never presume so far, but miss melly," and
his voice was apologetic, "i'm sorry i had to say that mr. wilkes
was in belle watling's house.  i'm sorry to have involved him and
the others in such a--a--  but i had to think fast when i rode away
from here and that was the only plan that occurred to me.  i knew
my word would be accepted because i have so many friends among the
yankee officers.  they do me the dubious honor of thinking me
almost one of them because they know my--shall we call it my
'unpopularity'?--among my townsmen.  and you see, i was playing
poker in belle's bar earlier in the evening.  there are a dozen
ya
 
 ___________________________
 
d your uncle henry--"

"oh, mercy!" cried aunt pitty.

"the others had scattered after the brush with the troops and the
crowd that stuck together had come to the sullivan place to hide
their robes in the chimney and to see how badly mr. wilkes was
hurt.  but for his wound, they'd be headed for texas by now--all of
them--but he couldn't ride far and they wouldn't leave him.  it was
necessary to prove that they had been somewhere instead of where
they had been, and so i took them by back ways to belle watling's."

"oh--i see.  i do beg your pardon for my rudeness, captain butler.
i see now it was necessary to take them there but--  oh, captain
butler, people must have seen you going in!"

"no one saw us.  we went in through a private back entrance that
opens on the railroad tracks.  it's always dark and locked."

"then how--?"

"i have a key," said rhett laconically, and his eyes met melanie's
evenly.

as the full impact of the meaning smote her, melanie became so
embarrassed that she fumbled with t
 
 ___________________________
 
rom the room.  there was a
gentleness foreign to him in both hand and voice.  "you've had a
rotten day, haven't you?"

she allowed herself to be led into the front room and though she
stood on the hearth rug in front of the fire she began to shiver.
the bubble of suspicion in her breast was swelling larger now.  it
was more than a suspicion.  it was almost a certainty and a
terrible certainty.  she looked up into rhett's immobile face and
for a moment she could not speak.  then:

"was frank at--belle watling's?"

"no."

rhett's voice was blunt.

"archie's carrying him to the vacant lot near belle's.  he's dead.
shot through the head."



chapter xlvi


few families in the north end of town slept that night for the news
of the disaster to the klan, and rhett's stratagem spread swiftly
on silent feet as the shadowy form of india wilkes slipped through
back yards, whispered urgently through kitchen doors and slipped
away into the windy darkness.  and in her path, she left fear and
desperate hope.

fro
 
 ___________________________
 
t the night in jail.  they had been in the ill-
starred foray but had separated from the others after the shooting.
riding hard for home they were arrested before they learned of
rhett's plan.  fortunately they all replied, to questions, that
where they had been that night was their own business and not that
of any damned yankees.  they had been locked up for further
questioning in the morning.  old man merriwether and uncle henry
hamilton declared shamelessly that they had spent the evening at
belle watling's sporting house and when captain jaffery remarked
irritably that they were too old for such goings on, they wanted to
fight him.

belle watling herself answered captain jaffery's summons, and
before he could make known his mission she shouted that the house
was closed for the night.  a passel of quarrelsome drunks had
called in the early part of the evening and had fought one another,
torn the place up, broken her finest mirrors and so alarmed the
young ladies that all business had been suspen
 
 ___________________________
 
n.  and there was another
squad about aunt pitty's house, waiting for frank.

before dawn the news had trickled about that the military inquiry
would take place that day.  the townspeople, heavy eyed from
sleeplessness and anxious waiting, knew that the safety of some of
their most prominent citizens rested on three things--the ability
of ashley wilkes to stand on his feet and appear before the
military board, as though he suffered nothing more serious than a
morning-after headache, the word of belle watling that these men
had been in her house all evening and the word of rhett butler that
he had been with them.

the town writhed at these last two!  belle watling!  to owe their
men's lives to her!  it was intolerable!  women who had
ostentatiously crossed the street when they saw belle coming,
wondered if she remembered and trembled for fear she did.  the men
felt less humiliation at taking their lives from belle than the
women did, for many of them thought her a good sort.  but they were
stung tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t they must owe lives and freedom to rhett butler, a
speculator and a scallawag.  belle and rhett, the town's best-known
fancy woman and the town's most hated man.  and they must be under
obligation to them.

another thought that stung them to impotent wrath was the knowledge
that the yankees and carpetbaggers would laugh.  oh, how they would
laugh!  twelve of the town's most prominent citizens revealed as
habitual frequenters of belle watling's sporting house!  two of
them killed in a fight over a cheap little girl, others ejected
from the place as too drunk to be tolerated even by belle and some
under arrest, refusing to admit they were there when everyone knew
they were there!

atlanta was right in fearing that the yankees would laugh.  they
had squirmed too long beneath southern coldness and contempt and
now they exploded with hilarity.  officers woke comrades and
retailed the news.  husbands roused wives at dawn and told them as
 
 ___________________________
 
 house.  as she came up to
the carriage the door was opened and she saw a woman in the dim
interior.

leaning closer, peering inside, melanie questioned:  "who is it?
won't you come in the house?  it's so cold--"

"please come in here and set with me a minute, miz wilkes," came a
faintly familiar voice, an embarrassed voice from the depths of the
carriage.

"oh, you're miss--mrs.--watling!" cried melanie.  "i did so want to
see you!  you must come in the house."

"i can't do that, miz wilkes."  belle watling's voice sounded
scandalized.  "you come in here and set a minute with me."

melanie entered the carriage and the coachman closed the door
behind her.  she sat down beside belle and reached for her hand.

"how can i ever thank you enough for what you did today!  how can
any of us thank you enough!"

"miz wilkes, you hadn't ought of sent me that note this mornin'.
not that i wasn't proud to have a note from you but the yankees
might of got it.  and as for sayin' you was goin' to call on me to
tha
 
 ___________________________
 
's most prominent men was what aroused the hottest
hate of atlanta's ladies.

it was not that they regretted their men were still alive.  it was
that they bitterly resented owing the men's lives to such a man as
rhett and to such an embarrassing trick.  for months they had
writhed under yankee laughter and scorn, and the ladies felt and
said that if rhett really had the good of the klan at heart he
would have managed the affair in a more seemly fashion.  they said
he had deliberately dragged in belle watling to put the nice people
of the town in a disgraceful position.  and so he deserved neither
thanks for rescuing the men nor forgiveness for his past sins.

these women, so swift to kindness, so tender to the sorrowing, so
untiring in times of stress, could be as implacable as furies to
any renegade who broke one small law of their unwritten code.  this
code was simple.  reverence for the confederacy, honor to the
veterans, loyalty to old forms, pride in poverty, open hands to
friends and undying 