chest of
drawers and fumbled in the dark closet for the dancing dress that
needed stitching.  throwing it across her arm, she crossed the
hall quietly.  the door of her parents' bedroom was slightly ajar
and, before she could knock, ellen's voice, low but stern, came to
her ears.

"mr. o'hara, you must dismiss jonas wilkerson."

gerald exploded.  "and where will i be getting another overseer
who wouldn't be cheating me out of my eyeteeth?"

"he must be dismissed, immediately, tomorrow morning.  big sam is
a good foreman and he can take over the duties until you can hire
another overseer."

"ah, ha!" came gerald's voice.  "so, i understand!  then the
worthy jonas sired the--"

"he must be dismissed."

"so, he is the father of emmie slattery's baby," thought scarlett.
"oh, well, what else can you expect from a yankee man and a white-
trash girl?"

then, after a discreet pause which gave gerald's splutterings time
to die away, she knocked on the door and handed the dress to her
mother.

by the t
 
 ___________________________
 
r their
shoulders, shepherded along by an officer and a squad of men
wearing the insignia of the engineering corps.

"what on earth . . . ?" she began again.

then her eyes lighted on a singing black buck in the front rank.
he stood nearly six and a half feet tall, a giant of a man, ebony
black, stepping along with the lithe grace of a powerful animal,
his white teeth flashing as he led the gang in "go down, moses."
surely there wasn't a negro on earth as tall and loud voiced as
this one except big sam, the foreman of tara.  but what was big sam
doing here, so far away from home, especially now that there was no
overseer on the plantation and he was gerald's right-hand man?

as she half rose from her seat to look closer, the giant caught
sight of her and his black face split in a grin of delighted
recognition.  he halted, dropped his shovel and started toward her,
calling to the negroes nearest him:  "gawdlmighty!  it's miss
scarlett!  you, 'lige!  'postle!  prophet!  dar's miss scarlett!"

t
 
 ___________________________
 
here was confusion in the ranks.  the crowd halted uncertainly,
grinning, and big sam, followed by three other large negroes, ran
across the road to the carriage, closely followed by the harried,
shouting officer.

"get back in line, you fellows!  get back, i tell you or i'll--
why it's mrs. hamilton.  good morning, ma'm, and you, too, sir.
what are you up to inciting mutiny and insubordination?  god knows,
i've had trouble enough with these boys this morning."

"oh, captain randall, don't scold them!  they are our people.  this
is big sam our foreman, and elijah and apostle and
 
 ___________________________
 
 prophet from
tara.  of course, they had to speak to me.  how are you, boys?"

she shook hands all around, her small white hand disappearing into
their huge black paws and the four capered with delight at the
meeting and with pride at displaying before their comrades what a
pretty young miss they had.

"what are you boys doing so far from tara?  you've run away, i'll
be bound.  don't you know the patterollers will get you sure?"

they bellowed pleasedly at the badinage.

"runned away?" answered big sam.  "no'm, us ain' runned away.  dey
done sont an' tuck us, kase us wuz de fo' bigges' an' stronges'
han's at tara."  his white teeth showed proudly.  "dey specially
sont fer me, kase ah could sing so good.  yas'm, mist' frank
kennedy, he come by an' tuck us."

"but why, big sam?"

"lawd, miss scarlett!  ain' you heerd?  us is ter dig de ditches
fer de wite gempmums ter hide in w'en de yankees comes."

captain randall and the occupants of the carriage smothered smiles
at this naive explanation of
 
 ___________________________
 
 rifle pits.

"cose, mis' gerald might' nigh had a fit w'en dey tuck me, an' he
say he kain run de place widout me.  but miss ellen she say:  'tek
him, mist' kennedy.  de confedrutsy need big sam mo' dan us do.'
an' she gib me a dollar an' tell me ter do jes' whut de w'ite
gempmums tell me.  so hyah us is."

"what does it all mean, captain randall?"

"oh, it's quite simple.  we have to strengthen the fortifications
of atlanta with more miles of rifle pits, and the general can't
spare any men from the front to do it.  so we've been impressing
the strongest bucks in the countryside for the work."

"but--"

a cold little fear was beginning to throb in scarlett's breast.
more miles of rifle
 
 ___________________________
 
aking precautions.  that's the only reason we're
digging more entrenchments. . . .  but i must be going now.  it's
been pleasant, talking to you. . . .  say good-by to your mistress,
boys, and let's get going."

"good-by, boys.  now, if you get sick or hurt or in trouble, let me
know.  i live right down peachtree street, down there in almost the
last house at the end of town.  wait a minute--"  she fumbled in
her reticule.  "oh, dear, i haven't a cent.  rhett, give me a few
shinplasters.  here, big sam, buy some tobacco for yourself and the
boys.  and be good and do what captain randall tells you."

the straggling line re-formed, the dust arose again in a red cloud
as they moved off and big sam started up the singing again.


"go do-ow, mos-es!  waaa-ay, do-own, in eeejup laa-an!
an' te-el o-le faa-ro-o
ter let mah--peee-pul go!"


"rhett, captain randall was lying to me, just like all the men do--
trying to keep the truth from us women for fear we'll faint.  or
was he lying?  oh, rhett, if t
 
 ___________________________
 
d.

just as she was beginning to draw a breath of relief, her heart
rose in her throat with sudden fright, for a huge negro slipped
silently from behind a large oak tree.  she was frightened but not
enough to lose her wits and, in an instant, the horse was pulled up
and she had frank's pistol in her hand.

"what do you want?" she cried with all the sternness she could
muster.  the big negro ducked back behind the oak, and the voice
that answered was frightened.

"lawd, miss scarlett, doan shoot big sam!"

big sam!  for a moment she could not take in his words.  big sam,
the foreman of tara whom she had seen last in the days of the
siege.  what on earth . . .

"come out of there and let me see if you are really sam!"

reluctantly he slid out of his hiding place, a giant ragged figure,
bare-footed, clad in denim breeches and a blue union uniform jacket
that was far too short and tight for his big frame.  when she saw
it was really big sam, she shoved the pistol down into the
upholstery and smil
 
 ___________________________
 
ah life seed sech trashy niggers.  an' ah din' know you
wuz in 'lanta.  ah thought you wuz at tara.  ah wuz aimin' ter come
home ter tara soon as ah got de chance."

"have you been living in atlanta ever since the siege?"

"no, ma'm!  ah been trabelin'!"  he released her hand and she
painfully flexed it to see if the bones were intact.  "'member w'en
you seed me las'?"

scarlett remembered the hot day before the siege began when she and
rhett had sat in the carriage and the gang of negroes with big sam
at their head had marched down the dusty street toward the
entrenchments singing "go down, moses."  she nodded.

"wel, ah wuked lak a dawg diggin' bresswuks an' fillin' san' bags,
tell de confedruts lef' 'lanta.  de cap'n gempmum whut had me in
charge, he wuz kilt an' dar warn't nobody ter tell big sam whut ter
do, so ah jes' lay low in de bushes.  ah thought ah'd try ter git
home ter tara, but den ah hear dat all de country roun' tara done
buhnt up.  'sides, ah din' hab no way ter git back an'
 
 ___________________________
 
er you.  ah ain' been in shantytown but
two days, but ah hear dem talk 'bout you.  an' yesterday w'en you
druv by an' dem trashy black wenches holler at you, ah recernize
you but you went by so fas' ah couldn' ketch you.  but ah sho tan
de hides of dem niggers!  ah sho did.  ain' you notice dar ain'
none of dem roun' hyah terday?"

"i did notice and i certainly thank you, sam.  well, how would you
like to be my carriage man?"

"miss scarlett, thankee, ma'm, but ah specs ah better go ter tara."

big sam looked down and his bare toe traced aimless marks in the
road.  there was a furtive uneasiness about him.

"now, why?  i'll pay you good wages.  you must stay with me."

the big black face, stupid and as easily read as a child's, looked
up at her and there was fear in it.  he came closer and, leaning
over the side of the buggy, whispered:

"miss scarlett, ah got ter git outer 'lanta.  ah got ter git ter
tara whar dey woan fine me.  ah--ah done kilt a man."

"a darky?"

"no'm.  a w'ite man.  a y
 
 ___________________________
 
ater," she decided, and pushed the thought
into the lumber room of her mind and shut the door upon it.



the sun had completely gone when she reached the bend in the road
above shantytown and the woods about her were dark.  with the
disappearance of the sun, a bitter chill had fallen on the twilight
world and a cold wind blew through the dark woods, making the bare
boughs crack and the dead leaves rustle.  she had never been out
this late by herself and she was uneasy and wished herself home.

big sam was nowhere to be seen and, as she drew rein to wait for
him, she worried about his absence, fearing the yankees might have
already picked him up.  then she heard footsteps coming up the path
from the settlement and a sigh of relief went through her lips.
she'd certainly dress sam down for keeping her waiting.

but it wasn't sam who came round the bend.

it was a big ragged white man and a squat black negro with
shoulders and chest like a gorilla.  swiftly she flapped the reins
on the horse's b
 
 ___________________________
 
ck hand
fumbled between her breasts, and terror and revulsion such as she
had never known came over her and she screamed like an insane
woman.

"shut her up!  drag her out!" cried the white man, and the black
hand fumbled across scarlett's face to her mouth.  she bit as
savagely as she could and then screamed again, and through her
screaming she heard the white man swear and realized that there was
a third man in the dark road.  the black hand dropped from her
mouth and the negro leaped away as big sam charged at him.

"run, miss scarlett!" yelled sam, grappling with the negro; and
scarlett, shaking and screaming, clutched up the reins and whip and
laid them both over the horse.  it went off at a jump and she felt
the wheels pass over something soft, something resistant.  it was
the white man who lay in the road where sam had knocked him down.

maddened by terror, she lashed the horse again and again and it
struck a gait that made the buggy rock and sway.  through her
terror she was conscious
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the sound of feet running behind her
and she screamed at the horse to go faster.  if that black ape got
her again, she would die before he even got his hands upon her.

a voice yelled behind her:  "miss scarlett!  stop!"

without slacking, she looked trembling over her shoulder and saw
big sam racing down the road behind her, his long legs working like
hard-driven pistons.  she drew rein as he came up and he flung
himself into the buggy, his big body crowding her to one side.
sweat and blood were streaming down his face as he panted:

"is you hu't?  did dey hu't you?"

she could not speak, but seeing the direction of his eyes and their
quick averting, she realized that her basque was open to the waist
and her bare bosom and corset cover were showing.  with a shaking
hand she clutched
 
 ___________________________
 
ean as frank.

how could they be so calm and placid when she had just escaped so
terrible a fate?  they weren't even displaying common courtesy in
denying her the relief of talking about it.

the events of the afternoon had shaken her more than she cared to
admit, even to herself.  every time she thought of that malignant
black face peering at her from the shadows of the twilight forest
road, she fell to trembling.  when she thought of the black hand at
her bosom and what would have happened if big sam had not appeared,
she bent her head lower and squeezed her eyes tightly shut.  the
longer she sat silent in the peaceful room, trying to sew,
listening to melanie's voice, the tighter her nerves stretched.
she felt that at any moment she would actually hear them break with
the same pinging sound a banjo string makes when it snaps.

archie's whittling annoyed her and she frowned at him.  suddenly it
seemed odd that he should be sitting there occupying himself with a
piece of wood.  usually he la