oking boy, obviously a gentleman, and somewhere to the
south, some woman was watching the roads, wondering where he was
and when he was coming home, just as she and melanie, with a wild
hope in their hearts, watched every bearded figure that came up
their walk.  they buried the cadet in the family burying ground,
next to the three little o'hara boys, and melanie cried sharply as
pork filled in the grave, wondering in her heart if strangers were
doing this same thing to the tall body of ashley.

will benteen was another soldier, like the nameless boy, who
arrived unconscious across the saddle of a comrade.  will was
acutely ill with pneumonia and when the girls put him to bed, they
feared he would soon join the boy in the burying ground.

he had the sallow malarial face of the south georgia cracker, pale
pinkish hair and washed-out blue eyes which even in delirium were
patient and mild.  one of his legs was gone at the knee and to the
stump was fitted a roughly whittled wooden peg.  he was obviousl
 
 ___________________________
 
to punish them so,
then god could very well do without prayers.  religion had always
been a bargaining process with scarlett.  she promised god good
behavior in exchange for favors.  god had broken the bargain time
and again, to her way of thinking, and she felt that she owed him
nothing at all now.  and whenever she found carreen on her knees
when she should have been taking an afternoon nap or doing the
mending, she felt that carreen was shirking her share of the
burdens.

she said as much to will benteen one afternoon when he was able to
sit up in a chair and was startled when he said in his flat voice:
"let her be, miss scarlett.  it comforts her."

"comforts her?"

"yes, she's prayin' for your ma and him."

"who is 'him'?"

his faded blue eyes looked at her from under sandy lashes without
surprise.  nothing seemed to surprise or excite him.  perhaps he
had seen too much of the unexpected ever to be startled again.
that scarlett did not know what was in her sister's heart did not
seem odd to h
 
 ___________________________
 
've been mighty good to me, miss scarlett," he said, "and me a
stranger and nothin' to you all.  i've caused you a heap of trouble
and worry and if it's all the same to you, i'm goin' to stay here
and help you all with the work till i've paid you back some for
your trouble.  i can't ever pay it all, 'cause there ain't no
payment a man can give for his life."

so he stayed and, gradually, unobtrusively, a large part of the
burden of tara shifted from scarlett's shoulders to the bony
shoulders of will benteen.



it was september and time to pick the cotton.  will benteen sat on
the front steps at scarlett's feet in the pleasant sunshine of the
early autumn afternoon and his flat voice went on and on languidly
about the exorbitant costs of ginning the cotton at the new gin
near fayetteville.  however, he had learned that day in
fayetteville that he could cut this expense a fourth by lending the
horse and wagon for two weeks to the gin owner.  he had delayed
closing the bargain until he discussed it 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd meekly but had idled about, talking to
johnnie gallegher, the foreman of the irish workers, a hard-bitten
little gnome of a man who had a very bad reputation.  the town
talked about it for weeks.

on top of everything else, she was actually making money out of the
mill, and no man could feel right about a wife who succeeded in so
unwomanly an activity.  nor did she turn over the money or any part
of it to him to use in the store.  most of it went to tara and she
wrote interminable letters to will benteen telling him just how it
should be spent.  furthermore, she told frank that if the repairs
at tara could ever be completed, she intended to lend out her money
on mortgages.

"my!  my!" moaned frank whenever he thought of this.  a woman had
no business even knowing what a mortgage was.

scarlett was full of plans these days and each one of them seemed
worse to frank than the previous one.  she even talked of building
a saloon on the property where her warehouse had been until sherman
burned it.  
 
 ___________________________
 
bullard's store.  the dusty red road
was empty and lifeless, and the only sounds in the village were a
few whoops and drunken laughs that floated on the still twilight
air from a saloon far down the street.

the depot had not been rebuilt since it was burned in the battle
and in its place was only a wooden shelter, with no sides to keep
out the weather.  scarlett walked under it and sat down on one of
the empty kegs that were evidently put there for seats.  she peered
up and down the street for will benteen.  will should have been
here to meet her.  he should have known she would take the first
train possible after receiving his laconic message that gerald was
dead.

she had come so hurriedly that she had in her small carpetbag only
a nightgown and a tooth brush, not even a change of underwear.  she
was uncomfortable in the tight black dress she had borrowed from
mrs. meade, for she had had no time to get mourning clothes for
herself.  mrs. meade was thin now, and scarlett's pregnancy being
advanc
 
 ___________________________
 
en.  and she wanted a horse and
carriage too.  she pointed out that you had one."

"it's not a carriage, it's an old buggy," said scarlett indignantly.

"well, no matter what.  i might as well tell you suellen never has
got over your marryin' frank kennedy and i don't know as i blame
her.  you know that was a kind of scurvy trick to play on a
sister."

scarlett rose from his shoulder, furious as a rattler ready to
strike.

"scurvy trick, hey?  i'll thank you to keep a civil tongue in your
head, will benteen!  could i help it if he preferred me to her?"

"you're a smart girl, scarlett, and i figger, yes, you could have
helped him preferrin' you.  girls always can.  but i guess you kind
of coaxed him.  you're a mighty takin' person when you want to be,
but all the same, he was suellen's beau.  why, she'd had a letter
from him a week before you went to atlanta and he was sweet as
sugar about her and talked about how they'd get married when he got
a little more money ahead.  i know because she showed 
 
 ___________________________
 
 slept there.  at least, mammy insisted he was a
republican, saying she could smell a republican, same as a horse
could smell a rattlesnake; but no one believed mammy's story, for
there must be some limit even to melanie's charity.  at least
everyone hoped so.

yes, thought scarlett, sitting on the side porch in the pale
november sunshine with the baby on her lap, he is one of melanie's
lame dogs.  and he's really lame, at that!

the man who was making his way across the back yard stumped, like
will benteen, on a wooden leg.  he was a tall, thin old man with a
bald head, which shone pinkishly dirty, and a grizzled beard so
long he could tuck it in his belt.  he was over sixty, to judge by
his hard, seamed face, but there was no sag of age to his body.  he
was lank and ungainly but, even with his wooden peg, he moved as
swiftly as a snake.

he mounted the steps and came toward her and, even before he spoke,
revealing in his tones a twang and a burring of "r s" unusual in
the lowlands, scarlett knew
 
 ___________________________
 
 de
mattuh, miss scarlett?"

"pa and mother are both dead, sam."

"daid?  is you funnin' wid me, miss scarlett?  dat ain' no way ter
treat me!"

"i'm not funning.  it's true.  mother died when sherman men came
through tara and pa--he went last june.  oh, sam, don't cry.
please don't!  if you do, i'll cry too.  sam, don't!  i just can't
stand it.  let's don't talk about it now.  i'll tell you all about
it some other time. . . .  miss suellen is at tara and she's
married to a mighty fine man, mr. will benteen.  and miss carreen,
she's in a--"  scarlett paused.  she could never make plain to the
weeping giant what a convent was.  "she's living in charleston now.
but pork and prissy are at tara. . . .  there, sam, wipe your nose.
do you really want to go home?"

"yas'm but it ain' gwine be lak ah thought wid miss ellen an'--"

"sam, how'd you like to stay here in atlanta and work for me?  i
need a driver and i need one bad with so many mean folks around
these days."

"yas'm. you sho do.  ah been aimin