basque showed
breasts well matured for her sixteen years.  but for all the
modesty of her spreading skirts, the demureness of hair netted
smoothly into a chignon and the quietness of small white hands
folded in her lap, her true self was poorly concealed.  the green
eyes in the carefully sweet face were turbulent, willful, lusty
with life, distinctly at variance with her decorous demeanor.
her manners had been imposed upon her by her mother's gentle
admonitions and the sterner discipline of her mammy; her eyes were
her own.

on either side of her, the twins lounged easily in their chairs,
squinting at the sunlight through tall mint-garnished glasses as
they laughed and talked, their long legs, booted to the knee and
thick with saddle muscles, crossed negligently.  nineteen years
old, six feet two inches tall, long of bone and hard of muscle,
with sunburned faces and deep auburn hair, their eyes merry and
arrogant, their bodies clothed in identical blue coats and
mustard-colored breeches, th
 
 ___________________________
 
 about the barbecue and the ball,
that's no reason why we shouldn't get plenty of dances tomorrow
night.  you haven't promised them all, have you?"

"well, i have!  how did i know you all would be home?  i couldn't
risk being a wallflower just waiting on you two."

"you a wallflower!"  the boys laughed uproariously.

"look, honey.  you've got to give me the first waltz and stu the
last one and you've got to eat supper with us.  we'll sit on the
stair landing like we did at the last ball and get mammy jincy to
come tell our fortunes again."

"i don't like mammy jincy's fortunes.  you know she said i was
going to marry a gentleman with jet-black hair and a long black
mustache, and i don't like black-haired gentlemen."

"you like 'em red-headed, don't you, honey?" grinned brent.  "now,
come on, promise us all the waltzes and the supper."

"if you'll promise, we'll tell you a secret," said stuart.

"what?" cried scarlett, alert as a child at the word.

"is it what we heard yesterday in atlanta,
 
 ___________________________
 
 a mousy little person
like melanie.  scarlett recalled with contempt melanie's thin
childish figure, her serious heart-shaped face that was plain
almost to homeliness.  and ashley couldn't have seen her in
months.  he hadn't been in atlanta more than twice since the house
party he gave last year at twelve oaks.  no, ashley couldn't be in
love with melanie, because--oh, she couldn't be mistaken!--because
he was in love with her!  she, scarlett, was the one he loved--she
knew it!

scarlett heard mammy's lumbering tread shaking the floor of the
hall and she hastily untucked her foot and tried to rearrange her
face in more placid lines.  it would never do for mammy to suspect
that anything was wrong.  mammy felt that she owned the o'haras,
body and soul, that their secrets were her secrets; and even a
hint of a mystery was enough to set her upon the trail as
relentlessly as a bloodhound.  scarlett knew from experience that,
if mammy's curiosity were not immediately satisfied, she would
take up
 
 ___________________________
 
 the matter with ellen, and then scarlett would be forced
to reveal everything to her mother, or think up some plausible
lie.

mammy emerged from the hall, a huge old woman with the small,
shrewd eyes of an elephant.  she was shining black, pure african,
devoted to her last drop of blood to the o'haras, ellen's
mainstay, the despair of her three daughters, the terror of the
other house servants.  mammy was black, but her code of conduct
and her sense of pride were as high as or higher than those of her
owners.  she had been raised in the bedroom of solange robillard,
ellen o'hara's mother, a dainty, cold, high-nosed french-woman,
who spared neither her children nor her servants their just
punishment for any infringement of decorum.  she had been ellen's
mammy and had come with her from savannah to the up-country when
she married.  whom mammy loved, she chastened.  and, as her love
for scarlet
 
 ___________________________
 
so tired of hearing them talk about the war that i
couldn't have endured it through supper, especially with pa
joining in and shouting about mr. lincoln."

"you ain' got no mo' manners dan a fe'el han', an' after miss
ellen an' me done labored wid you.  an' hyah you is widout yo'
shawl!  an' de night air fixin' ter set in!  ah done tole you an'
tole you 'bout gittin' fever frum settin' in de night air wid
nuthin' on yo' shoulders.  come on in de house, miss scarlett."

scarlett turned away from mammy with studied nonchalance, thankful
that her face had been unnoticed in mammy's preoccupation with the
matter of the shawl.

"no, i want to sit here and watch the sunset.  it's so pretty.
you run get my shawl.  please, mammy, and i'll sit here till pa
comes home."

"yo' voice soun' lak you catchin' a cole," said mammy suspiciously.

"well, i'm not," said scarlett impatiently.  "you fetch me my
shawl."

mammy waddled back into the hall and scarlett heard her call
softly up the stairwell to the up
 
 ___________________________
 
stairs maid.

"you, rosa!  drap me miss scarlett's shawl."  then, more loudly:
"wuthless nigger!  she ain' never whar she does nobody no good.
now, ah got ter climb up an' git it mahseff."

scarlett heard the stairs groan and she got softly to her feet.
when mammy returned she would resume her lecture on scarlett's
breach of hospitality, and scarlett felt that she could not endure
prating about such a trivial matter when her heart was breaking.
as she stood, hesitant, wondering where she could hide until the
ache in her breast subsided a little, a thought came to her,
bringing a small ray of hope.  her father had ridden over to
twelve oaks, the wilkes plantation, that afternoon to offer to buy
dilcey, the broad wife of his valet, pork.  dilcey was head w
 
 ___________________________
 
actually heard anything this afternoon,
perhaps he's noticed something, sensed some excitement in the
wilkes family.  if i can just see him privately before supper,
perhaps i'll find out the truth--that it's just one of the twins'
nasty practical jokes.

it was time for gerald's return and, if she expected to see him
alone, there was nothing for her to do except meet him where the
driveway entered the road.  she went quietly down the front steps,
looking carefully over her shoulder to make sure mammy was not
observing her from the upstairs windows.  seeing no broad black
face, turbaned in snowy white, peering disapprovingly from between
fluttering curtains, she boldly snatched up her green flowered
skirts and sped down the path toward the driveway as fast as her
small ribbon-laced slippers would carry her.

the dark cedars on either side of the graveled drive met in an
arch overhead, turning the long avenue into a dim tunnel.  as soon
as she was beneath the gnarled arms of the cedars, she k
 
 ___________________________
 
he air she
breathed and the water she drank, for she had never consciously
seen beauty in anything but women's faces, horses, silk dresses
and like tangible things.  yet the serene half-light over tara's
well-kept acres brought a measure of quiet to her disturbed mind.
she loved this land so much, without even knowing she loved it,
loved it as she loved her mother's face under the lamp at prayer
time.

still there was no sign of gerald on the quiet winding road.  if
she had to wait much longer, mammy would certainly come in search
of her and bully her into the house.  but even as she strained her
eyes down the darkening road, she heard a pounding of hooves at
the bottom of the pasture hill and saw the horses and cows scatter
in fright.  gerald o'hara was coming home across country and at
top speed.

he came up the hill at a gallop on his thick-barreled, long-legged
hunter, appearing in the distance like a boy on a too large horse.
his long white hair standing out behind him, he urged the ho
 
 ___________________________
 
llent horseman.

"i wonder why he always wants to jump fences when he's had a few
drinks," she thought.  "and after that fall he had right here last
year when he broke his knee.  you'd think he'd learn.  especially
when he promised mother on oath he'd never jump again."

scarlett had no awe of her father and felt him more her contemporary
than her sisters, for jumping fences and keeping it a secret from
his wife gave him a boyish pride and guilty glee that matched her
own pleasure in outwitting mammy.  she rose from her seat to watch
him.

the big horse reached the fence, gathered himself and soared over
as effortlessly as a bird, his rider yelling enthusiastically, his
crop beating the air, his white curls jerking out behind him.
gerald did not see his daughter in the shadow of the trees, and he
drew rein in the road, patting his horse's neck with approbation.

"there's none in the county can touch you, nor in the state," he
informed his mount, with pride, the brogue of county meath still

 
 ___________________________
 
unger sisters, for carreen, who
had been born caroline irene, was delicate and dreamy, and
suellen, christened susan elinor, prided herself on her elegance
and ladylike deportment.

moreover, scarlett and her father were bound together by a mutual
suppression agreement.  if gerald caught her climbing a fence
instead of walking half a mile to a gate, or sitting too late on
the front steps with a beau, he castigated her personally and with
vehemence, but he did not mention the fact to ellen or to mammy.
and when scarlett discovered him jumping fences after his solemn
promise to his wife, or learned the exact amount of his losses at
poker, as she always did from county gossip, she refrained from
mentioning the fact at the supper table in the artfully artless
manner suellen had.  scarlett and her father each assured the
other solemnly that to bring such matters to the ears of ellen
would only hurt her, and nothing would induce them to wound her
gentleness.

scarlett looked at her father in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
fading light, and, without
knowing why, she found it comforting to be in his presence.  there
was something vital and earthy and coarse about him that appealed
to her.  being the least analytic of people, she did not realize
that this was because she possessed in some degree these same
qualities, despite sixteen years of effort on the part of ellen
and mammy to obliterate them.

"you look very presentable now," she said, "and i don't think
anyone will suspect you've been up to your tricks unless you brag
about them.  but it does seem to me that after you broke your knee
last year, jumping that same fence--"

"well, may i be damned if i'll have me own daughter telling me
what i shall jump and not jump," he shouted, giving her cheek
another pinch.  "it's me own neck, so it is.  and besides, missy,
what are you doing out here without your shawl?"

see
 
 ___________________________
 
her arm and passed it through his.

"we'll be going in to supper now, and all this is between us.
i'll not be worrying your mother with this--nor do you do it
either.  blow your nose, daughter."

scarlett blew her nose on her torn handkerchief, and they started
up the dark drive arm in arm, the horse following slowly.  near
the house, scarlett was at the point of speaking again when she
saw her mother in the dim shadows of the porch.  she had on her
bonnet, shawl and mittens, and behind her was mammy, her face like
a thundercloud, holding in her hand the black leather bag in which
ellen o'hara always carried the bandages and medicines she used in
doctoring the slaves.  mammy's lips were large and pendulous and,
when indignant, she could push out her lower one to twice its
normal length.  it was pushed out now, and scarlett knew that
mammy was seething over something of which she did not approve.

"mr. o'hara," called ellen as she saw the two coming up the
driveway--ellen belonged to a gener
 
 ___________________________
 
ation that was formal even
after seventeen years of wedlock and the bearing of six children--
"mr. o'hara, there is illness at the slattery house.  emmie's baby
has been born and is dying and must be baptized.  i am going there
with mammy to see what i can do."

her voice was raised questioningly, as though she hung on gerald's
assent to her plan, a mere formality but one dear to the heart of
gerald.

"in the name of god!" blustered gerald.  "why should those white
trash take you away just at your supper hour and just when i'm
wanting to tell you about the war talk that's going on in atlanta!
go, mrs. o'hara.  you'd not rest easy on your pillow the night if
there was trouble abroad and you not there to help."

"she doan never gi
 
 ___________________________
 
t no res' on her piller fer hoppin' up at night
time nursin' niggers an po' w'ite trash dat could ten' to
deyseff," grumbled mammy in a monotone as she went down the stairs
toward the carriage which was waiting in the side drive.

"take my place at the table, dear," said ellen, patting scarlett's
cheek softly with a mittened hand.

in spite of her choked-back tears, scarlett thrilled to the never-
failing magic of her mother's touch, to the faint fragrance of
lemon verbena sachet that came from her rustling silk dress.  to
scarlett, there was something breath-taking about ellen o'hara, a
miracle that lived in the house wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h her and awed her and charmed
and soothed her.

gerald helped his wife into the carriage and gave orders to the
coachman to drive carefully.  toby, who had handled gerald's
horses for twenty years, pushed out his lips in mute indignation
at being told how to conduct his own business.  driving off, with
mammy beside him, each was a perfect picture of pouting african
disapproval.

"if i didn't do so much for those trashy slatterys that they'd
have to pay money for elsewhere," fumed gerald, "they'd be willing
to sell me their miserable few acres of swamp bottom, and the
county would be well rid of them."  then, brightening, in
anticipation of one of his practical jokes:  "come daughter, let's
go tell pork that instead of buying dilcey, i've sold him to john
wilkes."

he tossed the reins of his horse t
 
 ___________________________
 
emove basting threads and
carry the rosewood sewing box from room to room, as ellen moved
about the house superintending the cooking, the cleaning and the
wholesale clothes-making for the plantation.

she had never seen her mother stirred from her austere placidity,
nor her personal appointments anything but perfect, no matter what
the hour of day or night.  when ellen was dressing for a ball or
for guests or even to go to jonesboro for court day, it frequently
required two hours, two maids and mammy to turn her out to her own
satisfaction; but her swift toilets in times of emergency were
amazing.

scarlett, whose room lay across the hall from her mother's, knew
from babyhood the soft sound of scurrying bare black feet on the
hardwood floor in the hours of dawn, the urgent tappings on her
mother's door, and the muffled, frightened negro voices that
whispered of sickness and birth and death in the long row of
whitewashed cabins in the quarters.  as a child, she often had
crept to the door an
 
 ___________________________
 
no answer.  why the loveliest of the
robillard daughters should marry a loud-voiced, red-faced little
man who came hardly up to her ears remained a mystery to all.

gerald himself never quite knew how it all came about.  he only
knew that a miracle had happened.  and, for once in his life, he
was utterly humble when ellen, very white but very calm, put a
light hand on his arm and said:  "i will marry you, mr. o'hara."

the thunderstruck robillards knew the answer in part, but only
ellen and her mammy ever knew the whole story of the night when
the girl sobbed till the dawn like a broken-hearted child and rose
up in the morning a woman with her mind made up.

with foreboding, mammy had brought her young mistress a small
package, addressed in a strange hand from new orleans, a package
containing a miniature of ellen, which she flung to the floor with
a cry, four letters in her own handwriting to philippe robillard,
and a brief letter from a new orleans priest, announcing the death
of her cous
 
 ___________________________
 
in in a barroom brawl.

"they drove him away, father and pauline and eulalie.  they drove
him away.  i hate them.  i hate them all.  i never want to see
them again.  i want to get away.  i will go away where i'll never
see them again, or this town, or anyone who reminds me of--of--
him."

and when the night was nearly spent, mammy, who had cried herself
out over her mistress' dark head, protested, "but, honey, you kain
do dat!"

"i will do it.  he is a kind man.  i will do it or go into the
convent at charleston."

it was the threat of the convent that finally won the assent of
bewildered and heartstricken pierre robillard.  he was staunchly
presbyterian, even though his family were catholic, and the
thought of his daughter becoming a nun was even worse than that of
her marrying gerald o'hara.  after all, the man had not
 
 ___________________________
 
hing
against him but a lack of family.

so, ellen, no longer robillard, turned her back on savannah, never
to see it again, and with a middle-aged husband, mammy, and twenty
"house niggers" journeyed toward tara.

the next year, their first child was born and they named her katie
scarlett, after gerald's mother.  gerald was disappointed, for he
had wanted a son, but he nevertheless was pleased enough over his
small black-haired daughter to serve rum to every slave at tara
and to get roaringly, happily drunk himself.

if ellen had ever regretted her sudden decision to marry him, no
one ever knew it, certainly not gerald, who almost burst with
pride whene
 
 ___________________________
 
d who valued a man for what
he was.

she became the best-loved neighbor in the county.  she was a
thrifty and kind mistress, a good mother and a devoted wife.  the
heartbreak and selflessness that she would have dedicated to the
church were devoted instead to the service of her child, her
household and the man who had taken her out of savannah and its
memories and had never asked any questions.

when scarlett was a year old, and more healthy and vigorous than a
girl baby had any right to be, in mammy's opinion, ellen's second
child, named susan elinor, but always called suellen, was born,
and in due time came carreen, listed in the family bible as
caroline irene.  then followed three little boys, each of whom
died before he had learned to walk--three little boys who now lay
under the twisted cedars in the burying ground a hundred yards
from the house, beneath three stones, each bearing the name of
"gerald o'hara, jr."

from the day when ellen first came to tara, the place had been
transform
 
 ___________________________
 
if she was only fifteen years old, she was
nevertheless ready for the responsibilities of the mistress of a
plantation.  before marriage, young girls must be, above all other
things, sweet, gentle, beautiful and ornamental, but, after
marriage, they were expected to manage households that numbered a
hundred people or more, white and black, and they were trained
with that in view.

ellen had been given this preparation for marriage which any well-
brought-up young lady received, and she also had mammy, who could
galvanize the most shiftless negro into energy.  she quickly
brought order, dignity and grace into gerald's household, and she
gave tara a beauty it had never had before.

the house had been built according to no architectural plan
whatever, with extra rooms added where and when it seemed
convenient, but, with ellen's care and attention, it gained a
charm that made up for its lack of design.  the avenue of cedars
leading from the main road to the house--that avenue of cedars
without 
 
 ___________________________
 
ere always kind,
gracious and forgiving.

she had been reared in the tradition of great ladies, which had
taught her how to carry her burden and still retain her charm, and
she intended that her three daughters should be great ladies also.
with her younger daughters, she had success, for suellen was so
anxious to be attractive she lent an attentive and obedient ear to
her mother's teachings, and carreen was shy and easily led.  but
scarlett, child of gerald, found the road to ladyhood hard.

to mammy's indignation, her preferred playmates were not her
demure sisters or the well-brought-up wilkes girls but the negro
children on the plantation and the boys of the neighborhood, and
she could climb a tree or throw a rock as well as any of them.
mammy was greatly perturbed that ellen's daughter should display
such traits and frequently adjured her to "ack lak a lil lady."
but ellen took a more tolerant and long-sighted view of the
matter.  she knew that from childhood playmates grew beaux in
lat
 
 ___________________________
 
er years, and the first duty of a girl was to get married.  she
told herself that the child was merely full of life and there was
still time in which to teach her the arts and graces of being
attractive to men.

to this end, ellen and mammy bent their efforts, and as scarlett
grew older she became an apt pupil in this subject, even though
she learned little else.  despite a succession of governesses and
two years at the near-by fayetteville female academy, her
education was sketchy, but no girl in the county danced more
gracefully than she.  she knew how to smile so that her dimples
leaped, how to walk pigeon-toed so that her wide hoop skirts
swayed entrancingly, how to look up into a man's face and then
drop her eyes and bat the 
 
 ___________________________
 
lids rapidly so that she seemed a-
tremble with gentle emotion.  most of all she learned how to
conceal from men a sharp intelligence beneath a face as sweet and
bland as a baby's.

ellen, by soft-voiced admonition, and mammy, by constant carping,
labored to inculcate in her the qualities that would make her
truly desirable as a wife.

"you must be more gentle, dear, more sedate," ellen told her
daughter.  "you must not interrupt gentlemen when they are
speaking, even if you do think you know more about matters than
they do.  gentlemen do not like forward girls."

"young misses whut frowns an pushes out dey chins an' says 'ah
will' and 'ah woan' mos' gener'ly doan ketch husbands," prophesied
mammy gloomily.  "young 
 
 ___________________________
 
only the outward signs of gentility.  the inner
grace from which these signs should spring, she never learned nor
did she see any reason for learning it.  appearances were enough,
for the appearances of ladyhood won her popularity and that was
all she wanted.  gerald bragged that she was the belle of five
counties, and with some truth, for she had received proposals from
nearly all the young men in the neighborhood and many from places
as far away as atlanta and savannah.

at sixteen, thanks to mammy and ellen, she looked sweet, charming
and giddy, but she was, in reality, self-willed, vain and
obstinate.  she had the easily stirred passions of her irish
father and nothing except the thinnest veneer of her mother's
unselfish and forbearing nature.  ellen never fully realized that
it was only a veneer, for scarlett always showed her best face to
her mother, concealing her escapades, curbing her temper and
appearing as sweet-natured as she could in ellen's presence, for
her mother could shame
 
 ___________________________
 
 her to tears with a reproachful glance.

but mammy was under no illusions about her and was constantly
alert for breaks in the veneer.  mammy's eyes were sharper than
ellen's, and scarlett could never recall in all her life having
fooled mammy for long.

it was not that these two loving mentors deplored scarlett's high
spirits, vivacity and charm.  these were traits of which southern
women were proud.  it was gerald's headstrong and impetuous nature
in her that gave them concern, and they sometimes feared they
would not be able to conceal her damaging qualities until she had
made a good match.  but scarlett intended to marry--and marry
ashley--and she was willing to appear demure, pliable and
scatterbrained, if those were the qualiti
 
 ___________________________
 
gainst her mother's
legs.

dilcey was tall and bore herself erectly.  she might have been any
age from thirty to sixty, so unlined was her immobile bronze face.
indian blood was plain in her features, overbalancing the negroid
characteristics.  the red color of her skin, narrow high forehead,
prominent cheek bones and the hawk-bridged nose which flattened at
the end above thick negro lips, all showed the mixture of two
races.  she was self-possessed and walked with a dignity that
surpassed even mammy's, for mammy had acquired her dignity and
dilcey's was in her blood.

when she spoke, her voice was not so slurred as most negroes' and
she chose her words more carefully.

"good evenin', young misses.  mist' gerald, i is sorry to 'sturb
you, but i wanted to come here and thank you agin fo' buyin' me
and my chile.  lots of gentlemens might a' bought me but they
wouldn't a' bought my prissy, too, jes' to keep me frum grievin'
and i thanks you.  i'm gwine do my bes' fo' you and show you i
ain't f
 
 ___________________________
 
s of her eyes.  "miss scarlett, poke done tole me how you
ast mist gerald to buy me.  and so i'm gwine give you my prissy
fo' yo' own maid."

she reached behind her and jerked the little girl forward.  she
was a brown little creature, with skinny legs like a bird and a
myriad of pigtails carefully wrapped with twine sticking stiffly
out from her head.  she had sharp, knowing eyes that missed
nothing and a studiedly stupid look on her face.

"thank you, dilcey," scarlett replied, "but i'm afraid mammy will
have something to say about that.  she's been my maid ever since i
was born."

"mammy getting ole," said dilcey, with a calmness that would have
enraged mammy.  "she a good mammy, but you a young lady now and
needs a good maid, and my prissy been maidin' fo' miss india fo' a
year now.  she kin sew and fix hair good as a grown pusson."

prodded by her mother, prissy bobbed a sudden curtsy and grinned
at scarlett, who could not help grinning back.

"a sharp little wench," she thought, and sa
 
 ___________________________
 
's lap and cry in peace.  wouldn't mother ever come home?

then, wheels ground sharply on the graveled driveway, and the soft
murmur of ellen's voice dismissing the coachman floated into the
room.  the whole group looked up eagerly as she entered rapidly,
her hoops swaying, her face tired and sad.  there entered with her
the faint fragrance of lemon verbena sachet, which seemed always
to creep from the folds of her dresses, a fragrance that was
always linked in scarlett's mind with her mother.  mammy followed
at a few paces, the leather bag in her hand, her underlip pushed
out and her brow lowering.  mammy muttered darkly to herself as
she waddled, taking care that her remarks were pitched too low to
be understood but loud enough to register her unqualified
disapproval.

"i am sorry i am so late," said ellen, slipping her plaid shawl
from drooping shoulders and handing it to scarlett, whose cheek
she patted in passing.

gerald's face had brightened as if by magic at her entrance.

"is the b
 
 ___________________________
 
 not want to marry emmie, no matter how
often he might walk with her in the twilight.

scarlett sighed, for her curiosity was sharp.  things were always
happening under her mother's eyes which she noticed no more than
if they had not happened at all.  ellen ignored all things
contrary to her ideas of propriety and tried to teach scarlett to
do the same, but with poor success.

ellen had stepped to the mantel to take her rosary beads from the
small inlaid casket in which they always reposed when mammy spoke
up with firmness.

"miss ellen, you gwine eat some supper befo' you does any
prayin'."

"thank you.  mammy, but i am not hungry."

"ah gwine fix yo' supper mahseff an' you eats it," said mammy, her
brow furrowed with indignation as she started down the hall for
the kitchen.  "poke!" she called, "tell cookie stir up de fiah.
miss ellen home."

as the boards shuddered under her weight, the soliloquy she had
been muttering in the front hall grew louder and louder, coming
clearly to the ears 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the family in the dining room.

"ah has said time an' again, it doan do no good doin' nuthin' fer
w'ite trash.  dey is de shiflesses, mos' ungrateful passel of no-
counts livin'.  an' miss ellen got no bizness weahin' herseff out
waitin' on folks dat did dey be wuth shootin' dey'd have niggers
ter wait on dem.  an' ah has said--"

her voice trailed off as she went down the long open passageway,
covered only by a roof, that led into the kitchen.  mammy had her
own method of letting her owners know exactly where she stood on
all matters.  she knew it was beneath the dignity of quality white
folks to pay the slightest attention to what a darky said when she
was just grumbling to herself.  she knew that to uphold this
dignity, they must ignore what she said, even if she stood in the
next room and almost shouted.  it protected her from reproof, and
it left no doubt in anyone's mind as to her exact views on any
subject.

pork entered the room, bea
 
 ___________________________
 
ring a plate, silver and a napkin.  he
was followed closely by jack, a black little boy of ten, hastily
buttoning a white linen jacket with one hand and bearing in the
other a fly-swisher, made of thin strips of newspaper tied to a
reed longer than he was.  ellen had a beautiful peacock-feather
fly-brusher, but it was used only on very special occasions and
then only after domestic struggle, due to the obstinate conviction
of pork, cookie and mammy that peacock feathers were bad luck.

ellen sat down in the chair which gerald pulled out for her and
four voices attacked her.

"mother, the lace is loose on my new ball dress and i want to wear
it tomorrow night at twelve oaks.  won't you please fix it?"

"mother, scarlett's new dress is prettier than mine and i look
like a fright in pink.  why can't she wear my pink and let me wear
her green?  she looks all right in pink."

"mother, can i stay up for the ball tomorrow night?  i'm thirteen
no
 
 ___________________________
 
 had it not
been for ellen's restraining hand, scarlett would frequently have
boxed her ears.

"now, mr. o'hara, tell me more about what mr. calvert said about
charleston," said ellen.

scarlett knew her mother cared nothing at all about war and
politics and thought them masculine matters about which no lady
could intelligently concern herself.  but it gave gerald pleasure
to air his views, and ellen was unfailingly thoughtful of her
husband's pleasure.

while gerald launched forth on his news, mammy set the plates
before her mistress, golden-topped biscuits, breast of fried
chicken and a yellow yam open and steaming, with melted butter
dripping from it.  mammy pinched small jack, and he hastened to
his business of slowly swishing the paper ribbons back and forth
behind ellen.  mammy stood beside the table, watching every
forkful that traveled from plate to mouth, as though she intended
to force the food down ellen's throat should she see signs of
flagging.  ellen ate diligently, but scarle
 
 ___________________________
 
tt could see that she
was too tired to know what she was eating.  only mammy's implacable
face forced her to it.

when the dish was empty and gerald only midway in his remarks on
the thievishness of yankees who wanted to free darkies and yet
offered no penny to pay for their freedom, ellen rose.

"we'll be having prayers?" he questioned, reluctantly.

"yes.  it is so late--why, it is actually ten o'clock," as the
clock with coughing and tinny thumps marked the hour.  "carreen
should have been asleep long ago.  the lamp, please, pork, and my
prayer book, mammy."

prompte
 
 ___________________________
 
d by mammy's hoarse whisper, jack set his fly-brush in the
corner and removed the dishes, while mammy fumbled in the
sideboard drawer for ellen's worn prayer book.  pork, tiptoeing,
reached the ring in the chain and drew the lamp slowly down until
the table top was brightly bathed in light and the ceiling receded
into shadows.  ellen arranged her skirts and sank to the floor on
her knees, laying the open prayer book on the table before her and
clasping her hands upon it.  gerald knelt beside her, and scarlett
and suellen took their accustomed places on the opposite side of
the table, folding th
 
 ___________________________
 
eir voluminous petticoats in pads under their
knees, so they would ache less from contact with the hard floor.
carreen, who was small for her age, could not kneel comfortably at
the table and so knelt facing a chair, her elbows on the seat.
she liked this position, for she seldom failed to go to sleep
during prayers and, in this postures it escaped her mother's
notice.

the house servants shuffled and rustled in the hall to kneel by
the doorway, mammy groaning aloud as she sank down, pork straight
as a ramrod, rosa and teena, the maids, graceful in their
spreading bright calicoes, cookie gaunt and yellow beneath her
snowy head rag, and jack, stupid with sleep, as far away from
mammy's pinching fingers as possible.  their dark eyes gleamed
expectantly, for praying with their white folks was one of the
events of the day.  the old and colorful phrases of the litany
with its oriental imagery meant little to them but it satisfied
something in the
 
 ___________________________
 
ed him, he would hasten to her side.  she had only to--

"oh!" she thought rapturously, digging her fingers into her
lowered brow.  "what a fool i've been not to think of this till
now!  i must think of some way to let him know.  he wouldn't marry
her if he knew i loved him!  how could he?"

with a start, she realized that gerald had finished and her
mother's eyes were on her.  hastily she began her decade, telling
off the beads automatically but with a depth of emotion in her
voice that caused mammy to open her eyes and shoot a searching
glance at her.  as she finished her prayers and suellen, then
carreen, began their decades, her mind was still speeding onward
with her entrancing new thought.

even now, it wasn't too late!  too often the county had been
scandalized by elopements when one or the other of the
participating parties was practically at the altar with a third.
and ashley's engagement had not even been announced yet!  yes,
there was plenty of time!

if no love lay between ashle
 
 ___________________________
 
ey were beautiful because
they were the attributes of ellen.  but tonight, because of the
exaltation of her own spirit, scarlett found in the whole
ceremonial, the softly spoken words, the murmur of the responses,
a surpassing beauty beyond any that she had ever experienced
before.  and her heart went up to god in sincere thankfulness that
a pathway for her feet had been opened--out of her misery and
straight to the arms of ashley.

when the last "amen" sounded, they all rose, somewhat stiffly,
mammy being hauled to her feet by the combined efforts of teena
and rosa.  pork took a long spiller from the mantelpiece, lit it
from the lamp flame and went into the hall.  opposite the winding
stair stood a walnut sideboard, too large for use in the dining
room, bearing on its wide top several lamps and a long row of
candles in candlesticks.  pork lit one lamp and three candles and,
with the pompous dignity of a first chamberlain of the royal
bedchamber lighting a king and queen to their rooms, he 
 
 ___________________________
 
ry well.  what a pity legs could
not be shown, she thought, pulling up her petticoats and
regretfully viewing them, plump and neat under pantalets.  she had
such nice legs.  even the girls at the fayetteville academy had
admitted as much.  and as for her waist--there was no one in
fayetteville, jonesboro or in three counties, for that matter, who
had so small a waist.

the thought of her waist brought her back to practical matters.
the green muslin measured seventeen inches about the waist, and
mammy had laced her for the eighteen-inch bombazine.  mammy would
have to lace her tighter.  she pushed open the door, listened and
heard mammy's heavy tread in the downstairs hall.  she shouted for
her impatiently, knowing she could raise her voice with impunity,
as ellen was in the smokehouse, measuring out the day's food to
cookie.

"some folks thinks as how ah kin fly," grumbled mammy, shuffling
up the stairs.  she entered puffing, with the expression of one
who expects battle and welcomes it.  i
 
 ___________________________
 
n her large black hands was
a tray upon which food smoked, two large yams covered with butter,
a pile of buckwheat cakes dripping syrup, and a large slice of ham
swimming in gravy.  catching sight of mammy's burden, scarlett's
expression changed from one of minor irritation to obstinate
belligerency.  in the excitement of trying on dresses she had
forgotten mammy's ironclad rule that, before going to any party,
the o'hara girls must be crammed so full of food at home they
would be unable to eat any refreshments at the party.

"it's no use.  i won't eat it.  you can just take it back to the
kitchen."

mammy set the tray on the table and squared herself, hands on
hips.

"yas'm, you is!  ah ain' figgerin' on havin' happen whut happen at
dat las' barbecue w'en ah wuz too sick frum dem chittlins ah et
ter fetch you no tray befo' you went.  you is gwine eat e
 
 ___________________________
 
ve'y bite
of dis."

"i am not!  now, come here and lace me tighter because we are late
already.  i heard the carriage come round to the front of the
house."

mammy's tone became wheedling.

"now, miss scarlett, you be good an' come eat jes'a lil.  miss
carreen an' miss suellen done eat all dey'n."

"they would," said scarlett contemptuously.  "they haven't any
more spirit than a rabbit.  but i won't!  i'm through with trays.
i'm not forgetting the time i ate a whole tray and went to the
calverts' and they had ice cream out of ice they'd brought all the
way from savannah, and i couldn't eat but a spoonful.  i'm going
to have a good time today and eat as mu
 
 ___________________________
 
ch as i please."

at this defiant heresy, mammy's brow lowered with indignation.
what a young miss could do and what she could not do were as
different as black and white in mammy's mind; there was no middle
ground of deportment between.  suellen and carreen were clay in
her powerful hands and harkened respectfully to her warning.  but
it had always been a struggle to teach scarlett that most of her
natural impulses were unladylike.  mammy's victories over scarlett
were hard-won and represented guile unknown to the white mind.

"ef you doan care 'bout how folks talks 'bout dis fainbly, ah
does," she rumbled.  "ah ain' gwine stand by an' have eve'ybody at
de pahty sayin' how you ain' fotched up right.  ah has tole you
an' tole you dat you kin allus tell a lady by dat she eat lak a
bird.  an' ah ain' aimin' ter have you go ter mist' wilkes' an'
eat lak a fe'el han' an' gobble lak a hawg."

"mother is a lady and she eats," countered
 
 ___________________________
 
 scarlett.

"w'en you is mahied, you kin eat, too," retorted mammy.  "w'en
miss ellen yo' age, she never et nuthin' w'en she went out, an'
needer yo' aunt pauline nor yo' aunt eulalie.  an' dey all done
mahied.  young misses whut eats heavy mos' gener'ly doan never
ketch husbands."

"i don't believe it.  at that barbecue when you were sick and i
didn't eat beforehand, ashley wilkes told me he liked to see a
girl with a healthy appetite."

mammy shook her head ominously.

"whut gempmums says an' whut dey thinks is two diffunt things.
an' ah ain' noticed mist' ashley axing fer ter mahy you."

scarlett scowled, started to speak sharply and then caught
herself.  mammy had her there and there was no argument.  seeing
the obdurate look on scarlett's face, mammy picked up the tray
and, with the bland guile of her race, changed her tactics.  as
she started for the door, she sighed.

"well'm, awright.  ah wuz tellin' cookie w'ile she wuz a-fix
 
 ___________________________
 
in'
dis tray.  'you kin sho tell a lady by whut she doan eat,' an' ah
say ter cookie.  'ah ain' seed no w'ite lady who et less'n miss
melly hamilton did las' time she wuz visitin' mist' ashley'--ah
means, visitin' miss india."

scarlett shot a look of sharp suspicion at her, but mammy's broad
face carried only a look of innocence and of regret that scarlett
was not the lady melanie hamilton was.

"put down that tray and come lace me tighter," said scarlett
irritably.  "and i'll try to eat a little afterwards.  if i ate
now i couldn't lace tight enough."

cloaking her triumph, mammy set down the tray.

"whut mah lamb gwine wear?"

"that," answered scarlett, pointing at the fluffy mass of green
flowered muslin.  instantly mammy was in arms.

"no, you ain'.  it ain' fittin' fer
 
 ___________________________
 
w yo'
buzzum befo' three o'clock an' dat dress ain' got no neck an' no
sleeves.  an' you'll git freckled sho as you born, an' ah ain'
figgerin' on you gittin' freckled affer all de buttermilk ah been
puttin' on you all dis winter, bleachin' dem freckles you got at
savannah settin' on de beach.  ah sho gwine speak ter yo' ma 'bout
you."

"if you say one word to her before i'm dressed i won't eat a
bite," said scarlett coolly.  "mother won't have time to send me
back to change once i'm dressed."

mammy sighed resignedly, beholding herself outguessed.  between
the two evils, it was better to have scarlett wear an afternoon
dress at a morning barbecue than to have her gobble like a hog.

"hole onter sumpin' an' suck in yo' breaf," she commanded.

scarlett obeyed, bracing herself and catching firm hold of one of
the bedposts.  mammy pulled and jerked vigorously and, as the tiny
circumference of whalebone-girdled waist grew smaller, a proud,
fond look came into her eyes.

"ain' nobody got a wais'
 
 ___________________________
 
 lak mah lamb," she said approvingly.
"eve'y time ah pulls miss suellen littler dan twenty inches, she
up an' faint."

"pooh!" gasped scarlctt, speaking with difficulty.  "i never
fainted in my life."

"well, 'twouldn' do no hahm ef you wuz ter faint now an' den,"
advised mammy.  "you is so brash sometimes, miss scarlett.  ah
been aimin' ter tell you, it jes' doan look good de way you doan
faint 'bout snakes an' mouses an' sech.  ah doan mean round home
but w'en you is out in comp'ny.  an' ah has tole you an'--"

"oh, hurry!  don't talk so much.  i'll catch a husband.  see if i
don't, even if i don't scream and faint.  goodness, but my stays
are tight!  put on the dress."

mammy carefully dropped the twelve yards of green sprigged muslin
over the mountainous petticoat
 
 ___________________________
 
s and hooked up the back of the
tight, low-cut basque.

"you keep yo' shawl on yo' shoulders w'en you is in de sun, an'
doan you go takin' off yo' hat w'en you is wahm," she commanded.
"elsewise you be comin' home lookin' brown lak ole miz slattery.
now, you come eat, honey, but doan eat too fas'.  no use havin' it
come right back up agin."

scarlett obediently sat down before the tray, wondering if she
would be able to get any food into her stomach and still have room
to breathe.  mammy plucked a large towel from the washstand and
carefully tied it around scarlett's neck, spreading the white
folds over her lap.  scarlett began on the ham, because she liked
ham, and forced it down.

"i wish to heaven i was married," she said resentfully as she
attacked the yams with loathing.  "i'm tired of everlastingly
being unnatural and never doing anything i want to do.  i'm tired
of acting like i don't eat more than a bird, and walking when i
want to run and saying i feel faint after a wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ltz, when i could
dance for two days and never get tired.  i'm tired of saying, 'how
wonderful you are!' to fool men who haven't got one-half the sense
i've got, and i'm tired of pretending i don't know anything, so
men can tell me things and feel important while they're doing
it. . . .  i can't eat another bite."

"try a hot cake," said mammy inexorably.

"why is it a girl has to be so silly to catch a husband?"

"ah specs it's kase gempmums doan know whut dey wants.  dey jes'
knows whut dey thinks dey wants.  an' givin' dem whut dey thinks
dey wants saves a pile of mizry an' bein' a ole maid.  an' dey
thinks dey wants mousy lil gals wid bird's tastes an' no sense at
all.  it doan make a gempmum feel lak mahyin' a lady ef he
suspicions she got mo' sense dan he has."

"don't you suppose men get surprised after they're married to find
 
 ___________________________
 

that their wives do have sense?"

"well, it's too late den.  dey's already mahied.  'sides, gempmums
specs dey wives ter have sense."

"some day i'm going to do and say everything i want to do and say,
and if people don't like it i don't care."

"no, you ain'," said mammy grimly.  "not while ah got breaf.  you
eat dem cakes.  sop dem in de gravy, honey."

"i don't think yankee girls have to act like such fools.  when we
were at saratoga last year, i noticed plenty of them acting like
they had right good sense and in front of men, too."

mammy snorted.

"yankee gals!  yas'm, ah guess dey speaks dey minds awright, but
ah ain' noticed many of dem gittin' proposed ter at saratoga."

"but yankees must get married," argued scarlett.  "they don't just
grow.  they must 
 
 ___________________________
 
get married and have children.  there's too many
of them."

"men mahys dem fer dey money," said mammy firmly.

scarlett sopped the wheat cake in the gravy and put it in her
mouth.  perhaps there was something to what mammy said.  there
must be something in it, for ellen said the same things, in
different and more delicate words.  in fact, the mothers of all
her girl friends impressed on their daughters the necessity of
being helpless, clinging, doe-eyed creatures.  really, it took a
lot of sense to cultivate and hold such a pose.  perhaps she had
been too brash.  occasionally she had argued with ashley and
frankly aired her opinions.  perhaps this and her healthy
enjoyment of walking and riding had turned him fro
 
 ___________________________
 
 that her own personality,
frighteningly vital though it was, was more attractive than any
masquerade she might adopt.  had she been told, she would have
been pleased but unbelieving.  and the civilization of which she
was a part would have been unbelieving too, for at no time, before
or since, had so low a premium been placed on feminine
naturalness.



as the carriage bore her down the red road toward the wilkes
plantation, scarlett had a feeling of guilty pleasure that neither
her mother nor mammy was with the party.  there would be no one at
the barbecue who, by delicately lifted brows or out-thrust
underlip, could interfere with her plan of action.  of course,
suellen would be certain to tell tales tomorrow, but if all went
as scarlett hoped, the excitement of the family over her
engagement to ashley or her elopement would more than overbalance
their displeasure.  yes, she was very glad ellen had been forced
to stay at home.

gerald, primed with brandy, had given jonas wilkerson his
di
 
 ___________________________
 
andering.  he had told gerald over and over that emmie
slattery's baby might have been fathered by any one of a dozen men
as easily as himself--an idea in which gerald concurred--but that
had not altered his case so far as ellen was concerned.  jonas
hated all southerners.  he hated their cool courtesy to him and
their contempt for his social status, so inadequately covered by
their courtesy.  he hated ellen o'hara above anyone else, for she
was the epitome of all that he hated in southerners.

mammy, as head woman of the plantation, had remained to help
ellen, and it was dilcey who rode on the driver's seat beside
toby, the girls' dancing dresses in a long box across her lap.
gerald rode beside the carriage on his big hunter, warm with
brandy and pleased with himself for having gotten through with the
unpleasant business of wilkerson so speedily.  he had shoved the
responsibility onto ellen, and her disappointment at missing the
barbecue and the gathering of her friends did not enter his m
 
 ___________________________
 
at any rate i've never been thrown," cried scarlett
indignantly.  "and mrs. tarleton takes a toss at every hunt."

"and breaks a collar bone like a man," said gerald.  "no fainting,
no fussing.  now, no more of it, for here she comes."

he stood up in his stirrups and took off his hat with a sweep, as
the tarleton carriage, overflowing with girls in bright dresses
and parasols and fluttering veils, came into view, with mrs.
tarleton on the box as gerald had said.  with her four daughters,
their mammy and their ball dresses in long cardboard boxes
crowding the carriage, there was no room for the coachman.  and,
besides, beatrice tarleton never willingly permitted anyone, black
or white, to hold reins when her arms were out of slings.  frail,
fine-boned, so white of skin that her flaming hair seemed to have
drawn all the color from her face into its vital burnished mass,
she was nevertheless possessed of exuberant health and untiring
energy.  she had borne eight children, as red of hair and a
 
 ___________________________
 
 nellie.  it's a stentor, you are."

"a stentor, me ignorant broth of a boy!" cried mrs. tarleton,
aping his brogue.  "you mean a centaur.  stentor was a man with a
voice like a brass gong."

"stentor or centaur, 'tis no matter," answered gerald, unruffled
by his error.  "and 'tis a voice like brass you have, ma'm, when
you're urging on the hounds, so it is."

"that's one on you, ma," said betty.  "i told you you yelled like
a comanche whenever you saw a fox."

"but not as loud as you yell when mammy washes your ears,"
returned mrs. tarleton.  "and you sixteen!  well, as to why i'm
not riding today, nellie foaled early this morning."

"did she now!" cried gerald with real interest, his irishman's
passion for horses shining in his eyes, and scarlett again felt
the sense of shock in comparing her mother with mrs. tarleton.  to
ellen, mares never foaled nor cows calved.  in fact, hens almost
didn't lay eggs.  ellen ignored these matters completely.  but
mrs. tarleton had no such reticences.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
oom where the wraps were laid, she found cathleen
calvert preening before the mirror and biting her lips to make
them look redder.  there were fresh roses in her sash that matched
her cheeks, and her cornflower-blue eyes were dancing with
excitement.

"cathleen," said scarlett, trying to pull the corsage of her dress
higher, "who is that nasty man downstairs named butler?"

"my dear, don't you know?" whispered cathleen excitedly, a weather
eye on the next room where dilcey and the wilkes girls' mammy were
gossiping.  "i can't imagine how mr. wilkes must feel having him
here, but he was visiting mr. kennedy in jonesboro--something
about buying cotton--and, of course, mr. kennedy had to bring him
along with him.  he couldn't just go off and leave him."

"what is the matter with him?"

"my dear, he isn't received!"

"not really!"

"no."

scarlett digested this in silence, for she had never before been
under the same roof with anyone who was not received.  it was very
exciting.

"what did he do
 
 ___________________________
 
ot occur to her that if she married ashley she would
automatically be relegated to arbors and front parlors with staid
matrons in dull silks, as staid and dull as they and not a part of
the fun and frolicking.  like most girls, her imagination carried
her just as far as the altar and no further.  besides, she was too
unhappy now to pursue an abstraction.

she dropped her eyes to her plate and nibbled daintily on a beaten
biscuit with an elegance and an utter lack of appetite that would
have won mammy's approval.  for all that she had a superfluity of
beaux, she had never been more miserable in her life.  in some way
that she could not understand, her plans of last night had failed
utterly so far as ashley was concerned.  she had attracted other
beaux by the dozens, but not ashley, and all the fears of
yesterday afternoon were sweeping back upon her, making her heart
beat fast and then slow, and color flame and whiten in her cheeks.

ashley had made no attempt to join the circle about her, i
 
 ___________________________
 
 cad, you--  you made me believe you were going to
marry me--"

"be fair," his voice pleaded.  "did i ever--"

she did not want to be fair, although she knew what he said was
true.  he had never once crossed the borders of friendliness with
her and, when she thought of this fresh anger rose, the anger of
hurt pride and feminine vanity.  she had run after him and he
would have none of her.  he preferred a whey-faced little fool
like melanie to her.  oh, far better that she had followed ellen
and mammy's precepts and never, never revealed that she even liked
him--better anything than to be faced with this scorching shame!

she sprang to her feet, her hands clenched and he rose towering
over her, his face full of the mute misery of one forced to face
realities when realities are agonies.

"i shall hate you till i die, you cad--you lowdown--lowdown--"
what was the word she wanted?  she could not think of any word bad
enough.

"scarlett--please--"

he put out his hand toward her and, as he did, 
 
 ___________________________
 
n
the sofa and she heard him laughing.

if she could have killed him, she would have done it.  instead,
she walked out of the room with such dignity as she could summon
and banged the heavy door behind her.



she went up the stairs so swiftly that when she reached the
landing, she thought she was going to faint.  she stopped,
clutching the banisters, her heart hammering so hard from anger,
insult and exertion that it seemed about to burst through her
basque.  she tried to draw deep breaths but mammy's lacings were
too tight.  if she should faint and they should find her here on
the landing, what would they think?  oh, they'd think everything.
ashley and that vile butler man and those nasty girls who were so
jealous!  for once in her life, she wished that she carried
smelling salts, like the other girls, but she had never even owned
a vinaigrette.  she had always been so proud of never feeling
giddy.  she simply could not let herself faint now!

gradually the sickening feeling began to depa
 
 ___________________________
 
mingled with her frenzied desire to be free of charles and
safely back at tara, an unmarried girl again, ran the knowledge
that she had only herself to blame.  ellen had tried to stop her
and she would not listen.

so she danced through the night of ashley's wedding in a daze and
said things mechanically and smiled and irrelevantly wondered at
the stupidity of people who thought her a happy bride and could
not see that her heart was broken.  well, thank god, they couldn't
see!

that night after mammy had helped her undress and had departed and
charles had emerged shyly from the dressing room, wondering if he
was to spend a second night in the horsehair chair, she burst into
tears.  she cried until charles climbed into bed beside her and
tried to comfort her, cried without words until no more tears
would come and at last she lay sobbing quietly on his shoulder.

if there had not been a war, there would have been a week of
visiting about the county, with balls and barbecues in honor of
the tw
 
 ___________________________
 
following measles, without ever having
gotten any closer to the yankees than the camp in south carolina.

in due time, charles' son was born and, because it was fashionable
to name boys after their fathers' commanding officers, he was
called wade hampton hamilton.  scarlett had wept with despair at
the knowledge that she was pregnant and wished that she were dead.
but she carried the child through its time with a minimum of
discomfort, bore him with little distress and recovered so quickly
that mammy told her privately it was downright common--ladies
should suffer more.  she felt little affection for the child, hide
the fact though she might.  she had not wanted him and she
resented his coming and, now that he was here, it did not seem
possible that he was hers, a part of her.

though she recovered physically from wade's birth in a disgracefully
short time, mentally she was dazed and sick.  her spirits drooped,
despite the efforts of the whole plantation to revive them.  ellen
went about wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ed it.  she hated it
but she was drawn there, so she could hear john wilkes and the
girls talk about him--hear them read his letters from virginia.
they hurt her but she had to hear them.  she disliked the stiff-
necked india and the foolish prattling honey and knew they
disliked her equally, but she could not stay away from them.  and
every time she came home from twelve oaks, she lay down on her bed
morosely and refused to get up for supper.

it was this refusal of food that worried ellen and mammy more than
anything else.  mammy brought up tempting trays, insinuating that
now she was a widow she might eat as much as she pleased, but
scarlett had no appetite.

when dr. fontaine told ellen gravely that heartbreak frequently
led to a decline and women pined away into the grave, ellen went
white, for that fear was what she had carried in her heart.

"isn't there anything to be done, doctor?"

"a change of scene will be the best thing in the world for her,"
said the doctor, only too anxious t
 
 ___________________________
 
 and i
would feel so much easier and safer if scarlett were with us.
three lonely women are better than two.  and perhaps dear scarlett
could find some ease for her sorrow, as melly is doing, by nursing
our brave boys in the hospitals here--and, of course, melly and i
are longing to see the dear baby. . . ."

so scarlett's trunk was packed again with her mourning clothes and
off she went to atlanta with wade hampton and his nurse prissy, a
headful of admonitions as to her conduct from ellen and mammy and
a hundred dollars in confederate bills from gerald.  she did not
especially want to go to atlanta.  she thought aunt pitty the
silliest of old ladies and the very idea of living under the same
roof with ashley's wife was abhorrent.  but the county with its
memories was impossible now, and any change was welcome.




part two



chapter viii


as the train carried scarlett northward that may morning in 1862,
she thought that atlanta couldn't possibly be so boring as
charleston and savannah h
 
 ___________________________
 
t chile.  dat
lil pickaninny gwine let it drap."

scarlett looked at prissy and sighed.  prissy was not the most
adequate of nurses.  her recent graduation from a skinny
pickaninny with brief skirts and stiffly wrapped braids into the
dignity of a calico dress and starched white turban was an
intoxicating affair.  she would never have arrived at this
eminence so early in life had not the exigencies of war and the
demands of the commissary department on tara made it impossible
for ellen to spare mammy or dilcey or even rosa or teena.  prissy
had never been more than a mile away from twelve oaks or tara
before, and the trip on the train plus her elevation to nurse was
almost more than the brain in her little black skull could bear.
the twenty-mile journey from jonesboro to atlanta had so excited
her that scarlett had been forced to hold the baby all the way.
now, the sight of so many buildings and people completed prissy's
demoralization.  she twisted from side to side, pointed, bounced
about
 
 ___________________________
 
 and so jounced the baby that he wailed miserably.

scarlett longed for the fat old arms of mammy.  mammy had only to
lay hands on a child and it hushed crying.  but mammy was at tara
and there was nothing scarlett could do.  it was useless for her
to take little wade from prissy.  he yelled just as loudly when
she held him as when prissy did.  besides, he would tug at the
ribbons of her bonnet and, no doubt, rumple her dress.  so she
pretended she had not heard uncle peter's suggestion.

"maybe i'll learn about babies sometime," she thought irritably,
as the carriage jolted and swayed out of the morass surrounding
the station, "but i'm never going to like foolin
 
 ___________________________
 
g with them."  and
as wade's face went purple with his squalling, she snapped
crossly:  "give him that sugar-tit in your pocket, priss.
anything to make him hush.  i know he's hungry, but i can't do
anything about that now."

prissy produced the sugar-tit, given her that morning by mammy,
and the baby's wails subsided.  with quiet restored and with the
new sights that met her eyes, scarlest's spirits began to rise a
little.  when uncle peter finally maneuvered the carriage out of
the mudholes and onto peachtree street, she felt the first surge
of interest she had known in months.  how the town had grown!  it
was not much more than a year since she had last been here, and it
did not seem possible that the little atlanta she knew could have
changed so much.

for the past year, sh
 
 ___________________________
 
ow of alligators broke the
night stillness; better than charleston itself, dreaming in its
gardens behind its high walls; better than savannah with its wide
streets lined with palmetto and the muddy river beside it.  yes,
and temporarily even better than tara, dear though tara was.

there was something exciting about this town with its narrow muddy
streets, lying among rolling red hills, something raw and crude
that appealed to the rawness and crudeness underlying the fine
veneer that ellen and mammy had given her.  she suddenly felt that
this was where she belonged, not in serene and quiet old cities,
flat beside yellow waters.

the houses were farther and farther apart now, and leaning out
scarlett saw the red brick and slate roof of miss pittypat's
house.  it was almost the last house on the north side of town.
beyond it, peachtree road narrowed and twisted under great trees
out of sight into thick quiet woods.  the neat wooden-paneled
fence had been newly painted white and the front yar
 
 ___________________________
 
, learned nothing of harshness or reality, and the home
in which he grew to manhood was as soft as a bird's nest.  it was
such a quiet, old-fashioned, gentle home compared with tara.  to
scarlett, this house cried out for the masculine smells of brandy,
tobacco and macassar oil, for hoarse voices and occasional curses,
for guns, for whiskers, for saddles and bridles and for hounds
underfoot.  she missed the sounds of quarreling voices that were
always heard at tara when ellen's back was turned, mammy quarreling
with pork, rosa and teena bickering, her own acrimonious arguments
with suellen, gerald's bawling threats.  no wonder charles had been
a sissy, coming from a home like this.  here, excitement never
entered in, voices were never raised, everyone deferred gently to
the opinions of others, and, in the end, the black grizzled autocrat
in the kitchen had his way.  scarlett, who had hoped for a freer
rein when she escaped mammy's supervision, discovered to her sorrow
that uncle peter's sta
 
 ___________________________
 
ndards of ladylike conduct, especially for
mist' charles' widow, were even stricter than mammy's.

in such a household, scarlett came back to herself, and almost
before she realized it her spirits rose to normal.  she was only
seventeen, she had superb health and energy, and charles' people
did their best to make her happy.  if they fell a little short of
this, it was not their fault, for no one could take out of her
heart the ache that throbbed whenever ashley's name was mentioned.
and melanie mentioned it so often!  but melanie and pitty were
tireless in planning ways to soothe the sor
 
 ___________________________
 
e background
in order to divert her.  they fussed about her food and her hours
for taking afternoon naps and for taking carriage rides.  they not
only admired her extravagantly, her high-spiritedness, her figure,
her tiny hands and feet, her white skin, but they said so
frequently, petting, hugging and kissing her to emphasize their
loving words.

scarlett did not care for the caresses, but she basked in the
compliments.  no one at tara had ever said so many charming things
about her.  in fact, mammy had spent her time deflating her
conceit.  little wade was no longer an annoyance, for the family,
black and white, and the neighbors idolized him and there was a
never-ceasing rivalry as to whose lap he should occupy.  melanie
especially doted on him.  even in his worst screaming spells,
melanie thought him adorable and said so, adding, "oh, you
precious darling!  i just wish you were mine!"

sometimes scarlett found it hard to dissemble her feelings, for
she still thought aunt pitty the silli
 
 ___________________________
 
 lovely, lovely dresses!

here she sat like a crow with hot black taffeta to her wrists and
buttoned up to her chin, with not even a hint of lace or braid,
not a jewel except ellen's onyx mourning brooch, watching tacky-
looking girls hanging on the arms of good-looking men.  all
because charles hamilton had had the measles.  he didn't even die
in a fine glow of gallantry in battle, so she could brag about
him.

rebelliously she leaned her elbows on the counter and looked at
the crowd, flouting mammy's oft-repeated admonition against
leaning on elbows and making them ugly and wrinkled.  what did it
matter if they did get ugly?  she'd probably never get a chance to
show them again.  she looked hungrily at the frocks floating by,
butter-yellow watered silks with garlands of rosebuds; pink satins
with eighteen flounces edged with tiny black velvet ribbons; baby
blue taffeta, ten yards in the skirt and foamy with cascading
lace; exposed bosoms; seductive flowers.  maybelle merriwether
went towa
 
 ___________________________
 
at in corners at dances with other sober matrons and only
emerged to dance with your husband or with old gentlemen who
stepped on your feet.  if you didn't do these things, the other
matrons talked about you and then your reputation was ruined and
your family disgraced.  it seemed such a terrible waste to spend
all your little girlhood learning how to be attractive and how to
catch men and then only use the knowledge for a year or two.  when
she considered her training at the hands of ellen and mammy, she
knew it had been thorough and good because it had always reaped
results.  there were set rules to be followed, and if you followed
them success crowned your efforts.

with old ladies you were sweet and guileless and appeared as
simple minded as possible, for old ladies were sharp and they
watched girls as jealously as cats, ready to pounce on any
indiscretion of tongue or eye.  with old gentlemen, a girl was
pert and saucy and almost, but not quite, flirtatious, so that the
old fools' vani
 
 ___________________________
 
ell them and laugh harder and
keep them around indefinitely trying to find out.  you could
promise, with your eyes, any number of exciting things that would
make a man maneuver to get you alone.  and, having gotten you
alone, you could be very, very hurt or very, very angry when he
tried to kiss you.  you could make him apologize for being a cur
and forgive him so sweetly that he would hang around trying to
kiss you a second time.  sometimes, but not often, you did let him
kiss you.  (ellen and mammy had not taught her that but she
learned it was effective.)  then you cried and declared you didn't
know what had come over you and that he couldn't ever respect you
again.  then he had to dry your eyes and usually he proposed, to
show just how much he did respect you.  and then there were--  oh,
there were so many things to do to bachelors and she knew them
all, the nuance of the sidelong glance, the half-smile behind the
fan, the swaying of the hips so that skirts swung like a bell, the
tears,
 
 ___________________________
 
th.  but
there was something stimulating about him, something warm and
vital and electric.  all that was irish in her rose to the
challenge of his black eyes.  she decided she was going to take
this man down a notch or two.  his knowledge of her secret gave
him an advantage over her that was exasperating, so she would have
to change that by putting him at a disadvantage somehow.  she
stifled her impulse to tell him exactly what she thought of him.
sugar always caught more flies than vinegar, as mammy often said,
and she was going to catch and subdue this fly, so he could never
again have her at his mercy.

"thank you," she said sweetly, deliberately misunderstanding his
jibe.  "a compliment like that coming from so famous a man as
captain butler is appreciated."

he threw back his head and laughed freely--yelped, was what
scarlett thought fiercely, her face becoming pink again.

"why don't you say what you really think?" he demanded, lowering
his voice so that in the clatter and excitement 
 
 ___________________________
 
all the roads for miles.
atlanta breathed more easily, but--

but kennesaw mountain was only twenty-two miles away!

on the day when the first wounded from kennesaw mountain were
coming in, mrs. merriwether's carriage was at aunt pitty's house at
the unheard-of hour of seven in the morning, and black uncle levi
sent up word that scarlett must dress immediately and come to the
hospital.  fanny elsing and the bonnell girls, roused early from
slumber, were yawning on the back seat and the elsings' mammy sat
grumpily on the box, a basket of freshly laundered bandages on her
lap.  off scarlett went, unwillingly for she had danced till dawn
the night before at the home guard's party and her feet were tired.
she silently cursed the efficient and indefatigable mrs.
merriwether, the wounded and the whole southern confederacy, as
prissy buttoned her in her oldest and raggedest calico frock which
she used for hospital work.  gulping down the bitter brew of
parched corn and dried sweet potatoes that pa
 
 ___________________________
 
say miss meade done
got wud early dis mawnin' dat young mist' phil done been shot an'
miss meade she tuck de cah'ige an' ole talbot an' betsy an' dey
done gone ter fotch him home.  cookie say he bad hurt an' miss
meade ain' gwine ter be studyin' 'bout comin' up hyah."

scarlett stared at her and had an impulse to shake her.  negroes
were always so proud of being the bearers of evil tidings.

"well, don't stand there like a ninny.  go down to mrs.
merriwether's and ask her to come up or send her mammy.  now,
hurry."

"dey ain' dar, miss scarlett.  ah drapped in ter pass time of de
day wid mammy on mah way home.  dey's done gone.  house all locked
up.  spec dey's at de horsepittle."

"so that's where you were so long!  whenever i send you somewhere
you go where i tell you and don't stop to 'pass any time' with
anybody.  go--"

she stopped and racked her brain.  who was left in town among their
friends who would be helpful?  there was mrs. elsing.  of course,
mrs. elsing didn't like her at all
 
 ___________________________
 
her.  well, she'd tell a lie about it.

she entered melanie's room and saw that the breakfast tray was
untouched.  melanie lay on her side, her face white.

"mrs. meade's over at the hospital," said scarlett.  "but mrs.
elsing is coming.  do you feel bad?"

"not very," lied melanie.  "scarlett, how long did it take wade to
get born?"

"less than no time," answered scarlett with a cheerfulness she was
far from feeling.  "i was out in the yard and i didn't hardly have
time to get into the house.  mammy said it was scandalous--just
like one of the darkies."

"i hope i'll be like one of the darkies too," said melanie,
mustering a smile which suddenly disappeared as pain contorted her
face.

scarlett looked down at melanie's tiny hips with none too sanguine
hopes but said reassuringly:  "oh, it's not really so bad."

"oh, i know it isn't.  i'm afraid i'm a little coward.  is--is mrs.
elsing coming right away?"

"yes, right away," said scarlett.  "i'll go down and get some fresh
water and sponge 
 
 ___________________________
 
once she looked sharply at
the pain-twisted face and wondered why it should be that she, of
all people in the world, should be here with melanie at this
particular time--she who had nothing in common with her, who hated
her, who would gladly have seen her dead.  well, maybe she'd have
her wish, and before the day was over too.  a cold superstitious
fear swept her at this thought.  it was bad luck to wish that
someone were dead, almost as bad luck as to curse someone.  curses
came home to roost, mammy said.  she hastily prayed that melanie
wouldn't die and broke into feverish small talk, hardly aware of
what she said.  at last, melanie put a hot hand on her wrist.

"don't bother about talking, dear.  i know how worried you are.
i'm so sorry i'm so much trouble."

scarlett relapsed into silence but she could not sit still.  what
would she do if neither the doctor nor prissy got there in time?
she walked to the window and looked down the street and came back
and sat down again.  then she rose 
 
 ___________________________
 
ite, hurried, hurried with straining
faces, lugging packages and sacks and boxes of food--more food than
she had seen in a year.  the crowd suddenly gave a lane for a
careening carriage and through the lane came the frail and elegant
mrs. elsing, standing up in the front of her victoria, reins in one
hand, whip in the other.  she was hatless and white faced and her
long gray hair streamed down her back as she lashed the horse like
a fury.  jouncing on the back seat of the carriage was her black
mammy, melissy, clutching a greasy side of bacon to her with one
hand, while with the other and both feet she attempted to hold the
boxes and bags piled all about her.  one bag of dried peas had
burst and the peas strewed themselves into the street.  scarlett
screamed to her, but the tumult of the crowd drowned her voice and
the carriage rocked madly by.

for a moment she could not understand what it all meant and then,
remembering that the commissary warehouses were down by the
railroad tracks, she 
 
 ___________________________
 
er and protect her and spoil her.  it was incredible that
she could be in such a fix.  not a friend, not a neighbor to help
her.  there had always been friends, neighbors, the competent hands
of willing slaves.  and now in this hour of greatest need, there
was no one.  it was incredible that she could be so completely
alone, and frightened, and far from home.

home!  if she were only home, yankees or no yankees.  home, even if
ellen was sick.  she longed for the sight of ellen's sweet face,
for mammy's strong arms around her.

she rose dizzily to her feet and started walking again.  when she
came in sight of the house, she saw wade swinging on the front
gate.  when he saw her, his face puckered and he began to cry,
holding up a grubby bruised finger.

"hurt!" he sobbed.  "hurt!"

"hush!  hush!  hush!  or i'll spank you.  go out in the back yard
and make mud pies and don't move from there."

"wade hungwy," he sobbed and put the hurt finger in his mouth.

"i don't care.  go in the back yard a
 
 ___________________________
 

moment later melanie's voice, weak and trembling, called:
"scarlett?  is it you?  please come!  please!"

scarlett dropped prissy's arm and the wench sank whimpering to the
steps.  for a moment scarlett stood still, looking up, listening to
the low moaning which had begun again.  as she stood there, it
seemed as though a yoke descended heavily upon her neck, felt as
though a heavy load were harnessed to it, a load she would feel as
soon as she took a step.

she tried to think of all the things mammy and ellen had done for
her when wade was born but the merciful blurring of the childbirth
pains obscured almost everything in mist.  she did recall a few
things and she spoke to prissy rapidly, authority in her voice.

"build a fire in the stove and keep hot water boiling in the
kettle.  and bring up all the towels you can find and that ball of
twine.  and get me the scissors.  don't come telling me you can't
find them.  get them and get them quick.  now hurry."

she jerked prissy to her feet a
 
 ___________________________
 
  anything might come out of there!"

she flapped the reins and urged the horse forward.  the sight of
the macintosh house had pricked the last bubble of hope remaining
to her.  it was burned, in ruins, deserted, as were all the
plantations she had passed that day.  tara lay only half a mile
away, on the same road, right in the path of the army.  tara was
leveled, too!  she would find only the blackened bricks, starlight
shining through the roofless walls, ellen and gerald gone, the
girls gone, mammy gone, the negroes gone, god knows where, and this
hideous stillness over everything.

why had she come on this fool's errand, against all common sense,
dragging melanie and her child?  better that they had died in
atlanta than, tortured by this day of burning sun and jolting
wagon, to die in the silent ruins of tara.

but ashley had left melanie in her care.  "take care of her."  oh,
that beautiful, heartbreaking day when he had kissed her good-by
before he went away forever!  "you'll take care
 
 ___________________________
 
n on her hands as he patted her clumsily, crying:  "sho
is glad you back!  sho is--"

prissy burst into tears and incoherent mumblings:  "poke!  poke,
honey!"  and little wade, encouraged by the weakness of his elders,
began sniffling:  "wade thirsty!"

scarlett caught them all in hand.

"miss melanie is in the wagon and her baby too.  pork, you must
carry her upstairs very carefully and put her in the back company
room.  prissy, take the baby and wade inside and give wade a drink
of water.  is mammy here, pork?  tell her i want her."

galvanized by the authority in her voice, pork approached the wagon
and fumbled at the backboard.  a moan was wrenched from melanie as
he half-lifted, half-dragged her from the feather tick on which she
had lain so many hours.  and then she was in pork's strong arms,
her head drooping like a child's across his shoulder.  prissy,
holding the baby and dragging wade by the hand, followed them up
the wide steps and disappeared into the blackness of the hall.

sca
 
 ___________________________
 
made her knees tremble.  she would think of mother later.  she must
put her mother out of her mind now, else she would stumble stupidly
like gerald or sob monotonously like wade.

pork came down the wide dark steps toward them, hurrying to press
close to scarlett like a cold animal toward a fire.

"lights?" she questioned.  "why is the house so dark, pork?  bring
candles."

"dey tuck all de candles, miss scarlett, all 'cept one we been
usin' ter fine things in de dahk wid, an' it's 'bout gone.  mammy
been usin' a rag in a dish of hawg fat fer a light fer nussin' miss
careen an' miss suellen."

"bring what's left of the candle," she ordered.  "bring it into
mother's--into the office."

pork pattered into the dining room and scarlett groped her way into
the inky small room and sank down on the sofa.  her father's arm
still lay in the crook of hers, helpless, appealing, trusting, as
only the hands of the very young and the very old can be.

"he's an old man, an old tired man," she thought agai
 
 ___________________________
 
ored face and, for the first time
in her life, she saw him unshaven, his once florid face covered
with silvery bristles.  pork placed the candle on the candle stand
and came to her side.  scarlett felt that if he had been a dog he
would have laid his muzzle in her lap and whined for a kind hand
upon his head.

"pork, how many darkies are here?"

"miss scarlett, dem trashy niggers done runned away an' some of dem
went off wid de yankees an'--"

"how many are left?"

"dey's me, miss scarlett, an' mammy.  she been nussin' de young
misses all day.  an' dilcey, she settin' up wid de young misses
now.  us three, miss scarlett."

"us three" where there had been a hundred.  scarlett with an effort
lifted her head on her aching neck.  she knew she must keep her
voice steady.  to her surprise, words came out as coolly and
naturally as if there had never been a war and she could, by waving
her hand, call ten house servants to her.

"pork, i'm starving.  is there anything to eat?"

"no'm.  dey tuck it 
 
 ___________________________
 
y thinks dey's jes'
roots an'--"

"the moon will be up soon.  you go out and dig us some and roast
them.  there's no corn meal?  no dried peas?  no chickens?"

"no'm.  no'm.  whut chickens dey din' eat right hyah dey cah'ied
off 'cross dey saddles."

they--  they--  they--  was there no end to what 'they" had done?
was it not enough to burn and kill?  must they also leave women and
children and helpless negroes to starve in a country which they had
desolated?

"miss scarlett, ah got some apples mammy buhied unner de house.  we
been eatin' on dem today."

"bring them before you dig the potatoes.  and, pork--i--i feel so
faint.  is there any wine in the cellar, even blackberry?"

"oh, miss scarlett, de cellar wuz de fust place dey went."

a swimming nausea compounded of hunger, sleeplessness, exhaustion
and stunning blows came on suddenly and she gripped the carved
roses under her hand.

"no wine," she said dully, remembering the endless rows of bottles
in the cellar.  a memory stirred.

"por
 
 ___________________________
 
ey ain' been no sugar at tara fer de
longes'.  an' dey hawses done et up all de mint an' dey done broke
all de glasses."

if he says "they" once more, i'll scream.  i can't help it, she
thought, and then, aloud:  "well, hurry and get the whisky,
quickly.  we'll take it neat."  and, as he turned:  "wait, pork.
there's so many things to do that i can't seem to think. . . .  oh,
yes.  i brought home a horse and a cow and the cow needs milking,
badly, and unharness the horse and water him.  go tell mammy to
look after the cow.  tell her she's got to fix the cow up somehow.
miss melanie's baby will die if he doesn't get something to eat
and--"

"miss melly ain'--kain--?"  pork paused delicately.

"miss melanie has no milk."  dear god, but mother would faint at
that!

"well, miss scarlett, mah dilcey ten' ter miss melly's chile.  mah
dilcey got a new chile herseff an' she got mo'n nuff fer both."

"you've got a new baby, pork?"

babies, babies, babies.  why did god make so many babies?  but no,
g
 
 ___________________________
 
od didn't make them.  stupid people made them.

"yas'm, big fat black boy.  he--"

"go tell dilcey to leave the girls.  i'll look after them.  tell
her to nurse miss melanie's baby and do what she can for miss
melanie.  tell mammy to look after the cow and put that poor horse
in the stable."

"dey ain' no stable, miss scarlett.  dey use it fer fiah wood."

"don't tell me any more what 'they' did.  tell dilcey to look after
them.  and you, pork, go dig up that whisky and then some
potatoes."

"but, miss scarlett, ah ain' got no light ter dig by."

"you can use a stick of firewood, can't you?"

"dey ain' no fiah wood--dey--"

"do something. . . .  i don't care what.  but dig those things and
dig them fast.  now, hurry."

p
 
 ___________________________
 
d walls had been defiled rose in her.
this house, sacred because ellen had lived in it, and those--those--
in it.

"so they were, daughter.  we saw the smoke from twelve oaks, across
the river, before they came.  but miss honey and miss india and
some of their darkies had refugeed to macon, so we did not worry
about them.  but we couldn't be going to macon.  the girls were so
sick--your mother--we couldn't be going.  our darkies ran--i'm not
knowing where.  they stole the wagons and the mules.  mammy and
dilcey and pork--they didn't run.  the girls--your mother--we
couldn't be moving them."

"yes, yes."  he mustn't talk about mother.  anything else.  even
that general sherman himself had used this room, mother's office,
for his headquarters.  anything else.

"the yankees were moving on jonesboro, to cut the railroad.  and
they came up the road from the river--thousands and thousands--and
cannon and horses--thousands.  i met them on the front porch."

"oh, gallant little gerald!" thought sca
 
 ___________________________
 
ffort he
spoke again.

"they camped all round the house, everywhere, in the cotton, in the
corn.  the pasture was blue with them.  that night there were a
thousand campfires.  they tore down the fences and burned them to
cook with and the barns and the stables and the smokehouse.  they
killed the cows and the hogs and the chickens--even my turkeys."
gerald's precious turkeys.  so they were gone.  "they took things,
even the pictures--some of the furniture, the china--"

"the silver?"

"pork and mammy did something with the silver--put it in the well--
but i'm not remembering now," gerald's voice was fretful.  "then
they fought the battle from here--from tara--there was so much
noise, people galloping up and stamping about.  and later the
cannon at jonesboro--it sounded like thunder--even the girls could
hear it, sick as they were, and they kept saying over and over:
'papa, make it stop thundering.'"

"and--and mother?  did she know yankees were in the house?"

"she--never knew anything."

"
 
 ___________________________
 
lett
thought hysterically that perhaps she had better give a drink to
little wade and see if it would stop his hiccoughs--  and melanie
would not die.  and when ashley came home--if he did come home . . .
no, she would think of that later too.  so much to think of--
later!  so many things to unravel--to decide.  if only she could
put off the hour of reckoning forever!  she started suddenly as a
creaking noise and a rhythmic "ker-bunk--ker-bunk--" broke the
stillness of the air outside.

"that's mammy gettin' the water to sponge off the young misses.
they takes a heap of bathin'," explained dilcey, propping the gourd
on the table between medicine bottles and a glass.

scarlett laughed suddenly.  her nerves must be shredded if the
noise of the well windlass, bound up in her earliest memories,
could frighten her.  dilcey looked at her steadily as she laughed,
her face immobile in its dignity, but scarlett felt that dilcey
understood.  she sank back in her chair.  if she could only be rid
of he
 
 ___________________________
 
r tight stays, the collar that choked her and the slippers
still full of sand and gravel that blistered her feet.

the windlass creaked slowly as the rope wound up, each creak
bringing the bucket nearer the top.  soon mammy would be with her--
ellen's mammy, her mammy.  she sat silent, intent on nothing, while
the baby, already glutted with milk, whimpered because he had lost
the friendly nipple.  dilcey, silent too, guided the child's mouth
back, quieting him in her arms as scarlett listened to the slow
scuffing of mammy's feet across the back yard.  how still the night
air was!  the slightest sounds roared in her ears.

the upstairs hall seemed to shake as mammy's ponderous weight came
toward the door.  then mammy was in the room, mammy with shoulders
drag
 
 ___________________________
 
ged down by two heavy wooden buckets, her kind black face sad
with the uncomprehending sadness of a monkey's face.

her eyes lighted up at the sight of scarlett, her white teeth
gleamed as she set down the buckets, and scarlett ran to her,
laying her head on the broad, sagging breasts which had held so
many heads, black and white.  here was something of stability,
thought scarlett, something of the old life that was unchanging.
but mammy's first words dispelled this illusion.

"mammy's chile is home!  oh, miss scarlett, now dat miss ellen's in
de grabe, whut is we gwine ter do?  oh, miss scarlett, effen ah wuz
jes' daid longside miss ellen!  ah kain make out widout miss ellen.
ain' nuthin' lef' now but mizry an' trouble.  jes' weery loads,
honey, jes' weery loads."

as scarlett lay with her head hugged close to mammy's breast, two
words caught her attention, "weery loads."  those were the words
which had hummed in her brain that afternoon so monotonously they
had sickened h
 
 ___________________________
 
er.  now, she remembered the rest of the song,
remembered with a sinking heart:


"just a few more days for to tote the weary load!
no matter, 'twill never be light!
just a few more days till we totter in the road--"


"no matter, 'twill never be light"--she took the words to her tired
mind.  would her load never be light?  was coming home to tara to
mean, not blessed surcease, but only more loads to carry?  she
slipped from mammy's arms and, reaching up, patted the wrinkled
black face.

"honey, yo' han's!"  mammy took the small hands with their blisters
and blood clots in hers and looked at them with horrified
disapproval.  "miss scarlett, ah done tole you an' tole you dat you
kin allus tell a lady by her han's an'--yo' face sunbuhnt too!"

poor mammy, still the martinet about such unimportant things even
though war and death had just passed over her head!  in another
moment she would be saying that young misses with bl
 
 ___________________________
 
istered hands
and freckles most generally didn't never catch husbands and
scarlett forestalled the remark.

"mammy, i want you to tell me about mother.  i couldn't bear to
hear pa talk about her."

tears started from mammy's eyes as she leaned down to pick up the
buckets.  in silence she carried them to the bedside and, turning
down the sheet, began pulling up the night clothes of suellen and
carreen.  scarlett, peering at her sisters in the dim flaring
light, saw that carreen wore a nightgown, clean but in tatters, and
suellen lay wrapped in an old negligee, a brown linen garment heavy
with tagging ends of irish lace.  mammy cried silently as she
sponged the gaunt bodies, using the remnant of an old apron as a
c
 
 ___________________________
 
loth.

"miss scarlett, it wuz dem slatterys, dem trashy, no-good, low-down
po'-w'ite slatterys dat kilt miss ellen.  ah done tole her an' tole
her it doan do no good doin' things fer trashy folks, but miss
ellen wuz so sot in her ways an' her heart so sof' she couldn'
never say no ter nobody whut needed her."

"slatterys?" questioned scarlett, bewildered.  "how do they come
in?"

"dey wuz sick wid disyere thing," mammy gestured with her rag to
the two naked girls, dripping with water on their damp sheet.  "ole
miss slattery's gal, emmie, come down wid it an' miss slattery come
hotfootin' it up hyah affer miss ellen, lak she allus done w'en
anything wrong.  why din' she nuss her own?  miss ellen had mo'n
she could tote anyways.  but miss ellen she went down dar an' she
nuss emmie.  an' miss ellen wuzn' well a-tall herseff, miss
scarlett.  yo' ma hadn' been well fer de longes'.  dey ain' been
too much ter eat r
 
 ___________________________
 
, an' den down come miss suellen.  so
miss ellen, she tuck an' nuss dem too.

"wid all de fightin' up de road an' de yankees 'cross de river an'
us not knowin' whut wuz gwine ter happen ter us an' de fe'el han's
runnin' off eve'y night, ah's 'bout crazy.  but miss ellen jes' as
cool as a cucumber.  'cept she wuz worried ter a ghos' 'bout de
young misses kase we couldn' git no medicines nor nuthin'.  an' one
night she say ter me affer we done sponge off de young misses 'bout
ten times, she say, 'mammy, effen ah could sell mah soul, ah'd sell
it fer some ice ter put on mah gals' haids.'

"she wouldn't let mist' gerald come in hyah, nor rosa nor teena,
nobody but me, kase ah done had de typhoy.  an' den it tuck her,
miss scarlett, an' ah seed right off dat 'twarnt no use."

mammy straightened up and, raising her apron, dried her streaming
eyes.

"she went fas', miss scarlett, an' even dat nice yankee doctah
couldn' do nuthin' fer her.  she din' know nuthin' a-tall.  ah call
ter her an' talk te
 
 ___________________________
 
r her but she din' even know her own mammy."

"did she--did she ever mention me--call for me?"

"no, honey.  she think she is lil gal back in savannah.  she din'
call nobody by name."

dilcey stirred and laid the sleeping baby across her knees.

"yes'm, she did.  she did call somebody."

"you hesh yo' mouf, you injun-nigger!"  mammy turned with
threatening violence on dilcey.

"hush, mammy!  who did she call, dilcey?  pa?"

"no'm.  not yo' pa.  it wuz the night the cotton buhnt--"

"has the cotton gone--tell me quickly!"

"yes'm, it buhnt up.  the sojers rolls it out of the shed into the
back yard and hollers, 'here the bigges' bonfiah in georgia,' and
tech it off."

three years of stored cotton--one hundred and fifty thousand
dollars, all in one blaze!

"and the fiah light up the place lak it wuz day--we wuz scared the
house would buhn, too, and it wuz so bright in this hyah roo
 
 ___________________________
 
m that
you could mos' pick a needle offen the flo'.  and w'en the light
shine in the winder, it look lak it wake miss ellen up and she set
right up in bed and cry out loud, time and again:  'feeleep!
feeleep!'  i ain' never heerd no sech name but it wuz a name and
she wuz callin' him."

mammy stood as though turned to stone glaring at dilcey but
scarlett dropped her head into her hands.  philippe--who was he and
what had he been to mother that she died calling him?



the long road from atlanta to tara had ended, ended in a blank
wall, the road that was to end in ellen's arms.  never again could
scarlett lie down, as a child, secure beneath her father's roof
with the protection of her mother's love wrapped about her like an
eiderdown quilt.  there was no security or haven to which s
 
 ___________________________
 
ly as if the air
were water against which her arms struggled.  she took the gourd
from between the glass and bottle and looked in it.  there was some
whisky left in the bottom, how much she could not tell in the
uncertain light.  strange that the sharp smell did not offend her
nostrils now.  she drank slowly but this time the liquid did not
burn, only a dull warmth followed.

she set down the empty gourd and looked about her.  this was all a
dream, this smoke-filled dim room, the scrawny girls, mammy
shapeless and huge crouching beside the bed, dilcey a still bronze
image with the sleeping pink morsel against her dark breast--all a
dream from which she would awake, to smell bacon frying in the
kitchen, hear the throaty laughter of the negroes and the creaking
of wagons fieldward bound, and ellen's gentle insistent hand upon
her.

then she discovered she was in her own room, on her own bed, faint
moonlight pricking the darkness, and mammy and dilcey were
undressing her.  the torturing stays 
 
 ___________________________
 
no longer pinched her waist
and she could breathe deeply and quietly to the bottom of her lungs
and her abdomen.  she felt her stockings being stripped gently from
her and heard mammy murmuring indistinguishable comforting sounds
as she bathed her blistered feet.  how cool the water was, how good
to lie here in softness, like a child.  she sighed and relaxed and
after a time which might have been a year or a second, she was
alone and the room was brighter as the rays of the moon streamed in
across the bed.

she did not know she was drunk, drunk with fatigue and whisky.  she
only knew she had left her tired body and floated somewhere above
it where there was no pain and weari
 
 ___________________________
 
d have told her she was
suffering the normal aftermath of her first experience with hard
drinking but gerald noticed nothing.  he sat at the head of the
table, a gray old man with absent, faded eyes fastened on the door
and head cocked slightly to hear the rustle of ellen's petticoats,
to smell the lemon verbena sachet.

as scarlett sat down, he mumbled:  "we will wait for mrs. o'hara.
she is late."  she raised an aching head, looked at him with
startled incredulity and met the pleading eyes of mammy, who stood
behind gerald's chair.  she rose unsteadily, her hand at her throat
and looked down at her father in the morning sunlight.  he peered
up at her vaguely and she saw that his hands were shaking, that his
head trembled a little.

until this moment she had not realized how much she had counted on
gerald to take command, to tell her what she must do, and now--
why, last night he had seemed almost himself.  there had been none
of his usual bluster and vitality, but at least he had told a
c
 
 ___________________________
 
onnected story and now--now, he did not even remember ellen was
dead.  the combined shock of the coming of the yankees and her
death had stunned him.  she started to speak, but mammy shook her
head vehemently and raising her apron dabbed at her red eyes.

"oh, can pa have lost his mind?" thought scarlett and her throbbing
head felt as if it would crack with this added strain.  "no, no.
he's just dazed by it all.  it's like he was sick.  he'll get over
it.  he must get over it.  what will i do if he doesn't?--i won't
think about it now.  i won't think of him or mother or any of these
awful things now.  no, not till i can stand it.  there are too many
other things to think ab
 
 ___________________________
 
't a woman's job anyway.  pa ought to look after such things,
but pa--  i won't think of pa now.  the confederacy can whistle for
its taxes.  what we need now is something to eat."

"pork, have any of you been to twelve oaks or the macintosh place
to see if there's anything left in the gardens there?"

"no, ma'm!  us ain' lef' tara.  de yankees mout git us."

"i'll send dilcey over to macintosh.  perhaps she'll find something
there.  and i'll go to twelve oaks."

"who wid, chile?"

"by myself.  mammy must stay with the girls and mr. gerald can't--"

pork set up an outcry which she found infuriating.  there might be
yankees or mean niggers at twelve oaks.  she mustn't go alone.

"that will be enough, pork.  tell dilcey to start immediately.  and
you and prissy go bring in the sow and her litter," she said
briefly, turning on her heel.

mammy's old sunbonnet, faded but clean, hung on its peg on the back
porch and scarlett put it on her head, remembering, as from another
world, the bonnet with
 
 ___________________________
 
 the curling green plume which rhett had
brought her from paris.  she picked up a large split-oak basket and
started down the back stairs, each step jouncing her head until her
spine seemed to be trying to crash through the top of her skull.

the road down to the river lay red and scorching between the ruined
cotton fields.  there were no trees to cast a shade and the sun
beat down through mammy's sunbonnet as if it were made of tarlatan
instead of heavy quilted calico, while the dust floating upward
sifted into her nose and throat until she felt the membranes would
crack dryly if she spoke.  deep ruts and furrows were cut into the
road where horses had dragged heavy guns along it and the red
gullies on either side were deeply gashed by the wheels.  the
cotton was mangled and trampled where cavalry and infantry, forced
off the narrow road by the artillery, had marched through the green
 
 ___________________________
 
ent with
grease, snap beans in mountains on brightly flowered porcelain,
fried squash, stewed okra, carrots in cream sauce thick enough to
cut.  and three desserts, so everyone might have his choice,
chocolate layer cake, vanilla blanc mange and pound cake topped
with sweet whipped cream.  the memory of those savory meals had the
power to bring tears to her eyes as death and war had failed to do,
and the power to turn her ever-gnawing stomach from rumbling
emptiness to nausea.  for the appetite mammy had always deplored,
the healthy appetite of a nineteen-year-old girl, now was increased
fourfold by the hard and unremitting labor she had never known
before.

hers was not the only troublesome appetite at tara, for wherever
she turned hungry faces, black and white, met her eyes.  soon
carreen and suellen would have the insatiable hunger of typhoid
convalescents.  already little wade whined monotonously:  "wade
doan like yams.  wade hungwy."

the others grumbled, too:

"miss scarlett, 'ness i 
 
 ___________________________
 
ich irritated scarlett more than the
nagging whining voices of the others.  she could--and did--shout
them down with bitter sarcasm but before melanie's unselfishness
she was helpless, helpless and resentful.  gerald, the negroes and
wade clung to melanie now, because even in her weakness she was
kind and sympathetic, and these days scarlett was neither.

wade especially haunted melanie's room.  there was something wrong
with wade, but just what it was scarlett had no time to discover.
she took mammy's word that the little boy had worms and dosed him
with the mixture of dried herbs and bark which ellen always used to
worm the pickaninnies.  but the vermifuge only made the child look
paler.  these days scarlett hardly thought of wade as a person.  he
was only another worry, another mouth to feed.  some day when the
present emergency was over, she would play with him, tell him
stories and teach him his a b c's but now she did not have the time
or the soul or the inclination.  and, because he 
 
 ___________________________
 
 thing i can do till i get well, and
you've got your hands full enough without having to watch him."

"don't be a goose, melly," said scarlett shortly.  "you aren't
getting well like you should and having wade fall on your stomach
won't help you.  now, wade, if i ever catch you on auntee's bed
again, i'll wear you out.  and stop sniffling.  you are always
sniffling.  try to be a little man."

wade flew sobbing to hide himself under the house.  melanie bit her
lip and tears came to her eyes, and mammy standing in the hall, a
witness to the scene, scowled and breathed hard.  but no one talked
back to scarlett these days.  they were all afraid of her sharp
tongue, all afraid of the new person who walked in her body.

scarlett reigned supreme at tara now and, like others suddenly
elevated to authority, all the bullying instincts in her nature
rose to the surface.  it was not that she was basically unkind.  it
was because she was so frightened and unsure of herself she was
harsh lest others lear
 
 ___________________________
 
n her inadequacies and refuse her authority.
besides, there was some pleasure in shouting at people and knowing
they were afraid.  scarlett found that it relieved her overwrought
nerves.  she was not blind to the fact that her personality was
changing.  sometimes when her curt orders made pork stick out his
under lip and mammy mutter:  "some folks rides mighty high dese
days," she wondered where her good manners had gone.  all the
courtesy, all the gentleness ellen had striven to instill in her
had fallen away from her as quickly as leaves fall from trees in
the first chill wind of autumn.

time and again, ellen had said:  "be firm but be gentle with
inferiors, especially darkies."  but if she was gentle the darkies
would sit in the kitchen all day, talking endlessly about the good
old days when a house nigger wasn't
 
 ___________________________
 
ould be full.

scarlett had not intended to do any cotton picking herself, even
after grandma fontaine's tart remark.  it was unthinkable that she,
an o'hara lady, now the mistress of tara, should work in the
fields.  it put her on the same level with the snarly haired mrs.
slattery and emmie.  she had intended that the negroes should do
the field work, while she and the convalescent girls attended to
the house, but here she was confronted with a caste feeling even
stronger than her own.  pork, mammy and prissy set up outcries at
the idea of working in the fields.  they reiterated that they were
house niggers, not field hands.  mammy, in particular, declared
vehemently that she had never even been a yard nigger.  she had
been born in the robillard great house, not in the quarters, and
had been raised in ole miss' bedroom, sleeping on a pallet at the
foot of the bed.  dilcey alone said nothing and she fixed her
prissy with an unwinking eye that made her squirm.

scarlett refused to listen to
 
 ___________________________
 
 the protests and drove them all into
the cotton rows.  but mammy and pork worked so slowly and with so
many lamentations that scarlett sent mammy back to the kitchen to
cook and pork to the woods and the river with snares for rabbits
and possums and lines for fish.  cotton picking was beneath pork's
dignity but hunting and fishing were not.

scarlett next had tried her sisters and melanie in the fields, but
that had worked no better.  melanie had picked neatly, quickly and
willingly for an hour in the hot sun and then fainted quietly and
had to stay in bed for a week.  suellen, sullen and tearful,
pretended to faint too, but came back to
 
 ___________________________
 
h armies.  when the war was over, a
plantation could earn an honest living.  oh, if the war were only
over!  then people could plant crops with some certainty of reaping
them!

there was hope now.  the war couldn't last forever.  she had her
little cotton, she had food, she had a horse, she had her small but
treasured hoard of money.  yes, the worst was over!



chapter xxvii


on a noonday in mid-november, they all sat grouped about the dinner
table, eating the last of the dessert concocted by mammy from corn
meal and dried huckleberries, sweetened with sorghum.  there was a
chill in the air, the first chill of the year, and pork, standing
behind scarlett's chair, rubbed his hands together in glee and
questioned:  "ain' it 'bout time fer de hawg killin', miss
scarlett?"

"you can taste those chitlins already, can't you?" said scarlett
with a grin.  "well, i can taste fresh pork myself and if the
weather holds for a few days more, we'll--"

melanie interrupted, her spoon at her lips,

"list
 
 ___________________________
 
t?"

"the horse!  the cow!  the pigs!  they shan't have them!  i won't
let them have them!"

she turned swiftly to the four negroes who huddled in the doorway,
their black faces a peculiarly ashen shade.

"the swamp," she said rapidly.

"whut swamp?"

"the river swamp, you fools!  take the pigs to the swamp.  all of
you.  quickly.  pork, you and prissy crawl under the house and get
the pigs out.  suellen, you and carreen fill the baskets with as
much food as you can carry and get to the woods.  mammy, put the
silver in the well again.  and pork!  pork, listen to me, don't
stand there like that!  take pa with you.  don't ask me where!
anywhere!  go with pork, pa.  that's a sweet pa."

even in her frenzy she thought what the sight of bluecoats might do
to gerald's wavering mind.  she stopped and wrung her hands and the
frightened sobbing of little wade who was clutching melanie's skirt
added to her panic.

"what shall i do, scarlett?"  melanie's voice was calm amid the
wailing and tears and s
 
 ___________________________
 

scarlett thought:  "i never expected to see melly hamilton
straddling a horse!" and then she ran into the house.  wade was at
her heels, sobbing, trying to catch her flying skirts.  as she went
up the steps, three at a bound, she saw suellen and carreen with
split-oak baskets on their arms, running toward the pantry, and
pork tugging none too gently at gerald's arm, dragging him toward
the back porch.  gerald was mumbling querulously and pulling away
like a child.

from the back yard she heard mammy's strident voice:  "you, priss!
you git unner dat house an' han' me dem shoats!  you knows mighty
well ah's too big ter crawl thoo dem lattices.  dilcey, comyere an'
mek dis wuthless chile--"

"and i thought it was such a good idea to keep the pigs under the
house, so nobody could steal them," thought scarlett, running into
her room.  "why, oh, why didn't i build a pen for them down in the
swamp?"

she tore open her top bureau drawer and scratched about in the
clothing until the yankee's wallet
 
 ___________________________
 
ly was worth three of the others.  melly--what
had melly said?  oh, yes, the baby!

clutching the wallet to her, scarlett ran across the hall to the
room where little beau was sleeping in the low cradle.  she
snatched him up into her arms and he awoke, waving small fists and
slobbering sleepily.

she heard suellen crying:  "come on, carreen!  come on!  we've got
enough.  oh, sister, hurry!"  there were wild squealings, indignant
gruntings in the back yard and, running to the widow, scarlett saw
mammy waddling hurriedly across the cotton field with a struggling
young pig under each arm.  behind her was pork also carrying two
pigs and pushing gerald before him.  gerald was stumping across the
furrows, waving his cane.

leaning out of the window scarlett yelled:  "get the sow, dilcey!
make prissy drive her out.  you can chase her across the fields!"

dilcey looked up, her bronzed face harassed.  in her apron was a
pile of silver tableware.  she pointed under the house.

"the sow done bit priss
 
 ___________________________
 
some of her fear fell away and there remained
only a congealed feeling in her breast, as if all hope and fear had
frozen.  as she stood there, she heard from the avenue the sound of
many horses' feet, the jingle of bridle bits and sabers rattling in
scabbards and a harsh voice crying a command:  "dismount!"  swiftly
she bent to the child beside her and her voice was urgent but oddly
gentle.

"turn me loose, wade, honey!  you run down the stairs quick and
through the back yard toward the swamp.  mammy will be there and
aunt melly.  run quickly, darling, and don't be afraid."

at the change in her tone, the boy looked up and scarlett was
appalled at the look in his eyes, like a baby rabbit in a trap.

"oh, mother of god!" she prayed.  "don't let him have a convulsion!
not--not before the yankees.  they mustn't know we are afraid."
and, as the child only gripped her skirt the tighter, she said
clearly:  "be a little man, wade.  they're only a passel of damn
yankees!"

and she went down the ste
 
 ___________________________
 
rk even than dilcey but scarlett knew she was sick.
when she lifted things her face went white and she had a way of
sitting down suddenly after exertions, as if her legs would no
longer support her.  but tonight she, like suellen and carreen,
was doing everything possible to make the soldiers enjoy their
christmas eve.  scarlett alone took no pleasure in the guests.

the troop had added their ration of parched corn and side meat to
the supper of dried peas, stewed dried apples and peanuts which
mammy set before them and they declared it was the best meal they
had had in months.  scarlett watched them eat and she was uneasy.
she not only begrudged them every mouthful they ate but she was on
tenterhooks lest they discover somehow that pork had slaughtered
one of the shoats the day before.  it now hung in the pantry and
she had grimly promised her household that she would scratch out
the eyes of anyone who mentioned the shoat to their guests or the
presence of the dead pig's sisters and brothe
 
 ___________________________
 
 a thought and scratched unconcernedly even in the
presence of ladies.  as for dysentery--the "bloody flux" as the
ladies delicately called it--it seemed to have spared no one from
private to general.  four years of half-starvation, four years of
rations which were coarse or green or half-putrefied, had done its
work with them and every soldier who stopped at tara was either
just recovering or was actively suffering from it.

"dey ain' a soun' set of bowels in de whole confedrut ahmy,"
observed mammy darkly as she sweated over the fire, brewing a
bitter concoction of blackberry roots which had been ellen's
sovereign remedy for such afflictions.  "it's mah notion dat
'twarn't de yankees whut beat our gempmum.  'twuz dey own innards.
kain no gempmum fight wid his bowels tuhnin' ter water."

one and all, mammy dosed them, never waiting to ask foolish
questions about the state of their organs and, one and all, they
drank her doses meekly and with wry faces, remembering, perhaps,
other stern bla
 
 ___________________________
 
ck faces in far-off places and other inexorable
black hands holding medicine spoons.

in the matter of "comp'ny" mammy was equally adamant.  no lice-
ridden soldier should come into tara.  she marched them behind a
clump of thick bushes, relieved them of their uniforms, gave them a
basin of water and strong lye soap to wash with and provided them
with quilts and blankets to cover their nakedness, while she boiled
their clothing in her huge wash pot.  it was useless for the girls
to argue hotly that such conduct humiliated the soldiers.  mammy
replied that the girls would be a sight more humiliated if they
found
 
 ___________________________
 
 lice upon themselves.

when the soldiers began arriving almost daily, mammy protested
against their being allowed to use the bedrooms.  always she feared
lest some louse had escaped her.  rather than argue the matter,
scarlett turned the parlor with its deep velvet rug into a
dormitory.  mammy cried out equally loudly at the sacrilege of
soldiers being permitted to sleep on miss ellen's rug but scarlett
was firm.  they had to sleep somewhere.  and, in the months after
the surrender, the deep soft nap began to show signs of wear and
finally the heavy warp and woof showed through in spots where heels
had worn it and spurs dug carelessly.

of each soldier, they asked eagerly of ashley.  suellen, bridling,
always asked news of mr. kennedy.  but none of the soldiers had
ever heard of them
 
 ___________________________
 
oon in june when everyone at tara was assembled on the
back porch eagerly watching pork cut the first half-ripe watermelon
of the season, they heard hooves on the gravel of the front drive.
prissy started languidly toward the front door, while those left
behind argued hotly as to whether they should hide the melon or
keep it for supper, should the caller at the door prove to be a
soldier.

melly and carreen whispered that the soldier guest should have a
share and scarlett, backed by suellen and mammy, hissed to pork to
hide it quickly.

"don't be a goose, girls!  there's not enough for us as it is and
if there are two or three famished soldiers out there, none of us
will even get a taste," said scarlett.

while pork stood with the little melon clutched to him, uncertain
as to the final decision, they heard prissy cry out.

"gawdlmighty!  miss scarlett!  miss melly!  come quick!"

"who is it?" cried scarlett, leaping up from the steps and racing
through the hall with melly at her shoulder an
 
 ___________________________
 
seed her write an' seed her
a-cryin' w'en y'all writ her back dat you got too much ter do on
disyere ole farm ter come home?"

"but, uncle peter--"

"huccome you leave miss pitty by herseff lak dis w'en she so scary
lak?  you know well's ah do miss pitty ain' never live by herseff
an' she been shakin' in her lil shoes ever since she come back frum
macom.  she say fer me ter tell y'all plain as ah knows how dat she
jes' kain unnerstan' y'all desertin' her in her hour of need."

"now, hesh!" said mammy tartly, for it sat ill upon her to hear
tara referred to as an "ole farm."  trust an ignorant city-bred
darky not to know the difference between a farm and a plantation.
"ain' us got no hours of need?  ain' us needin' miss scarlett an'
miss melly right hyah an' needin' dem bad?  huccome miss pitty doan
ast her brudder fer 'sistance, does she need any?"

uncle peter gave her a withering look.

"us ain' had nuthin' ter do wid mist' henry fer y'ars, an' us is
too ole ter start now."  he turned bac
 
 ___________________________
 
 young misses ought ter tek
shame, leavin' po' miss pitty 'lone, wid half her frens daid an' de
other half in macom, an' 'lanta full of yankee sojers an' trashy
free issue niggers."

the two girls had borne the castigation with straight faces as long
as they could, but the thought of aunt pitty sending peter to scold
them and bring them back bodily to atlanta was too much for their
control.  they burst into laughter and hung on each other's
shoulders for support.  naturally, pork and dilcey and mammy gave
vent to loud guffaws at hearing the detractor of their beloved tara
set at naught.  suellen and carreen giggled and even gerald's face
wore a vague smile.  everyone laughed except peter, who shifted
from one large splayed foot to the other in mounting indignation.

"whut's wrong wid you, nigger?" inquired mammy with a grin.  "is
you gittin' too ole ter perteck yo' own missus?"

peter was outraged.

"too ole!  me too ole?  no, ma'm!  ah kin perteck miss pitty lak ah
allus done.  ain' ah per
 
 ___________________________
 
s pitty wouldn' trust de mails or nobody but
me ter bring it an'--"

"a letter?  for me?  who from?"

"well'm, it's--miss pitty, she says ter me, 'you, peter, you brek
it gen'ly ter miss melly,' an' ah say--"

melly rose from the steps, her hand at her heart.

"ashley!  ashley!  he's dead!"

"no'm!  no'm!" cried peter, his voice rising to a shrill bawl, as
he fumbled in the breast pocket of his ragged coat.  "he's 'live!
disyere a letter frum him.  he comin' home.  he--  gawdlmighty!
ketch her, mammy!  lemme--"

"doan you tech her, you ole fool!" thundered mammy, struggling to
keep melanie's sagging body from falling to the ground.  "you pious
black ape!  brek it gen'ly!  you, poke, tek her feet.  miss
carreen, steady her haid.  lessus lay her on de sofa in de parlor."

there was a tumult of sound as everyone but scarlett swarmed about
the fainting melanie, everyone crying out in alarm, scurrying into
the house for water and pillows, and in a moment scarlett and uncle
peter were left standi
 
 ___________________________
 
he was alone in the world.  yet, none of these things
seemed to bother him any more than the leg he had left in virginia.

yes, will was a comfort to scarlett after hard days when the
negroes muttered and suellen nagged and cried and gerald asked too
frequently where ellen was.  she could tell will anything.  she
even told him of killing the yankee and glowed with pride when he
commented briefly:  "good work!"

eventually all the family found their way to will's room to air
their troubles--even mammy, who had at first been distant with him
because he was not quality and had owned only two slaves.

when he was able to totter about the house, he turned his hands to
weaving baskets of split oak and mending the furniture ruined by
the yankees.  he was clever at whittling and wade was constantly by
his side, for he whittled out toys for him, the only toys the
little boy had.  with will in the house, everyone felt safe in
leaving wade and the two babies while they went about their tasks,
for he c
 
 ___________________________
 
ould care for them as deftly as mammy and only melly
surpassed him at soothing the screaming black and white babies.

"you've been mighty good to me, miss scarlett," he said, "and me a
stranger and nothin' to you all.  i've caused you a heap of trouble
and worry and if it's all the same to you, i'm goin' to stay here
and help you all with the work till i've paid you back some for
your trouble.  i can't ever pay it all, 'cause there ain't no
payment a man can give for his life."

so he stayed and, gradually, unobtrusively, a large p
 
 ___________________________
 
pleasant sunshine of the
early autumn afternoon and his flat voice went on and on languidly
about the exorbitant costs of ginning the cotton at the new gin
near fayetteville.  however, he had learned that day in
fayetteville that he could cut this expense a fourth by lending the
horse and wagon for two weeks to the gin owner.  he had delayed
closing the bargain until he discussed it with scarlett.

she looked at the lank figure leaning against the porch column,
chewing a straw.  undoubtedly, as mammy frequently declared, will
was something the lord had provided and scarlett often wondered how
tara could have lived through the last few months without him.  he
never had much to say, never displayed any energy, never seemed to
take much interest in anything that went on about him, but he knew
everything about everybody at tara.  and he did things.  he did
them silently, patiently and competently.  though he had only one
leg, he could work faster than pork.  and he could get work out of
pork, w
 
 ___________________________
 
eville today," said will, "i found
somethin' right cute that i thought would interest you ladies and i
brought it home."  he fumbled in his back pants pocket and brought
out the wallet of calico, stiffened with bark, which carreen had
made him.  from it, he drew a confederate bill.

"if you think confederate money is cute, will, i certainly don't,"
said scarlett shortly, for the very sight of confederate money made
her mad.  "we've got three thousand dollars of it in pa's trunk
this minute, and mammy's after me to let her paste it over the
holes in the attic walls so the draft won't get her.  and i think
i'll do it.  then it'll be good for something."

"'imperious caesar, dead and turned to clay,'" said melanie with a
sad smile.  "don't do that, scarlett.  keep it for wade.  he'll be
proud of it some day."

"well, i don't know nothin' about imperious caesar," said will,
patiently, "but what i've got is in line with what you've just said
about wade, miss melly.  it's a poem, pasted on the ba
 
 ___________________________
 
and with difficulty.

"the name is 'lines on the back of a confederate note,'" he said.


"representing nothing on god's earth now
   and naught in the waters below it--
as the pledge of nation that's passed away
   keep it, dear friend, and show it.

show it to those who will lend an ear
   to the tale this trifle will tell
of liberty, born of patriots' dream,
   of a storm-cradled nation that fell."


"oh, how beautiful!  how touching!" cried melanie.  "scarlett, you
mustn't give the money to mammy to paste in the attic.  it's more
than paper--just like this poem said:  'the pledge of a nation
that's passed away!'"

"oh, melly, don't be sentimental!  paper is paper and we've got
little enough of it and i'm tired of hearing mammy grumble about
the cracks in the attic.  i hope when wade grows up i'll have
plenty of greenbacks to give him instead of confederate trash."

will, who had been enticing little beau across the blanket with the
bill during this argument, looked up and, shading his e
 
 ___________________________
 
ore company," he said, squinting in the sun.  "another soldier."

scarlett followed his gaze and saw a familiar sight, a bearded man
coming slowly up the avenue under the cedars, a man clad in a
ragged mixture of blue and gray uniforms, head bowed tiredly, feet
dragging slowly.

"i thought we were about through with soldiers," she said.  "i hope
this one isn't very hungry."

"he'll be hungry," said will briefly.

melanie rose.

"i'd better tell dilcey to set an extra plate," she said, "and warn
mammy not to get the poor thing's clothes off his back too abruptly
and--"

she stopped so suddenly that scarlett turned to look at her.
melanie's thin hand was at her throat, clutching it as if it was
torn with pain, and scarlett could see the veins beneath the white
skin throbbing swiftly.  her face went whiter and her brown eyes
dilated enormously.

she's going to faint, thought scarlett, leaping to her feet and
catching her arm.

but, in an instant, melanie threw off her hand and was down the
ste
 
 ___________________________
 
simply because i've thrown myself at your head.  it will never
happen again."

she turned away and started back toward the house across the rough
fields, twisting her hair into a knot upon her neck.  ashley
watched her go and saw her square her small thin shoulders as she
went.  and that gesture went to his heart, more than any words she
had spoken.



chapter xxxii


she was still clutching the ball of red clay when she went up the
front steps.  she had carefully avoided the back entrance, for
mammy's sharp eyes would certainly have seen that something was
greatly amiss.  scarlett did not want to see mammy or anyone else.
she did not feel that she could endure seeing anyone or talking to
anyone again.  she had no feeling of shame or disappointment or
bitterness now, only a weakness of the knees and a great emptiness
of heart.  she squeezed the clay so tightly it ran out from her
clenched fist and she said over and over, parrot-like:  "i've still
got this.  yes, i've still got this."

there
 
 ___________________________
 
ooked at them.

a minute later, she was dragging a heavy marble-topped table across
the floor.  its rusty castors screeching in protest.  she rolled
the table under the window, gathered up her skirts, climbed on it
and tiptoed to reach the heavy curtain pole.  it was almost out of
her reach and she jerked at it so impatiently the nails came out of
the wood, and the curtains, pole and all, fell to the floor with a
clatter.

as if by magic, the door of the parlor opened and the wide black
face of mammy appeared, ardent curiosity and deepest suspicion
evident in every wrinkle.  she looked disapprovingly at scarlett,
poised on the table top, her skirts above her knees, ready to leap
to the floor.  there was a look of excitement and triumph on her
face which brought sudden distrust to mammy.

"whut you up to wid miss ellen's po'teers?" she demanded.

"what are you up to listening outside doors?" asked scarlett,
leaping nimbly to the floor and gathering up a length of the heavy
dusty velvet.

"da
 
 ___________________________
 
t ain' needer hyah no dar," countered mammy, girding herself for
combat.  "you ain' got no bizness wid miss ellen's po'teers,
juckin' de poles plum outer de wood, an' drappin' dem on de flo' in
de dust.  miss ellen set gret sto' by dem po'teers an' ah ain'
'tendin' ter have you muss dem up dat way."

scarlett turned green eyes on mammy, eyes which were feverishly
gay, eyes which looked like the bad little girl of the good old
days mammy sighed about.

"scoot up to the attic and get my box of dress patterns, mammy,"
she cried, giving her a slight shove.  "i'm going to have a new
dress."

mammy was torn between indignation at the very idea of her two
hundred pounds scooting anywhere, much less to the attic, and the
dawning of a horrid suspicion.  quickly she snatched the curtain
lengths from scarlett, holding them against her monumental, sagging
breasts as if they were holy relics.

"not outer miss ellen's po'teers is you gwine 
 
 ___________________________
 
have a new dress, ef
dat's whut you figgerin' on.  not w'ile ah got breaf in mah body."

for a moment the expression mammy was wont to describe to herself
as "bullheaded" flitted over her young mistress' face and then it
passed into a smile, so difficult for mammy to resist.  but it did
not fool the old woman.  she knew miss scarlett was employing that
smile merely to get around her and in this matter she was
determined not to be gotten around.

"mammy, don't be mean.  i'm going to atlanta to borrow some money
and i've got to have a new dress."

"you doan need no new dress.  ain' no other ladies got new dresses.
dey weahs dey ole ones an' dey weahs dem proudfully.  ain' no
reason why miss ellen's chile kain weah rags ef she wants ter, an'
eve'ybody respec' her lak she wo' silk."

the bullheaded expression began to creep back.  lordy, 'twus right
funny how de older miss scarlett git de mo' she look lak mist'
gerald and de less lak miss ellen!

 
 ___________________________
 

"now, mammy you know aunt pitty wrote us that miss fanny elsing is
getting married this saturday, and of course i'll go to the
wedding.  and i'll need a new dress to wear."

"de dress you got on'll be jes' as nice as miss fanny's weddin'
dress.  miss pitty done wrote dat de elsings mighty po'."

"but i've got to have a new dress!  mammy, you don't know how we
need money.  the taxes--"

"yas'm, ah knows all 'bout de taxes but--"

"you do?"

"well'm, gawd give me ears, din' he, an' ter hear wid?  specially
w'en mist' will doan never tek trouble ter close de do'."

was there nothing mammy did not overhear?  scarlett wondered how
that ponderous body which shook the floors could move with such
savage stealth when its owner wished to eavesdrop.

"well, if you heard all that, i suppose you heard jonas wilkerson
and that emmie--"

"ya
 
 ___________________________
 
s'm," said mammy with smoldering eyes.

"well, don't be a mule, mammy.  don't you see i've got to go to
atlanta and get money for the taxes?  i've got to get some money.
i've got to do it!"  she hammered one small fist into the other.
"name of god, mammy, they'll turn us all out into the road and then
where'll we go?  are you going to argue with me about a little
matter of mother's curtains when that trash emmie slattery who
killed mother is fixing to move into this house and sleep in the
bed mother slept in?"

mammy shifted from one foot to another like a restive elephant.
she had a dim feeling that she was being got around.

"no'm, ah ain' wantin' ter see trash in miss ellen's house or us
all in de road but--"  she fixed scarlett with a sudde
 
 ___________________________
 
nly accusing
eye:  "who is you fixin' ter git money frum dat you needs a new
dress?"

"that," said scarlett, taken aback, "is my own business."

mammy looked at her piercingly, just as she had done when scarlett
was small and had tried unsuccessfully to palm off plausible
excuses for misdeeds.  she seemed to be reading her mind and
scarlett dropped her eyes unwillingly, the first feeling of guilt
at her intended conduct creeping over her.

"so you needs a spang new pretty dress ter borry money wid.  dat
doan lissen jes' right ter me.  an' you ain' sayin' whar de money
ter come frum."

"i'm not saying anything," said scarlett indignantly.  "it
 
 ___________________________
 
's my own
business.  are you going to give me that curtain and help me make
the dress?"

"yas'm," said mammy softly, capitulating with a suddenness which
aroused all the suspicion in scarlett's mind.  "ah gwine he'p you
mek it an' ah specs we mout git a petticoat outer de satin linin'
of de po'teers an' trim a pa'r pantalets wid de lace cuttins."

she handed the velvet curtain back to scarlett and a sly smile
spread over her face.

"miss melly gwine ter 'lanta wid you, miss scarlett?"

"no," said scarlett sharply, beginning to realize what was coming.
"i'm going by myself."

"dat's whut you thinks," s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid mammy firmly, "but ah is gwine wid
you an' dat new dress.  yas, ma'm, eve'y step of de way."

for an instant scarlett envisaged her trip to atlanta and her
conversation with rhett with mammy glowering chaperonage like a
large black cerberus in the background.  she smiled again and put a
hand on mammy's arm.

"mammy darling, you're sweet to want to go with me and help me, but
how on earth would the folks here get on without you?  you know you
just about run tara."

"huh!" said mammy.  "doan do no good ter sweet talk me, miss
scarlett.  ah been knowin' you sence ah put de fust pa'r of diapers
on you.  ah's said ah's gwine ter 'lanta wid you an' gwine ah is.
miss ellen be tuhnin' in her grabe at you gwine up dar by yo'seff
wid dat town full up wid yankees an' free niggers an' sech like."

"but i'll be at aunt pittypat's," scarlett offered frantically.

"miss pittypat a fine woman an' she think she see eve'ything but
she doan," said mammy, and turning with the majestic air of
 
 ___________________________
 
 having
closed the interview, she went into the hall.  the boards trembled
as she called:

"prissy, child!  fly up de stairs an' fotch miss scarlett's pattun
box frum de attic an' try an' fine de scissors without takin' all
night 'bout it."

"this is a fine mess," thought scarlett dejectedly.  "i'd as soon
have a bloodhound after me."

after supper had been cleared away, scarlett and mammy spread
patterns on the dining-room table while suellen and carreen busily
ripped satin linings from curtains and melanie brushed the velvet
with a clean hairbrush to remove the dust.  gerald, will and ashley
sat about the room smoking, smiling at the feminine tumult.  a
feeling of pleasurable excitement which seemed to emanate from
scarlett was on them all, an excitement they could not understand.
there was color in scarlett's face and a bright hard glitter in her
eyes and she laughed a good de
 
 ___________________________
 
 such finality they did not
think to question.  and when they asked who was going to lend the
money she said:  "layovers catch meddlers," so archly they all
laughed and teased her about her millionaire friend.

"it must be captain rhett butler," said melanie slyly and they
exploded with mirth at this absurdity, knowing how scarlett hated
him and never failed to refer to him as "that skunk, rhett butler."

but scarlett did not laugh at this and ashley, who had laughed,
stopped abruptly as he saw mammy shoot a quick, guarded glance at
scarlett.

suellen, moved to generosity by the party spirit of the occasion,
produced her irish-lace collar, somewhat worn but still pretty, and
carreen insisted that scarlett wear her slippers to atlanta, for
they were in better condition than any others at tara.  melanie
begged mammy to leave her enough velvet scraps to recover the frame
of her battered bonnet and brought shouts of laughter when she said
the old rooster was going to part with his gorgeous bron
 
 ___________________________
 
d as for suellen and carreen--they think all this is
just a temporary matter.  they don't change to meet changed
conditions because they think it'll all be over soon.  they think
god is going to work a miracle especially for their benefit.  but
he won't.  the only miracle that's going to be worked around here
is the one i'm going to work on rhett butler. . . .  they won't
change.  maybe they can't change.  i'm the only one who's changed--
and i wouldn't have changed if i could have helped it."

mammy finally turned the men out of the dining room and closed the
door, so the fitting could begin.  pork helped gerald upstairs to
bed and ashley and will were left alone in the lamplight in the
front hall.  they were silent for a while and will chewed his
tobacco like a placid ruminant animal.  but his mild face was far
from placid.

"this goin' to atlanta," he said at last in a slow voice, "i don't
like it.  not one bit."

ashley looked at will quickly and then looked away, saying nothing
but won
 
 ___________________________
 
dering if will had the same awful suspicion which was
haunting him.  but that was impossible.  will didn't know what had
taken place in the orchard that afternoon and how it had driven
scarlett to desperation.  will couldn't have noticed mammy's face
when rhett butler's name was mentioned and, besides, will didn't
know about rhett's money or his foul reputation.  at least, ashley
did not think he could know these things, but since coming back to
tara he had realized that will, like mammy, seemed to know things
without being told, to sense them before they happened.  there was
something ominous in the air, exactly what ashley did not know, but
he was powerless to save scarlett from it.  she had not met his
eyes once that evening and the hard bright gaiety with which she
had treated him was frightening.  the suspicions which tore at him
were too terrible to be put into words.  he did not have the right
to insult her by asking her if they were true.  he clenched his
fists.  he had
 
 ___________________________
 
 no rights at all where she was concerned; this
afternoon he had forfeited them all, forever.  he could not help
her.  no one could help her.  but when he thought of mammy and the
look of grim determination she wore as she cut into the velvet
curtains, he was cheered a little.  mammy would take care of
scarlett whether scarlett wished it or not.

"i have caused all this," he thought despairingly.  "i have driven
her to this."

he remembered the way she had squared her shoulders when she turned
away from him that afternoon, remembered the stubborn lift of her
head.  his heart went out to her, torn with his own helplessness,
wrenched with admiration.  he knew she had no such word in her
vocabulary as gallantry, knew she would have stared blankly if he
had told her she was the
 
 ___________________________
 
d refused to
recognize defeat, men who rode gaily into sure disaster because
they were gallant.  and they had been defeated, just the same.

he thought as he stared at will in the shadowy hall that he had
never known such gallantry as the gallantry of scarlett o'hara
going forth to conquer the world in her mother's velvet curtains
and the tail feathers of a rooster.



chapter xxxiii


a cold wind was blowing stiffly and the scudding clouds overhead
were the deep gray of slate when scarlett and mammy stepped from
the train in atlanta the next afternoon.  the depot had not been
rebuilt since the burning of the city and they alighted amid
cinders and mud a few yards above the blackened ruins which marked
the site.  habit strong upon her, scarlett looked about for uncle
peter and pitty's carriage, for she had always been met by them
when returning from tara to atlanta during the war years.  then she
caught herself with a sniff at her own absent-mindedness.
naturally, peter wasn't there for she
 
 ___________________________
 
d yelling and people calling
greetings to friends.  she sighed for the light-hearted excitement
of the war days and sighed again at the thought of walking all the
way to aunt pitty's house.  but she was hopeful that once on
peachtree street, she might meet someone she knew who would give
them a ride.

as she stood looking about her a saddle-colored negro of middle age
drove the closed carriage toward her and, leaning from the box,
questioned:  "cah'ige, lady?  two bits fer any whar in 'lanta."

mammy threw him an annihilating glance.

"a hired hack!" she rumbled.  "nigger, does you know who we is?"

mammy was a country negro but she had not always been a country
negro and she knew that no chaste woman ever rode in a hired
conveyance--especially a closed carriage--without the escort of
some male member of her family.  even the presence of a negro maid
would not satisfy the conventions.  she gave scarlett a glare as
she saw her look longingly at the hack.

"come 'way frum dar, miss scarlett! 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a hired hack an' a free issue
nigger!  well, dat's a good combination."

"ah ain' no free issue nigger," declared the driver with heat.  "ah
b'longs ter ole miss talbot an' disyere her cah'ige an' ah drives
it ter mek money fer us."

"whut miss talbot is dat?"

"miss suzannah talbot of milledgeville.  us done move up hyah affer
old marse wuz kilt."

"does you know her, miss scarlett?"

"no," said scarlett, regretfully.  "i know so few milledgeville
folks."

"den us'll walk," said mammy sternly.  "drive on, nigger."

she picked up the carpetbag which held scarlett's new velvet frock
and bonnet and nightgown and tucked the neat bandanna bundle that
contained her own belongings under her arm and shepherded scarlett
across the wet expanse of cinders.  scarlett did not argue the
matter, much as she preferred to ride, for she wished no
disagreement with mammy.  ever since yesterday afternoon when mammy
had caught her with the velvet curtains, there had been an alert
suspicious look
 
 ___________________________
 
 in her eyes which scarlett did not like.  it was
going to be difficult to escape from her chaperonage and she did
not intend to rouse mammy's fighting blood before it was absolutely
necessary.

as they walked along the narrow sidewalk toward peachtree, scarlett
was dismayed and sorrowful, for atlanta looked so devastated and
different from what she remembered.  they passed beside what had
been the atlanta hotel where rhett and uncle henry had lived and of
that elegant hostelry there remained only a shell, a part of the
blackened walls.  the warehouses which had bordered the train
tracks for a quarter of a mile and held tons of mili
 
 ___________________________
 
treet, trying to adjust her mind to the new atlanta, she heard the
blithe sound of hammers and saws, noticed scaffoldings rising and
saw men climbing ladders with hods of bricks on their shoulders.
she looked down the street she loved so well and her eyes misted a
little.

"they burned you," she thought, "and they laid you flat.  but they
didn't lick you.  they couldn't lick you.  you'll grow back just as
big and sassy as you used to be!"

as she walked along peachtree, followed by the waddling mammy, she
found the sidewalks just as crowded as they were at the height of
the war and there was the same air of rush and bustle about the
resurrecting town which had made her blood sing when she came here,
so long ago, on her first visit to aunt pitty.  there seemed to be
just as many vehicles wallowing in the mud holes as there had been
then, except that there were no confederate ambulances, and just as
many horses and mules tethered to hitching racks in front of the
wooden awnings of the stores.
 
 ___________________________
 
  though the sidewalks were jammed,
the faces she saw were as unfamiliar as the signs overhead, new
people, many rough-looking men and tawdrily dressed women.  the
streets were black with loafing negroes who leaned against walls or
sat on the curbing watching vehicles go past with the naive
curiosity of children at a circus parade.

"free issue country niggers," snorted mammy.  "ain' never seed a
proper cah'ige in dere lives.  an' impident lookin', too."

they were impudent looking, scarlett agreed, for they stared at her
in an insolent manner, but she forgot them in the renewed shock of
seeing blue uniforms.  the town was full of yankee soldiers, on
horses, afoot, in army wagons, loafing on the street, reeling out
of barrooms.

i'll never get used to them, she thought, clenching her fists.
never! and over her shoulder:  "hurry, mammy, let's get out of this
crowd."

 
 ___________________________
 

"soon's ah kick dis black trash outer mah way," answered mammy
loudly, swinging the carpetbag at a black buck who loitered
tantalizingly in front of her and making him leap aside.  "ah doan
lak disyere town, miss scarlett.  it's too full of yankees an'
cheap free issue."

"it's nicer where it isn't so crowded.  when we get across five
points, it won't be so bad."

they picked their way across the slippery stepping stones that
bridged the mud of decatur street and continued up peachtree,
through a thinning crowd.  when they reached wesley chapel where
scarl
 
 ___________________________
 
ett had paused to catch her breath that day in 1864 when she
had run for dr. meade, she looked at it and laughed aloud, shortly
and grimly.  mammy's quick old eyes sought hers with suspicion and
question but her curiosity went unsatisfied.  scarlett was
recalling with contempt the terror which had ridden her that day.
she had been crawling with fear, rotten with fear, terrified by the
yankees, terrified by the approaching birth of beau.  now she
wondered how she could have been so frightened, frightened like a
child at a loud noise.  and what a child she had been to think that
yankees and fire and defeat were the worst things that could h
 
 ___________________________
 
they were beside ellen's death and
gerald's vagueness, beside hunger and cold and back-breaking work
and the living nightmare of insecurity.  how easy she would find it
now to be brave before an invading army, but how hard to face the
danger that threatened tara!  no, she would never again be afraid
of anything except poverty.

up peachtree came a closed carriage and scarlett went to the curb
eagerly to see if she knew the occupant, for aunt pitty's house was
still several blocks away.  she and mammy leaned forward as the
carriage came abreast and scarlett, with a smile arranged, almost
called out when a woman's head appeared for a moment at the window--
a too bright red head beneath a fine fur hat.  scarlett took a
step back as mutual recognition leaped into both faces.  it was
belle watling and scarlett had a glimpse of nostrils distended with
dislike before she disappeared again.  strange that belle's should
be the first familiar face she saw.

"who dat?" questioned mammy suspiciously.  
 
 ___________________________
 
"she knowed you but she
din' bow.  ah ain' never seed ha'r dat color in mah life.  not even
in de tarleton fambly.  it look--well, it look dyed ter me!"

"it is," said scarlett shortly, walking faster.

"does you know a dyed-ha'rd woman?  ah ast you who she is."

"she's the town bad woman," said scarlett briefly, "and i give you
my word i don't know her, so shut up."

"gawdlmighty!" breathed mammy, her jaw dropping as she looked after
the carriage with passionate curiosity.  she had not seen a
professional bad woman since she left savannah with ellen more than
twenty years before and she wished ardently that she had observed
belle more closely.

"she sho dressed up fine an' got a fine cah'ige an' coachman," she
muttered.  "ah doan know whut de lawd thinkin' 'bout lettin' de bad
women flurrish lak dat w'en us good folks is hongry an' mos'
barefoot."

"the lord stopped thinking about us ye
 
 ___________________________
 
ards instead of shingles, managed to look livable for
all its battered appearance.  but in neither house was there a face
at the window or a figure on the porch, and scarlett was glad.  she
did not want to talk to anyone now.

then the new slate roof of aunt pitty's house came in view with its
red-brick walls, and scarlett's heart throbbed.  how good of the
lord not to level it beyond repair!  coming out of the front yard
was uncle peter, a market basket on his arm, and when he saw
scarlett and mammy trudging along, a wide, incredulous smile split
his black face.

i could kiss the old black fool, i'm so glad to see him, thought
scarlett, joyfully and she called:  "run get auntie's swoon bottle,
peter!  it's really me!"



that night the inevitable hominy and dried peas were on aunt
pitty's supper table and, as scarlett ate them, she made a vow that
these two dishes would never appear on her table when she had money
again.  and, no matter what price she had to pay, she was going to
have mone
 
 ___________________________
 
nds and plant
miles and miles of cotton.  and she could have pretty clothes and
all she wanted to eat and so could suellen and carreen.  and wade
could have nourishing food to fill out his thin cheeks and warm
clothes and a governess and afterward go to the university . . .
and not grow up barefooted and ignorant like a cracker.  and a good
doctor could look after pa and as for ashley--what couldn't she do
for ashley!

aunt pittypat's monologue broke off suddenly as she said
inquiringly:  "yes, mammy?" and scarlett, coming back from dreams,
saw mammy standing in the doorway, her hands under her apron and in
her eyes an alert piercing look.  she wondered how long mammy had
been standing there and how much she had heard and observed.
probably everything, to judge by the gleam in her old eyes.

"miss scarlett look lak she tared.  ah spec she better go ter bed."

"i am tired," said scarlett, rising and meeting mammy's eyes with a
childlike, helpless look, "and i'm afraid i'm catching a cold too
 
 ___________________________
 
.
aunt pitty, would you mind if i stayed in bed tomorrow and didn't
go calling with you?  i can go calling any time and i'm so anxious
to go to fanny's wedding tomorrow night.  and if my cold gets worse
i won't be able to go.  and a day in bed would be such a lovely
treat for me."

mammy's look changed to faint worry as she felt scarlett's hands
and looked into her face.  she certainly didn't look well.  the
excitement of her thoughts had abruptly ebbed, leaving her white
and shaking.

"yo' han's lak ice, honey.  you come ter bed an' ah'll brew you
some sassfrass tea an' git you a hot brick ter mek you sweat."

"how thoughtless i've been," cried the plump old lady, hopping from
her chair and patting scarlett's arm.  "just chattering on and not
thinking of you.  honey, you shall
 
 ___________________________
 
 stay in bed all tomorrow and
rest up and we can gossip together--  oh, dear, no!  i can't be
with you.  i've promised to sit with mrs. bonnell tomorrow.  she is
down with la grippe and so is her cook.  mammy, i'm so glad you are
here.  you must go over with me in the morning and help me."

mammy hurried scarlett up the dark stairs, muttering fussy remarks
about cold hands and thin shoes and scarlett looked meek and was
well content.  if she could only lull mammy's suspicions further
and get her out of the house in the morning, all would be well.
then she could go to the yankee jail and see rhett.  as she climbed
the stairs, the faint rumbling of thunder began and, standing on
the well-remembered landing, she thought how like the siege cannon
it sounded.  she shivered.  forever, thunder would mean cannon and
war to her.



chapter xxxiv


the sun shone intermittently the next morning and the hard wind
that drove dark clouds swiftly across its face rattl
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the
windowpanes and moaned faintly about the house.  scarlett said a
brief prayer of thanksgiving that the rain of the previous night
had ceased, for she had lain awake listening to it, knowing that it
would mean the ruin of her velvet dress and new bonnet.  now that
she could catch fleeting glimpses of the sun, her spirits soared.
she could hardly remain in bed and look languid and make croaking
noises until aunt pitty, mammy and uncle peter were out of the
house and on their way to mrs. bonnell's.  when, at last, the front
gate banged and she was alone in the house, except for cookie who
was singing in the kitchen, she leaped from the bed and lifted her
new clothes from the closet hooks.

sleep had refreshed her and given her strength and from the cold
hard core at the bottom of her heart, she drew courage.  there was
something about the prospect of a struggle of wits with a man--with
any man--that put her on her m
 
 ___________________________
 
 do this to a fine man like you!"

"what's she done?"

"she didn't write you?  oh, i guess she was too ashamed to write
you.  she should be ashamed!  oh, to have such a mean sister!"

by this time, frank could not even get questions to his lips.  he
sat staring at her, gray faced, the reins slack in his hands.

"she's going to marry tony fontaine next month.  oh, i'm so sorry,
frank.  so sorry to be the one to tell you.  she just got tired of
waiting and she was afraid she'd be an old maid."



mammy was standing on the front porch when frank helped scarlett
out of the buggy.  she had evidently been standing there for some
time, for her head rag was damp and the old shawl clutched tightly
about her showed rain spots.  her wrinkled black face was a study
in anger and apprehension and her lip was pushed out farther than
scarlett could ever remember.  she peered quickly at frank and,
when she saw who it was, her face changed--pleasure, bewilderment
and something akin to guilt spreading over it
 
 ___________________________
 
en keer of.  ah come back hyah an' fine she gone an' ah
been as 'stracted as a chicken wid its haid off, thinkin' she
runnin' roun' dis town by herseff wid all dese trashy free issue
niggers on de street.  huccome you din' tell me you gwine out,
honey?  an' you wid a cole!"

scarlett winked slyly at frank and, for all his distress at the bad
news he had just heard, he smiled, knowing she was enjoining
silence and making him one in a pleasant conspiracy.

"you run up and fix me some dry clothes, mammy," she said.  "and
some hot tea."

"lawd, yo' new dress is plum ruint," grumbled mammy.  "ah gwine
have a time dryin' it an' brushin' it, so it'll be fit ter be wo'
ter de weddin' ternight."

she went into the house and scarlett leaned close to frank and
whispered:  "do come to supper tonight.  we are so lonesome.  and
we're going to the wedding afterward.  do be our escort!  and,
please don't say anything to aunt pitty about--about suellen.  it
would distress her so much and i can't bear for he
 
 ___________________________
 
r to know that my
sister--"

"oh, i won't!  i won't!" frank said hastily, wincing from the very
thought.

"you've been so sweet to me today and done me so much good.  i feel
right brave again."  she squeezed his hand in parting and turned
the full battery of her eyes upon him.

mammy, who was waiting just inside the door, gave her an inscrutable
look and followed her, puffing, up the stairs to the bedroom.  she
was silent while she stripped off the wet clothes and hung them over
chairs and tucked scarlett into bed.  when she had brought up a cup
of hot tea and a hot brick, rolled in flannel, she looked down at
scarlett and said, with the nearest approach to an apology in her
voice scarlett had ever heard:  "lamb, huccome you din' tell yo' own
mammy whut you wuz upter?  den 
 
 ___________________________
 
a.  ah is too ole an' too fat fer sech runnin'
roun'."

"what do you mean?"

"honey, you kain fool me.  ah knows you.  an' ah seed mist' frank's
face jes' now an' ah seed yo' face, an' ah kin read yo' mine lak a
pahson read a bible.  an' ah heerd dat whisperin' you wuz givin'
him 'bout miss suellen.  effen ah'd had a notion 'twuz mist' frank
you wuz affer, ah'd stayed home whar ah b'longs."

"well," said scarlett shortly, snuggling under the blankets and
realizing it was useless to try to throw mammy off the scent, "who
did you think it was?"

"chile, ah din' know but ah din' lak de look on yo' face yestiddy.
an' ah 'membered miss pittypat writin' miss melly dat dat
rapscallion butler man had lots of money an' ah doan fergit whut ah
hears.  but mist' frank, he a gempmum even ef he ain' so pretty."

scarlett gave her a sharp look and mammy returned the gaze with
calm omniscience.

"well, what are you going to do about it?  tattle to suellen?"

"ah is gwine ter he'p you pleasure mist' frank e
 
 ___________________________
 
ve'y way ah knows
how," said mammy, tucking the covers about scarlett's neck.

scarlett lay quietly for a while, as mammy fussed about the room,
relief flooding her that there was no need for words between them.
no explanations were asked, no reproaches made.  mammy understood
and was silent.  in mammy, scarlett had found a realist more
uncompromising than herself.  the mottled wise old eyes saw deeply,
saw clearly, with the directness of the savage and the child,
undeterred by conscience when danger threatened her pet.  scarlett
was her baby and what her baby wanted, even though it belonged to
another, mammy was willing to help her obtain.  the rights of
suellen and frank kennedy did not even enter her mind, save to
cause a grim inward chuckle.  scarlett was in trouble and doing the
best she
 
 ___________________________
 
 could, and scarlett was miss ellen's child.  mammy rallied
to her with never a moment's hesitation.

scarlett felt the silent reinforcement and, as the hot brick at her
feet warmed her, the hope which had flickered faintly on the cold
ride home grew into a flame.  it swept through her, making her
heart pump the blood through her veins in pounding surges.
strength was coming back and a reckless excitement which made her
want to laugh aloud.  not beaten yet, she thought exultantly.

"hand me the mirror, mammy," she said.

"keep yo' shoulders unne
 
 ___________________________
 
r dat kivver," ordered mammy, passing the
hand mirror to her, a smile on her thick lips.

scarlett looked at herself.

"i look white as a hant," she said, "and my hair is as wild as a
horse's tail."

"you doan look peart as you mout."

"hum. . . .  is it raining very hard?"

"you know it's po'in'."

"well, just the same, you've got to go downtown for me."

"not in dis rain, ah ain'."

"yes, you are or i'll go myself."

"whut you got ter do dat woan wait?  look ter me lak you done nuff
fer one day."

"i want," said scarlett
 
 ___________________________
 
, surveying herself carefully in the mirror,
"a bottle of cologne water.  you can wash my hair and rinse it with
cologne.  and buy me a jar of quince-seed jelly to make it lie down
flat."

"ah ain' gwine wash yo' ha'r in dis wedder an' you ain' gwine put
no cologne on yo' haid lak a fas' woman needer.  not w'ile ah got
breaf in mah body."

"oh, yes, i am.  look in my purse and get that five-dollar gold
piece out and go to town.  and--er, mammy, while you are downtown,
you might get me a--a pot of rouge."

"whut dat?" asked mammy suspiciously.

scarlett met her eyes with a coldness she was far from feeling.
there was never any way of knowing just how far mammy could be
bullied.

"never you mind.  just ask for it."

"ah ain' buyin nuthin' dat ah doan know whut 'tis."

"well, it's paint, if you're so curious!  face paint.  don't stand
there and swell up like a toad.  go on."

"paint!" ejaculated mammy.  "face paint!  well, you ain' so b
 
 ___________________________
 
ak a--"

"you know very well grandma robillard painted her face and--"

"yas'm, an' wo' only one petticoat an' it wrang out wid water ter
mek it stick an' show de shape of her laigs, but dat ain' sayin'
you is gwine do sumpin' lak dat!  times wuz scan'lous w'en ole miss
wuz young but times changes, dey do an'--"

"name of god!" cried scarlett, losing her temper and throwing back
the covers.  "you can go straight back to tara!"

"you kain sen' me ter tara ness ah wants ter go.  ah is free," said
mammy heatedly.  "an' ah is gwine ter stay right hyah.  git back in
dat baid.  does you want ter ketch pneumony jes' now?  put down dem
stays!  put dem down, honey.  now, miss scarlett, you ain' gwine
nowhars in dis wedder.  lawd god!  but you sho look lak yo' pa!
git back in baid--ah kain go buyin' no paint!  ah die of shame,
eve'ybody knowin 'it wud fer mah chile!  miss scarlett, you is so
sweet an' pretty lookin' you doan need no paint.  honey, doan
nobody but bad womens use dat stuff."

"well, th
 
 ___________________________
 
kissed her and spoke gently with
tears in their eyes of her dear mother's passing and asked at
length about her father and her sisters.  everyone asked about
melanie and ashley, demanding the reason why they, too, had not
come back to atlanta.

in spite of her pleasure at the welcome, scarlett felt a slight
uneasiness which she tried to conceal, an uneasiness about the
appearance of her velvet dress.  it was still damp to the knees and
still spotted about the hem, despite the frantic efforts of mammy
and cookie with a steaming kettle, a clean hair brush and frantic
wavings in front of an open fire.  scarlett was afraid someone
would notice her bedraggled state and realize that this was her
only nice dress.  she was a little cheered by the fact that many of
the dresses of the other guests looked far worse than hers.  they
were so old and had such carefully mended and pressed looks.  at
least, her dress was whole and new, damp though it was--in fact,
the only new dress at the gathering with t
 
 ___________________________
 
ing about her to scarlett.  without saying a disloyal
word about suellen, she could tell him she understood how badly her
sister had treated him and what good treatment he merited from a
woman who really appreciated him.

little mrs. hamilton was such a pretty pink-cheeked person,
alternating between melancholy sighs when she thought of her sad
plight, and laughter as gay and sweet as the tinkling of tiny
silver bells when he made small jokes to cheer her.  her green
gown, now neatly cleaned by mammy, showed off her slender figure
with its tiny waist to perfection, and how bewitching was the faint
fragrance which always clung about her handkerchief and her hair!
it was a shame that such a fine little woman should be alone and
helpless in a world so rough that she didn't even understand its
harshness.  no husband nor brother nor even a father now to protect
her.  frank thought the world too rude a place for a lone woman
and, in that idea, scarlett silently and heartily concurred.

he came to
 
 ___________________________
 
 call every night, for the atmosphere of pitty's house
was pleasant and soothing.  mammy's smile at the front door was the
smile reserved for quality folks, pitty served him coffee laced
with brandy and fluttered about him and scarlett hung on his every
utterance.  sometimes in the afternoons he took scarlett riding
with him in his buggy when he went out on business.  these rides
were merry affairs because she asked so many foolish questions--
"just like a woman," he told himself approvingly.  he couldn't help
laughing at her ignorance about business matters and she laughed
too, sa
 
 ___________________________
 

frank gave her the three hundred dollars, bewildered by her sweet
urgency, reluctant at first, because it meant the end of his hope
of buying the sawmill immediately.  but he could not see her family
evicted, and his disappointment soon faded at the sight of her
radiant happiness, disappeared entirely at the loving way she "took
on" over his generosity.  frank had never before had a woman "take
on" over him and he came to feel that the money had been well
spent, after all.

scarlett dispatched mammy to tara immediately for the triple
purpose of giving will the money, announcing her marriage and
bringing wade to atlanta.  in two days she had a brief note from
will which she carried about with her and read and reread with
mounting joy.  will wrote that the taxes had been paid and jonas
wilkerson "acted up pretty bad" at the news but had made no other
threats so far.  will closed by wishing her happiness, a laconic
formal statement which he qualified in no way.  she knew will
understood what 
 
 ___________________________
 
ys liked the
gizzard of the chicken and three spoonfuls of sugar in his coffee.
yes, life was very sweet and cozy with scarlett--as long as she had
her own way.



when the marriage was two weeks old, frank contracted the grippe
and dr. meade put him to bed.  in the first year of the war, frank
had spent two months in the hospital with pneumonia and he had
lived in dread of another attack since that time, so he was only
too glad to lie sweating under three blankets and drink the hot
concoctions mammy and aunt pitty brought him every hour.

the illness dragged on and frank worried more and more about the
store as each day passed.  the place was in charge of the counter
boy, who came to the house every night to report on the day's
transactions, but frank was not satisfied.  he fretted until
scarlett who had only been waiting for such an opportunity laid a
cool hand on his forehead and said:  "now, sweetheart, i shall be
vexed if you take on so.  i'll go to town and see how things are."

and s
 
 ___________________________
 
and frank cowered, almost visibly.  she had the temper of a
tartar and the rages of a wild cat and, at such times, she did not
seem to care what she said or how much it hurt.  clouds of gloom
hung over the house on such occasions.  frank went early to the
store and stayed late.  pitty scrambled into her bedroom like a
rabbit panting for its burrow.  wade and uncle peter retired to the
carriage house and cookie kept to her kitchen and forebore to raise
her voice to praise the lord in song.  only mammy endured
scarlett's temper with equanimity and mammy had had many years of
training with gerald o'hara and his explosions.

scarlett did not mean to be short tempered and she really wanted to
make frank a good wife, for she was fond of him and grateful for
his help in saving tara.  but he did try her patience to the
breaking point so often and in so many different ways.

she could never respect a man who let her run over him and the
timid, hesitant attitude he displayed in any unpleasant situati
 
 ___________________________
 
 atlanta," answered
scarlett, coolness in her voice.  "personally, i've never seen a
white servant and i shouldn't care to have one in my house.  and,"
she could not keep a slight note of sarcasm from her words, "i
assure you that darkies aren't cannibals and are quite trustworthy."

"goodness, no!  i wouldn't have one in my house.  the idea!"

"i wouldn't trust them any farther than i could see them and as for
letting them handle my babies . . ."

scarlett thought of the kind, gnarled hands of mammy worn rough in
ellen's service and hers and wade's.  what did these strangers know
of black hands, how dear and comforting they could be, how
unerringly they knew how to soothe, to pat, to fondle?  she laughed
shortly.

"it's strange you should feel that way when it was you all who
freed them."

"lor'!  not i, dearie," laughed the maine woman.  "i never saw a
nigger till i came south last month and i don't care if i never
see another.  they give me the creeps.  i wouldn't trust one of
them. . . 
 
 ___________________________
 
t white
people, certainly more than she trusted any yankee.  there were
qualities of loyalty and tirelessness and love in them that no
strain could break, no money could buy.  she thought of the
faithful few who remained at tara in the face of the yankee
invasion when they could have fled or joined the troops for lives
of leisure.  but they had stayed.  she thought of dilcey toiling in
the cotton fields beside her, of pork risking his life in
neighboring hen houses that the family might eat, of mammy coming
to atlanta with her to keep her from doing wrong.  she thought of
the servants of her neighbors who had stood loyally beside their
white owners, protecting their mistresses while the men were at the
front, refugeeing with them through the terrors of the war, nursing
the wounded, burying the dead, comforting the bereaved, working,
begging, stealing to keep food on the tables.  and even now, with
the freedmen's bureau promising all manner of wonders, they still
stuck with their white folks
 
 ___________________________
 
age but from those of your parents' generation and from
your children's generation too.  they'll never understand you and
they'll be shocked no matter what you do.  but your grandparents
would probably be proud of you and say:  'there's a chip off the
old block,' and your grandchildren will sigh enviously and say:
'what an old rip grandma must have been!' and they'll try to be
like you."

scarlett laughed with amusement.

"sometimes you do hit on the truth!  now there was my grandma
robillard.  mammy used to hold her over my head whenever i was
naughty.  grandma was as cold as an icicle and strict about her
manners and everybody else's manners, but she married three times
and had any number of duels fought over her and she wore rouge and
the most shockingly low-cut dresses and no--well, er--not much
under her dresses."

"and you admired her tremendously, for all that you tried to be
like your mother!  i had a grandfather on the butler side who was a
pirate."

"not really!  a walk-the-plank 
 
 ___________________________
 

with, and you never could tell when the dull weapon you put into
his hands in an unguarded moment might turn into the keenest of
blades.  but, after all, he was as stimulating as--well, as a
surreptitious glass of brandy!

during these months scarlett had learned the use of brandy.  when
she came home in the late afternoons, damp from the rain, cramped
and aching from long hours in the buggy, nothing sustained her
except the thought of the bottle hidden in her top bureau drawer,
locked against mammy's prying eyes.  dr. meade had not thought to
warn her that a woman in her condition should not drink, for it
never occurred to him that a decent woman would drink anything
stronger than scuppernong wine.  except, of course, a glass of
champagne at a wedding or a hot toddy when confined to bed with a
hard cold.  of course, there were unfortunate women who drank, to
the eternal disgrace of their families, just as there were women
who were insane or divorced or who believed, with miss susan b.
ant
 
 ___________________________
 
ugh and
ashley feared to leave their families alone all day.

then the blow fell.

frank, full of the pride of new fatherhood, summoned up courage
enough to forbid scarlett leaving the house while conditions were
so dangerous.  his commands would not have worried her at all and
she would have gone about her business in spite of them, if he had
not put her horse and buggy in the livery stable and ordered that
they should not be surrendered to anyone except himself.  to make
matters worse, he and mammy had patiently searched the house while
she was ill and unearthed her hidden store of money.  and frank had
deposited it in the bank in his own name, so now she could not even
hire a rig.

scarlett raged at both frank and mammy, then was reduced to begging
and finally cried all one morning like a furious thwarted child.
but for all her pains she heard only:  "there, sugar!  you're just
a sick little girl."  and:  "miss scarlett, ef you doan quit
cahyin' on so, you gwine sour yo' milk an' de baby
 
 ___________________________
 
d have to pass right by it.  let
me think--  darling, promise me you won't do anything today and
i'll think of something.  promise me you'll go home and lie down.
you look right peaked.  promise me."

because she was too exhausted by her anger to do otherwise,
scarlett sulkily promised and went home, haughtily refusing any
overtures of peace from her household.

that afternoon a strange figure stumped through melanie's hedge and
across pitty's back yard.  obviously, he was one of those men whom
mammy and dilcey referred to as "de riff-raff whut miss melly pick
up off de streets an' let sleep in her cellar."

there were three rooms in the basement of melanie's house which
formerly had been servants' quarters and a wine room.  now dilcey
occupied one, and the other two were in constant use by a stream of
miserable and ragged transients.  no one but melanie knew whence
they came or where they were going and no one but she knew where
she collected them.  perhaps the negroes were right and she d
 
 ___________________________
 
ies, beating their way about the
country in hope of finding work.

frequently, brown and withered country women with broods of tow-
haired silent children spent the night there, women widowed by the
war, dispossessed of their farms, seeking relatives who were
scattered and lost.  sometimes the neighborhood was scandalized by
the presence of foreigners, speaking little or no english, who had
been drawn south by glowing tales of fortunes easily made.  once a
republican had slept there.  at least, mammy insisted he was a
republican, saying she could smell a republican, same as a horse
could smell a rattlesnake; but no one believed mammy's story, for
there must be some limit even to melanie's charity.  at least
everyone hoped so.

yes, thought scarlett, sitting on the side porch in the pale
november sunshine with the baby on her lap, he is one of melanie's
lame dogs.  and he's really lame, at that!

the man who was making his way across the back yard stumped, like
will benteen, on a wooden leg.
 
 ___________________________
 
ndered curiously where rhett was these days, for he
had abruptly left town three months before and no one, not even
scarlett, knew where he was.

archie was a silent man, never speaking unless spoken to and
usually answering with grunts.  every morning he came from
melanie's cellar and sat on the front steps of pitty's house,
chewing and spitting until scarlett came out and peter brought the
buggy from the stable.  uncle peter feared him only a little less
than the devil or the ku klux and even mammy walked silently and
timorously around him.  he hated negroes and they knew it and
feared him.  he reinforced his pistol and knife with another
pistol, and his fame spread far among the black population.  he
never once had to draw a pistol or even lay his hand on his belt.
the moral effect was sufficient.  no negro dared even laugh while
archie was in hearing.

once scarlett asked him curiously why he hated negroes and was
surprised when he answered, for generally all questions were
answered by 
 
 ___________________________
 
perado sitting in
judgment upon her, and it was still more embarrassing to know that
her family and friends agreed with the old man.

frank pleaded with her against taking the step.  ashley at first
refused to work convicts and was persuaded, against his will, only
after tears and supplications and promises that when times were
better she would hire free darkies.  neighbors were so outspoken in
their disapproval that frank, pitty and melanie found it hard to
hold up their heads.  even peter and mammy declared that it was bad
luck to work convicts and no good would come of it.  everyone said
it was wrong to take advantage of the miseries and misfortunes of
others.

"you didn't have any objections to working slaves!" scarlett cried
indignantly.

ah, but that was different.  slaves were neither miserable nor
unfortunate.  the negroes were far better off under slavery than
they were now under freedom, and if she didn't believe it, just
look about her!  but, as usual, opposition had the effect o
 
 ___________________________
 
for a moment.  she was not in the least
alarmed or distressed that sam had committed murder, but she was
disappointed that she could not have him as a driver.  a big negro
like sam would be as good a bodyguard as archie.  well, she must
get him safe to tara somehow, for of course the authorities must
not get him.  he was too valuable a darky to be hanged.  why, he
was the best foreman tara had ever had!  it did not enter
scarlett's mind that he was free.  he still belonged to her, like
pork and mammy and peter and cookie and prissy.  he was still "one
of our family" and, as such, must be protected.

"i'll send you to tara tonight," she said finally.  "now sam, i've
got to drive out the road a piece, but i ought to be back here
before sundown.  you be waiting here for me when i come back.
don't tell anyone where you are going and if you've got a hat,
bring it along to hide your face."

"ah ain' got no hat."

"well, here's a quarter.  you buy a hat from one of those shanty
darkies and meet me
 
 ___________________________
 
d looked very much as he did the night tony came
beating on their door, as though this was an exclusively masculine
affair and one to be handled with a minimum of words and emotions.

"you go get in the buggy.  i'll have peter drive you as far as
rough and ready tonight and you can hide in the woods till morning
and then catch the train to jonesboro.  it'll be safer. . . .  now,
sugar, stop crying.  it's all over now and you aren't really hurt.
miss pitty, could i have your smelling salts?  and mammy, fetch
miss scarlett a glass of wine."

scarlett had burst into renewed tears, this time tears of rage.
she wanted comforting, indignation, threats of vengeance.  she
would even have preferred him storming at her, saying that this was
just what he had warned her would happen--anything rather than have
him take it all so casually and treat her danger as a matter of
small moment.  he was nice and gentle, of course, but in an absent
way as if he had something far more important on his mind.

and t
 
 ___________________________
 
ent disbelief.  "well, i got to be
goin'.  i'm afraid somebody might recognize this carriage if i
stayed here longer and that wouldn't do you no good.  and, miz
wilkes, if you ever see me on the street, you--you don't have to
speak to me.  i'll understand."

"i shall be proud to speak to you.  proud to be under obligation to
you.  i hope--i hope we meet again."

"no," said belle.  "that wouldn't be fittin'.  good night."



chapter xlvii


scarlett sat in her bedroom, picking at the supper tray mammy had
brought her, listening to the wind hurling itself out of the night.
the house was frighteningly still, quieter even than when frank had
lain in the parlor just a few hours before.  then there had been
tiptoeing feet and hushed voices, muffled knocks on the door,
neighbors rustling in to whisper sympathy and occasional sobs from
frank's sister who had come up from jonesboro for the funeral.

but now the house was cloaked in silence.  although her door was
open she could hear no sounds from b
 
 ___________________________
 
elow stairs.  wade and the baby
had been at melanie's since frank's body was brought home and she
missed the sound of the boy's feet and ella's gurgling.  there was
a truce in the kitchen and no sound of quarreling from peter, mammy
and cookie floated up to her.  even aunt pitty, downstairs in the
library, was not rocking her creaking chair in deference to
scarlett's sorrow.

no one intruded upon her, believing that she wished to be left
alone with her grief, but to be left alone was the last thing
scarlett desired.  had it only been grief that companioned her, she
could have borne it as she had borne other griefs.  but, added to
her stunned sense of loss at frank's death, were fear and remorse
and the torment of a suddenl
 
 ___________________________
 
unaided any
longer.  she arose cautiously, pushed her door half-closed and then
dug about in the bottom bureau drawer beneath her underwear.  she
produced aunt pitty's "swoon bottle" of brandy which she had hidden
there and held it up to the lamp.  it was nearly half-empty.
surely she hadn't drunk that much since last night!  she poured a
generous amount into her water glass and gulped it down.  she would
have to put the bottle back in the cellaret before morning, filled
to the top with water.  mammy had hunted for it, just before the
funeral when the pallbearers wanted a drink, and already the air in
the kitchen was electric with suspicion between mammy, cookie and
peter.

the brandy burned with fiery pleasantness.  there was nothing like
it when you needed it.  in fact, brandy was good almost any time,
so much better than insipid wine.  why on earth should it be proper
for a woman to drink wine and not spirits?  mrs. merriwether and
mrs. meade had sniffed her breath most obviously at the 
 
 ___________________________
 
funeral and
she had seen the triumphant look they had exchanged.  the old cats!

she poured another drink.  it wouldn't matter if she did get a
little tipsy tonight for she was going to bed soon and she could
gargle cologne before mammy came up to unlace her.  she wished she
could get as completely and thoughtlessly drunk as gerald used to
get on court day.  then perhaps she could forget frank's sunken
face accusing her of ruining his life and then killing him.

she wondered if everyone in town thought she had killed him.
certainly the people at the funeral had been cold to her.  the only
people who had put any warmth into their expressions of sympathy
were the wives of the yankee officers with whom she did business.
well, she
 
 ___________________________
 
"what?"

"the cologne."

"i'm sure i don't know what you mean."

"i'm sure you do.  you've been drinking pretty heavily."

"well, what if i have?  is it any of your business?"

"the soul of courtesy, even in the depths of sorrow.  don't drink
alone, scarlett.  people always find it out and it ruins the
reputation.  and besides, it's a bad business, this drinking alone.
what's the matter, honey?"

he led her to the rosewood sofa and she sat down in silence.

"may i close the doors?"

she knew if mammy saw the closed doors she would be scandalized and
would lecture and grumble about it for days, but it would be still
worse if mammy should overhear this discussion of drinking,
especially in light of the missing brandy bottle.  she nodded and
rhett drew the sliding doors together.  when he came back and sat
down beside her, his dark eyes alertly searching her face, the pall
of death receded before the vitality he radiated and the room
seemed pleasant and homelike again, the lamps rosy and warm.
 
 ___________________________
 
 talk like a fool.  there's no fun being married."

"no?  why not?"

a measure of calm had returned and with it all the natural
bluntness which brandy brought to the surface.

"it's fun for men--though god knows why.  i never could understand
it.  but all a woman gets out of it is something to eat and a lot
of work and having to put up with a man's foolishness--and a baby
every year."

he laughed so loudly that the sound echoed in the stillness and
scarlett heard the kitchen door open.

"hush!  mammy has ears like a lynx and it isn't decent to laugh so
soon after--hush laughing.  you know it's true.  fun!  fiddle-dee-
dee!"

"i said you'd had bad luck and what you've just said proves it.
you've been married to a boy and to an old man.  and into the
bargain i'll bet your mother told you that women must bear 'these
things' because of the compensating joys of motherhood.  well,
that's all wrong.  why not try marrying a fine young man who has a
bad reputation and a way with women?  it'll be fun
 
 ___________________________
 
h one hand placed delicately over his heart, he
recited rapidly:

"forgive me for startling you with the impetuosity of my sentiments,
my dear scarlett--i mean, my dear mrs. kennedy.  it cannot have
escaped your notice that for some time past the friendship i have
had in my heart for you has ripened into a deeper feeling, a feeling
more beautiful, more pure, more sacred.  dare i name it you?  ah!
it is love which makes me so bold!"

"do get up," she entreated.  "you look such a fool and suppose
mammy should come in and see you?"

"she would be stunned and incredulous at the first signs of my
gentility," said rhett, arising lightly.  "come, scarlett, you are
no child, no schoolgirl to put me off with foolish excuses about
decency and so forth.  say you'll marry me when i come back or,
before god, i won't go.  i'll stay around here and play a guitar
under your window every night and sing at the top of my voice and
compromise you, so you'll have to marry me to save your reputation."

"rhett, d
 
 ___________________________
 
t and picked up his
gloves and hat.

"i'll write you.  let me know if you change your mind."

"aren't you--"

"well?"  he seemed impatient to be off.

"aren't you going to kiss me good-by?" she whispered, mindful of
the ears of the house.

"don't you think you've had enough kissing for one evening?" he
retorted and grinned down at her.  "to think of a modest, well-
brought-up young woman--  well, i told you it would be fun, didn't
i?"

"oh, you are impossible!" she cried in wrath, not caring if mammy
did hear.  "and i don't care if you never come back."

she turned and flounced toward the stairs, expecting to feel his
warm hand on her arm, stopping her.  but he only pulled open the
front door and a cold draft swept in.

"but i will come back," he said and went out, leaving her on the
bottom step looking at the closed door.

the ring rhett brought back from england was large indeed, so large
it embarrassed scarlett to wear it.  she loved gaudy and expensive
jewelry but she had an uneasy feel
 
 ___________________________
 
rain--or of minie balls.  now,
let me tell you this, mrs. merriwether, and you can take it back to
your busybody friends.  i'm going to marry captain butler and i
wouldn't care if he'd fought on the yankee side."

when that worthy matron went out of the house with her bonnet
jerking with rage, scarlett knew she had an open enemy now instead
of a disapproving friend.  but she did not care.  nothing mrs.
merriwether could say or do could hurt her.  she did not care what
anyone said--anyone except mammy.

scarlett had borne with pitty's swooning at the news and had
steeled herself to see ashley look suddenly old and avoid her eyes
as he wished her happiness.  she had been amused and irritated at
the letters from aunt pauline and aunt eulalie in charleston,
horror struck at the news, forbidding the marriage, telling her it
would not only ruin her social position but endanger theirs.  she
had even laughed when melanie with a worried pucker in her brows
said loyally:  "of course, captain butler i
 
 ___________________________
 
s much nicer than most
people realize and he was so kind and clever, the way he saved
ashley.  and after all, he did fight for the confederacy.  but,
scarlett, don't you think you'd better not decide so hastily?"

no, she didn't mind what anybody said, except mammy.  mammy's words
were the ones that made her most angry and brought the greatest
hurt.

"ah has seed you do a heap of things dat would hu't miss ellen, did
she know.  an' it has done sorrered me a plen'y.  but disyere is de
wust yit.  mahyin' trash!  yas'm, ah said trash!  doan go tellin'
me he come frum fine folkses.  dat doan mek no diffunce.  trash
come outer de high places, same as de low, and he trash!  yas'm,
miss scarlett, ah's seed you tek mist' charles 'way frum miss honey
w'en you din' keer nu
 
 ___________________________
 
thin' 'bout him.  an' ah's seed you rob yo own
sister of mist' frank.  an' ah's heshed mah mouf 'bout a heap of
things you is done, lak sellin' po' lumber fer good, an' lyin'
'bout de other lumber gempmums, an' ridin' roun' by yo'seff,
exposin' yo'seff ter free issue niggers an' gettin' mist' frank
shot, an' not feedin' dem po' convicts nuff ter keep dey souls in
dey bodies.  ah's done heshed mah mouf, even ef miss ellen in de
promise lan' wuz sayin' 'mammy, mammy!  you ain' look affer mah
chile right!'  yas'm.  ah's stood fer all dat but ah ain' gwine
stand fer dis, miss scarlett.  you kain mahy wid trash.  not w'ile
ah got breaf in mah body."

"i shall marry whom i please," said scarlett coldly.  "i think you
are forgetting your place, mammy."

"an' high time, too!  ef ah doan say dese wuds ter you, who gwine
ter do it?"

"i've been thinking the matter over, mammy, and i've decided that
the best thing for you to do is to go back to tara.  i'll give you
 
 ___________________________
 

some money and--"

mammy drew herself up with all her dignity.

"ah is free, miss scarlett.  you kain sen' me nowhar ah doan wanter
go.  an' w'en ah goes back ter tara, it's gwine be w'en you goes
wid me.  ah ain' gwine leave miss ellen's chile, an' dar ain' no
way in de worl' ter mek me go.  an' ah ain' gwine leave miss
ellen's gran'chillun fer no trashy step-pa ter bring up, needer.
hyah ah is and hyah ah stays!"

"i will not have you staying in my house and being rude to captain
butler.  i am going to marry him and 
 
 ___________________________
 
there's no more to be said."

"dar is plen'y mo' ter be said," retorted mammy slowly and into her
blurred old eyes there came the light of battle.

"but ah ain' never thought ter say it ter none of miss ellen's
blood.  but, miss scarlett, lissen ter me.  you ain' nuthin' but a
mule in hawse harness.  you kin polish a mule's feet an' shine his
hide an' put brass all over his harness an' hitch him ter a fine
cah'ige.  but he a mule jes' de same.  he doan fool nobody.  an'
you is jes' de same.  you got silk dresses an' de mills an' de sto'
an' de money, an' you give yo'seff
 
 ___________________________
 
 airs lak a fine hawse, but you a
mule jes' de same.  an' you ain' foolin' nobody, needer.  an' dat
butler man, he come of good stock and he all slicked up lak a race
hawse, but he a mule in hawse harness, jes' lak you."

mammy bent a piercing look on her mistress.  scarlett was
speechless and quivering with insult.

"ef you say you gwine mahy him, you gwine do it, 'cause you is
bullhaided lak yo' pa.  but 'member dis, miss scarlett, ah ain'
leavin' you.  ah gwine stay right hyah an' see dis ting thoo."

without waiting for a reply, mammy turned and left scarlett and if
she had said:  "thou shalt see me at philippi!" her tones would not
have been more ominous.

while they were honeymooning in new orleans scarlett told
 
 ___________________________
 
 rhett of
mammy's words.  to her surprise and indignation he laughed at
mammy's statement about mules in horse harness.

"i have never heard a profound truth expressed so succinctly," he
said.  "mammy's a smart old soul and one of the few people i know
whose respect and good will i'd like to have.  but, being a mule, i
suppose i'll never get either from her.  she even refused the ten-
dollar gold piece which i, in my groomlike fervor, wished to
present her after the wedding.  i've seen so few people who did not
melt at the sight of cash.  but she looked me in the eye and
thanked me and said she wasn't a free issue nigger and didn't need
my money."

"why should she take on so?  why should eve
 
 ___________________________
 
what riches!

she recklessly bought gifts for the family.  a furry st. bernard
puppy for wade, who had always longed for one, a persian kitten for
beau, a coral bracelet for little ella, a heavy necklace with
moonstone pendants for aunt pitty, a complete set of shakespeare
for melanie and ashley, an elaborate livery for uncle peter,
including a high silk coachman's hat with a brush upon it, dress
lengths for dilcey and cookie, expensive gifts for everyone at
tara.

"but what have you bought for mammy?" questioned rhett, looking
over the pile of gifts spread out on the bed in their hotel room,
and removing the puppy and kitten to the dressing room.

"not a thing.  she was hateful.  why should i bring her a present
when she called us mules?"

"why should you so resent hearing the truth, my pet?  you must
bring mammy a present.  it would break her heart if you didn't--and
hearts like hers are too valuable to be broken."

"i won't take her a thing.  she doesn't deserve it."

"then i'll buy her 
 
 ___________________________
 
one.  i remember my mammy always said that when
she went to heaven she wanted a taffeta petticoat so stiff that it
would stand by itself and so rustly that the lord god would think
it was made of angels' wings.  i'll buy mammy some red taffeta and
have an elegant petticoat made."

"she won't take it from you.  she'd die rather than wear it."

"i don't doubt it.  but i'll make the gesture just the same."

the shops of new orleans were so rich and exciting and shopping
with rhett was an adventure.  dining with him was an adventure too,
and one more thrilling than shopping, for he knew what to order and
how it should be cooked.  the wines and liqueurs and champagnes of
new orleans were new and exhilarating to her, acqua