ill careless laughter
of negro voices, as the field hands and mules came in from the
fields.  from within the house floated the soft voice of
scarlett's mother, ellen o'hara, as she called to the little black
girl who carried her basket of keys.  the high-pitched, childish
voice answered "yas'm," and there were sounds of footsteps going
out the back way toward the smokehouse where ellen would ration
out the food to the home-coming hands.  there was the click of
china and the rattle of silver as pork, the valet-butler of tara,
laid the table for supper.

at these last sounds, the twins realized it was time they were
starting home.  but they were loath to face their mother and they
lingered on the porch of tara, momentarily expecting scarlett to
give them an invitation to supper.

"look, scarlett.  about tomorrow," said brent.  "just because
we've been away and didn't know about the barbecue and the ball,
that's no reason why we shouldn't get plenty of dances tomorrow
night.  you haven't pro
 
 ___________________________
 
 to her feet.
when mammy returned she would resume her lecture on scarlett's
breach of hospitality, and scarlett felt that she could not endure
prating about such a trivial matter when her heart was breaking.
as she stood, hesitant, wondering where she could hide until the
ache in her breast subsided a little, a thought came to her,
bringing a small ray of hope.  her father had ridden over to
twelve oaks, the wilkes plantation, that afternoon to offer to buy
dilcey, the broad wife of his valet, pork.  dilcey was head woman
and midwife at twelve oaks, and, since the marriage six months
ago, pork had deviled his master night and day to buy dilcey, so
the two could live on the same plantation.  that afternoon,
gerald, his resistance worn thin, had set out to make an offer for
dilcey.

surely, thought scarlett, pa will know whether this awful story is
true.  even if he hasn't actually heard anything this afternoon,
perhaps he's noticed something, sensed some excitement in the
wilkes family.  i
 
 ___________________________
 
t his lips in mute indignation
at being told how to conduct his own business.  driving off, with
mammy beside him, each was a perfect picture of pouting african
disapproval.

"if i didn't do so much for those trashy slatterys that they'd
have to pay money for elsewhere," fumed gerald, "they'd be willing
to sell me their miserable few acres of swamp bottom, and the
county would be well rid of them."  then, brightening, in
anticipation of one of his practical jokes:  "come daughter, let's
go tell pork that instead of buying dilcey, i've sold him to john
wilkes."

he tossed the reins of his horse to a small pickaninny standing
near and started up the steps.  he had already forgotten
scarlett's heartbreak and his mind was only on plaguing his valet.
scarlett slowly climbed the steps after him, her feet leaden.  she
thought that, after all, a mating between herself and ashley could
be no queerer than that of her father and ellen robillard o'hara.
as always, she wondered how her loud, insensitiv
 
 ___________________________
 
from these indolent gentlefolk of semi-tropical weather and malarial
marshes.

from them he learned what he found useful, and the rest he
dismissed.  he found poker the most useful of all southern
customs, poker and a steady head for whisky; and it was his
natural aptitude for cards and amber liquor that brought to gerald
two of his three most prized possessions, his valet and his
plantation.  the other was his wife, and he could only attribute
her to the mysterious kindness of god.

the valet, pork by name, shining black, dignified and trained in
all the arts of sartorial elegance, was the result of an all-night
poker game with a planter from st. simons island, whose courage in
a bluff equaled gerald's but whose head for new orleans rum did
not.  though pork's former owner later offered to buy him back at
twice his value, gerald obstinately refused, for the possession of
his first slave, and that slave the "best damn valet on the
coast," was the first step upward toward his heart's desire
 
 ___________________________
 
tiny and four dueces that he never for a
moment wondered just how the money would be paid back should a
higher hand be laid down across the table.

"it's no bargain you're getting and i am glad not to have to pay
more taxes on the place," sighed the possessor of an "ace full,"
as he called for pen and ink.  "the big house burned a year ago
and the fields are growing up in brush and seedling pine.  but
it's yours."

"never mix cards and whisky unless you were weaned on irish
poteen," gerald told pork gravely the same evening, as pork
assisted him to bed.  and the valet, who had begun to attempt a
brogue out of admiration for his new master, made requisite answer
in a combination of geechee and county meath that would have
puzzled anyone except those two alone.

the muddy flint river, running silently between walls of pine and
water oak covered with tangled vines, wrapped about gerald's new
land like a curving arm and embraced it on two sides.  to gerald,
standing on the small knoll where th
 
 ___________________________
 
f a sporting print,
it came to him that tara, dear though it was, and the county folk,
with their open hearts and open houses, were not enough.  he
wanted a wife.

tara cried out for a mistress.  the fat cook, a yard negro
elevated by necessity to the kitchen, never had the meals on time,
and the chambermaid, formerly a field hand, let dust accumulate on
the furniture and never seemed to have clean linen on hand, so
that the arrival of guests was always the occasion of much
stirring and to-do.  pork, the only trained house negro on the
place, had general supervision over the other servants, but even
he had grown slack and careless after several years of exposure to
gerald's happy-go-lucky mode of living.  as valet, he kept
gerald's bedroom in order, and, as butler, he served the meals
with dignity and style, but otherwise he pretty well let matters
follow their own course.

with unerring african instinct, the negroes had all discovered
that gerald had a loud bark and no bite at all, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
y's hunting.

gerald's sharp blue eyes noticed how efficiently his neighbors'
houses were run and with what ease the smooth-haired wives in
rustling skirts managed their servants.  he had no knowledge of
the dawn-till-midnight activities of these women, chained to
supervision of cooking, nursing, sewing and laundering.  he only
saw the outward results, and those results impressed him.

the urgent need of a wife became clear to him one morning when he
was dressing to ride to town for court day.  pork brought forth
his favorite ruffled shirt, so inexpertly mended by the
chambermaid as to be unwearable by anyone except his valet.

"mist' gerald," said pork, gratefully rolling up the shirt as
gerald fumed, "whut you needs is a wife, and a wife whut has got
plen'y of house niggers."

gerald upbraided pork for his impertinence, but he knew that he
was right.  he wanted a wife and he wanted children and, if he did
not acquire them soon, it would be too late.  but he was not going
to marry just an
 
 ___________________________
 
retfully refused to let gerald o'hara pay court to
his daughter.  this knowledge did not make gerald feel inferior to
his neighbors.  nothing could ever make gerald feel that he was
inferior in any way to anyone.  it was merely a quaint custom of
the county that daughters only married into families who had lived
in the south much longer than twenty-two years, had owned land and
slaves and been addicted only to the fashionable vices during that
time.

"pack up.  we're going to savannah," he told pork.  "and if i hear
you say 'whist!' or 'faith!' but once, it's selling you i'll be
doing, for they are words i seldom say meself."

james and andrew might have some advice to offer on this subject
of marriage, and there might be daughters among their old friends
who would both meet his requirements and find him acceptable as a
husband.  james and andrew listened to his story patiently but
they gave him little encouragement.  they had no savannah
relatives to whom they might look for assistance, f
 
 ___________________________
 
," said gerald heatedly.  "besides, her mother is dead,
and old man robillard likes me."

"as a man, yes, but as a son-in-law, no."

"the girl wouldn't have you anyway," interposed andrew.  "she's
been in love with that wild buck of a cousin of hers, philippe
robillard, for a year now, despite her family being at her morning
and night to give him up."

"he's been gone to louisiana this month now," said gerald.

"and how do you know?"

"i know," answered gerald, who did not care to disclose that pork
had supplied this valuable bit of information, or that philippe
had departed for the west at the express desire of his family.
"and i do not think she's been so much in love with him that she
won't forget him.  fifteen is too young to know much about love."

"they'd rather have that breakneck cousin for her than you."

so, james and andrew were as startled as anyone when the news came
out that the daughter of pierre robillard was to marry the little
irishman from up the country.  savannah buzze
 
 ___________________________
 
e always felt
secure when ellen was by her, for there was nothing so bad that
ellen could not better it, simply by being there.

she rose suddenly from her chair at the sound of creaking wheels
in the driveway and then sank down again as they went on around
the house to the back yard.  it could not be ellen, for she would
alight at the front steps.  then there was an excited babble of
negro voices in the darkness of the yard and high-pitched negro
laughter.  looking out the window, scarlett saw pork, who had left
the room a moment before, holding high a flaring pine knot, while
indistinguishable figures descended from a wagon.  the laughter
and talking rose and fell in the dark night air, pleasant, homely,
carefree sounds, gutturally soft, musically shrill.  then feet
shuffled up the back-porch stairs and into the passageway leading
to the main house, stopping in the hall just outside the dining
room.  there was a brief interval of whispering, and pork entered,
his usual dignity gone, his 
 
 ___________________________
 
eyes rolling and his teeth a-gleam.

"mist' gerald," he announced, breathing hard, the pride of a
bridegroom all over his shining face, "you' new 'oman done come."

"new woman?  i didn't buy any new woman," declared gerald,
pretending to glare.

"yassah, you did, mist' gerald!  yassah!  an' she out hyah now
wanting ter speak wid you," answered pork, giggling and twisting
his hands in excitement.

"well, bring in the bride," said gerald, and pork, turning,
beckoned into the hall to his wife, newly arrived from the wilkes
plantation to become part of the household of tara.  she entered,
and behind her, almost hidden by her voluminous calico skirts,
came her twelve-year-old daughter, squirming against her mother's
legs.

dilcey was tall and bore herself erectly.  she might have been any
age from thirty to sixty, so unlined was her immobile bronze face.
indian blood was plain in her features, overbalancing the negroid
characteristics.  the
 
 ___________________________
 
od mammy, but you a young lady now and
needs a good maid, and my prissy been maidin' fo' miss india fo' a
year now.  she kin sew and fix hair good as a grown pusson."

prodded by her mother, prissy bobbed a sudden curtsy and grinned
at scarlett, who could not help grinning back.

"a sharp little wench," she thought, and said aloud:  "thank you,
dilcey, we'll see about it when mother comes home."

"thankee, ma'm.  i gives you a good night," said dilcey and,
turning, left the room with her child, pork dancing attendance.
the supper things cleared away, gerald resumed his oration, but
with little satisfaction to himself and none at all to his
audience.  his thunderous predictions of immediate war and his
rhetorical questions as to whether the south would stand for
further insults from the yankees only produced faintly bored,
"yes, papas" and "no, pas."  carreen, sitting on a hassock under
the big lamp, was deep in the romance of a girl who had taken the
veil after her lover's death and, with 
 
 ___________________________
 
d into the kitchen.  mammy had her
own method of letting her owners know exactly where she stood on
all matters.  she knew it was beneath the dignity of quality white
folks to pay the slightest attention to what a darky said when she
was just grumbling to herself.  she knew that to uphold this
dignity, they must ignore what she said, even if she stood in the
next room and almost shouted.  it protected her from reproof, and
it left no doubt in anyone's mind as to her exact views on any
subject.

pork entered the room, bearing a plate, silver and a napkin.  he
was followed closely by jack, a black little boy of ten, hastily
buttoning a white linen jacket with one hand and bearing in the
other a fly-swisher, made of thin strips of newspaper tied to a
reed longer than he was.  ellen had a beautiful peacock-feather
fly-brusher, but it was used only on very special occasions and
then only after domestic struggle, due to the obstinate conviction
of pork, cookie and mammy that peacock feathers wer
 
 ___________________________
 
d to know what she was eating.  only mammy's implacable
face forced her to it.

when the dish was empty and gerald only midway in his remarks on
the thievishness of yankees who wanted to free darkies and yet
offered no penny to pay for their freedom, ellen rose.

"we'll be having prayers?" he questioned, reluctantly.

"yes.  it is so late--why, it is actually ten o'clock," as the
clock with coughing and tinny thumps marked the hour.  "carreen
should have been asleep long ago.  the lamp, please, pork, and my
prayer book, mammy."

prompted by mammy's hoarse whisper, jack set his fly-brush in the
corner and removed the dishes, while mammy fumbled in the
sideboard drawer for ellen's worn prayer book.  pork, tiptoeing,
reached the ring in the chain and drew the lamp slowly down until
the table top was brightly bathed in light and the ceiling receded
into shadows.  ellen arranged her skirts and sank to the floor on
her knees, laying the open prayer book on the table before her and
clasping her h
 
 ___________________________
 
 folding their voluminous petticoats in pads under their
knees, so they would ache less from contact with the hard floor.
carreen, who was small for her age, could not kneel comfortably at
the table and so knelt facing a chair, her elbows on the seat.
she liked this position, for she seldom failed to go to sleep
during prayers and, in this postures it escaped her mother's
notice.

the house servants shuffled and rustled in the hall to kneel by
the doorway, mammy groaning aloud as she sank down, pork straight
as a ramrod, rosa and teena, the maids, graceful in their
spreading bright calicoes, cookie gaunt and yellow beneath her
snowy head rag, and jack, stupid with sleep, as far away from
mammy's pinching fingers as possible.  their dark eyes gleamed
expectantly, for praying with their white folks was one of the
events of the day.  the old and colorful phrases of the litany
with its oriental imagery meant little to them but it satisfied
something in their hearts, and they always swayed when
 
 ___________________________
 
because of the
exaltation of her own spirit, scarlett found in the whole
ceremonial, the softly spoken words, the murmur of the responses,
a surpassing beauty beyond any that she had ever experienced
before.  and her heart went up to god in sincere thankfulness that
a pathway for her feet had been opened--out of her misery and
straight to the arms of ashley.

when the last "amen" sounded, they all rose, somewhat stiffly,
mammy being hauled to her feet by the combined efforts of teena
and rosa.  pork took a long spiller from the mantelpiece, lit it
from the lamp flame and went into the hall.  opposite the winding
stair stood a walnut sideboard, too large for use in the dining
room, bearing on its wide top several lamps and a long row of
candles in candlesticks.  pork lit one lamp and three candles and,
with the pompous dignity of a first chamberlain of the royal
bedchamber lighting a king and queen to their rooms, he led the
procession up the stairs, holding the light high above his head.
e
 
 ___________________________
 
he green."

scarlett, looking at him with the affectionate contempt that
mothers feel for small swaggering sons, knew that he would be very
drunk by sundown.  coming home in the dark, he would try, as
usual, to jump every fence between twelve oaks and tara and, she
hoped, by the mercy of providence and the good sense of his horse,
would escape breaking his neck.  he would disdain the bridge and
swim his horse through the river and come home roaring, to be put
to bed on the sofa in the office by pork who always waited up with
a lamp in the front hall on such occasions.

he would ruin his new gray broadcloth suit, which would cause him
to swear horribly in the morning and tell ellen at great length
how his horse fell off the bridge in the darkness--a palpable lie
which would fool no one but which would be accepted by all and
make him feel very clever.

pa is a sweet, selfish, irresponsible darling, scarlett thought,
with a surge of affection for him.  she felt so excited and happy
this morni
 
 ___________________________
 
s to arrange both her thoughts and
her face in attractive lines before reaching twelve oaks.  gerald
obediently put spurs to his horse and was off in a red cloud after
the tarleton carriage where he could continue his horsy conversation.



chapter vi


they crossed the river and the carriage mounted the hill.  even
before twelve oaks came into view scarlett saw a haze of smoke
hanging lazily in the tops of the tall trees and smelled the
mingled savory odors of burning hickory logs and roasting pork and
mutton.

the barbecue pits, which had been slowly burning since last night,
would now be long troughs of rose-red embers, with the meats
turning on spits above them and the juices trickling down and
hissing into the coals.  scarlett knew that the fragrance carried
on the faint breeze came from the grove of great oaks in the rear
of the big house.  john wilkes always held his barbecues there, on
the gentle slope leading down to the rose garden, a pleasant shady
place and a far pleasanter pla
 
 ___________________________
 
 from which the succulent odors
of barbecue sauce and brunswick stew floated.  mr. wilkes always
had at least a dozen darkies busy running back and forth with
trays to serve the guests.  over behind the barns there was always
another barbecue pit, where the house servants and the coachmen
and maids of the guests had their own feast of hoecakes and yams
and chitterlings, that dish of hog entrails so dear to negro
hearts, and, in season, watermelons enough to satiate.

as the smell of crisp fresh pork came to her, scarlett wrinkled
her nose appreciatively, hoping that by the time it was cooked she
would feel some appetite.  as it was she was so full of food and
so tightly laced that she feared every moment she was going to
belch.  that would be fatal, as only old men and very old ladies
could belch without fear of social disapproval.

they topped the rise and the white house reared its perfect
symmetry before her, tall of columns, wide of verandas, flat of
roof, beautiful as a woman is beaut
 
 ___________________________
 
bird.  she teased
him and favored him and asked him questions and answered them
herself, so that he appeared very clever without having to say a
word.  the other boys were puzzled and annoyed by her obvious
interest in him, for they knew charles was too shy to hitch two
consecutive words together, and politeness was being severely
strained to conceal their growing rage.  everyone was smoldering,
and it would have been a positive triumph for scarlett, except for
ashley.

when the last forkful of pork and chicken and mutton had been
eaten, scarlett hoped the time had come when india would rise and
suggest that the ladies retire to the house.  it was two o'clock
and the sun was warm overhead, but india, wearied with the three-
day preparations for the barbecue, was only too glad to remain
sitting beneath the arbor, shouting remarks to a deaf old
gentleman from fayetteville.

a lazy somnolence descended on the crowd.  the negroes idled
about, clearing the long tables on which the food had been
 
 ___________________________
 
arshness or reality, and the home
in which he grew to manhood was as soft as a bird's nest.  it was
such a quiet, old-fashioned, gentle home compared with tara.  to
scarlett, this house cried out for the masculine smells of brandy,
tobacco and macassar oil, for hoarse voices and occasional curses,
for guns, for whiskers, for saddles and bridles and for hounds
underfoot.  she missed the sounds of quarreling voices that were
always heard at tara when ellen's back was turned, mammy quarreling
with pork, rosa and teena bickering, her own acrimonious arguments
with suellen, gerald's bawling threats.  no wonder charles had been
a sissy, coming from a home like this.  here, excitement never
entered in, voices were never raised, everyone deferred gently to
the opinions of others, and, in the end, the black grizzled autocrat
in the kitchen had his way.  scarlett, who had hoped for a freer
rein when she escaped mammy's supervision, discovered to her sorrow
that uncle peter's standards of ladylike co
 
 ___________________________
 
lly's
rooms.  poor things, they'd certainly be upset.  they were not
used to full-blooded males like gerald.  when the song had
finished, two forms merged into one, came up the walk and mounted
the steps.  a discreet knock sounded at the door.

"i suppose i must go down," thought scarlett.  "after all he's my
father and poor pitty would die before she'd go."  besides, she
didn't want the servants to see gerald in his present condition.
and if peter tried to put him to bed, he might get unruly.  pork
was the only one who knew how to handle him.

she pinned the wrapper close about her throat, lit her bedside
candle and hurried down the dark stairs into the front hall.
setting the candle on the stand, she unlocked the door and in the
wavering light she saw rhett butler, not a ruffle disarranged,
supporting her small, thickset father.  the "lament" had evidently
been gerald's swan song for he was frankly hanging onto his
companion's arm.  his hat was gone, his crisp long hair was
tumbled in a 
 
 ___________________________
 
e those torn up by the
yankees.  the generals in the field were crying out for fresh
troops, and there were fewer and fewer fresh troops to be had.
worst of all, some of the state governors, governor brown of
georgia among them, were refusing to send state militia troops and
arms out of their borders.  there were thousands of able-bodied men
in the state troops for whom the army was frantic, but the
government pleaded for them in vain.

with the new fall of currency, prices soared again.  beef, pork and
butter cost thirty-five dollars a pound, flour fourteen hundred
dollars a barrel, soda one hundred dollars a pound, tea five
hundred dollars a pound.  warm clothing, when it was obtainable at
all, had risen to such prohibitive prices that atlanta ladies were
lining their old dresses with rags and reinforcing them with
newspapers to keep out the wind.  shoes cost from two hundred to
eight hundred dollars a pair, depending on whether they were made
of "cardboard" or real leather.  ladies now 
 
 ___________________________
 
 who had relatives imprisoned there.

when lincoln refused to exchange prisoners, believing it would
hasten the end of the war to burden the confederacy with the
feeding and guarding of union prisoners, there were thousands of
bluecoats at andersonville, georgia.  the confederates were on
scant rations and practically without drugs or bandages for their
own sick and wounded.  they had little to share with the prisoners.
they fed their prisoners on what the soldiers in the field were
eating, fat pork and dried peas, and on this diet the yankees died
like flies, sometimes a hundred a day.  inflamed by the reports,
the north resorted to harsher treatment of confederate prisoners
and at no place were conditions worse than at rock island.  food
was scanty, one blanket for three men, and the ravages of smallpox,
pneumonia and typhoid gave the place the name of a pest-house.
three-fourths of all the men sent there never came out alive.

and ashley was in that horrible place!  ashley was alive but
 
 ___________________________
 
e was all for riding away with us.  your mother agreed,
providing he was able to jump the pasture fence, for, she said,
there would be a lot of rough riding to be done in the army.  your
father thought that easy, but--would you believe it?  when his
horse came to the fence, he stopped dead and over his head went
your father!  it's a wonder it didn't break his neck!  you know how
obstinate he is.  he got right up and tried it again.  well,
scarlett, he came off three times before mrs. o'hara and pork
assisted him to bed.  he was in a taking about it, swearing that
your mother had 'spoken a wee word in the beast's ear.'  he just
isn't up to active service, scarlett.  you need have no shame about
it.  after all, someone must stay home and raise crops for the
army."

scarlett had no shame at all, only an active feeling of relief.

"i've sent india and honey to macon to stay with the burrs and mr.
o'hara is looking after twelve oaks as well as tara. . . .  i must
go, my dear.  let me kiss your 
 
 ___________________________
 
ry.

"cousin melanie!"

melanie's voice murmured indistinctly.

"cousin melanie, this is your home.  twelve oaks is burned.  you
must stay with us."

thoughts of melanie's prolonged suffering spurred scarlett to
action.  the present was with her again, the necessity of laying
melanie and her child on a soft bed and doing those small things
for her that could be done.

"she must be carried.  she can't walk."

there was a scuffle of feet and a dark figure emerged from the cave
of the front hall.  pork ran down the steps.

"miss scarlett!  miss scarlett!" he cried.

scarlett caught him by the arms.  pork, part and parcel of tara, as
dear as the bricks and the cool corridors!  she felt his tears
stream down on her hands as he patted her clumsily, crying:  "sho
is glad you back!  sho is--"

prissy burst into tears and incoherent mumblings:  "poke!  poke,
honey!"  and little wade, encouraged by the weakness of his elders,
began sniffling:  "wade thirsty!"

scarlett caught them all in hand.

"mis
 
 ___________________________
 
s melanie is in the wagon and her baby too.  pork, you must
carry her upstairs very carefully and put her in the back company
room.  prissy, take the baby and wade inside and give wade a drink
of water.  is mammy here, pork?  tell her i want her."

galvanized by the authority in her voice, pork approached the wagon
and fumbled at the backboard.  a moan was wrenched from melanie as
he half-lifted, half-dragged her from the feather tick on which she
had lain so many hours.  and then she was in pork's strong arms,
her head drooping like a child's across his shoulder.  prissy,
holding the baby and dragging wade by the hand, followed them up
the wide steps and disappeared into the blackness of the hall.

scarlett's bleeding fingers sought her father's hand urgently.

"did they get well, pa?"

"the girls are recovering."

silence fell and in the silence an idea too monstrous for words
took form.  she could not, could not force it to her lips.  she
swallowed and swallowed but a sudden dryness 
 
 ___________________________
 
.  ellen could not be dead, not even though pa
had said it, said it over and over like a parrot that knows only
one phrase:  "she died yesterday--she died yesterday--she died
yesterday."

queer that she should feel nothing now, nothing except a weariness
that shackled her limbs with heavy iron chains and a hunger that
made her knees tremble.  she would think of mother later.  she must
put her mother out of her mind now, else she would stumble stupidly
like gerald or sob monotonously like wade.

pork came down the wide dark steps toward them, hurrying to press
close to scarlett like a cold animal toward a fire.

"lights?" she questioned.  "why is the house so dark, pork?  bring
candles."

"dey tuck all de candles, miss scarlett, all 'cept one we been
usin' ter fine things in de dahk wid, an' it's 'bout gone.  mammy
been usin' a rag in a dish of hawg fat fer a light fer nussin' miss
careen an' miss suellen."

"bring what's left of the candle," she ordered.  "bring it into
mother's--into the 
 
 ___________________________
 
office."

pork pattered into the dining room and scarlett groped her way into
the inky small room and sank down on the sofa.  her father's arm
still lay in the crook of hers, helpless, appealing, trusting, as
only the hands of the very young and the very old can be.

"he's an old man, an old tired man," she thought again and vaguely
wondered why she could not care.

light wavered into the room as pork entered carrying high a half-
burned candle stuck in a saucer.  the dark cave came to life, the
sagging old sofa on which they sat, the tall secretary reaching
toward the ceiling with mother's fragile carved chair before it,
the racks of pigeonholes, still stuffed with papers written in her
fine hand, the worn carpet--all, all were the same, except that
ellen was not there, ellen with the faint scent of lemon verbena
sachet and the sweet look in her up-tilted eyes.  scarlett felt a
small pain i
 
 ___________________________
 
n her heart as of nerves numbed by a deep wound,
struggling to make themselves felt again.  she must not let them
come to life now; there was all the rest of her life ahead of her
in which they could ache.  but, not now!  please, god, not now!

she looked into gerald's putty-colored face and, for the first time
in her life, she saw him unshaven, his once florid face covered
with silvery bristles.  pork placed the candle on the candle stand
and came to her side.  scarlett felt that if he had been a dog he
would have laid his muzzle in her lap and whined for a kind hand
upon his head.

"pork, how many darkies are here?"

"miss scarlett, dem trashy niggers done runned away an' some of dem
went off wid de yankees an'--"

"how many are left?"

"dey's me, miss scarlett, an' mammy.  she been nussin' de young
misses all day.  an' dilcey, she settin' up wid de young misses
now.  us three, miss scarlet
 
 ___________________________
 
t."

"us three" where there had been a hundred.  scarlett with an effort
lifted her head on her aching neck.  she knew she must keep her
voice steady.  to her surprise, words came out as coolly and
naturally as if there had never been a war and she could, by waving
her hand, call ten house servants to her.

"pork, i'm starving.  is there anything to eat?"

"no'm.  dey tuck it all."

"but the garden?"

"dey tuhned dey hawses loose in it."

"even the sweet potato hills?"

something almost like a pleased smile broke his thick lips.

"miss scarlett, ah done fergit de yams.  ah specs dey's right dar.
dem yankee folks ain' never seed no yams an' dey thinks dey's jes'
roots an'--"

"the moon will be up soon.  you go out and dig us some and roast
them.  there's no corn meal?  no dried peas?  no chickens?"

"no'
 
 ___________________________
 
m.  no'm.  whut chickens dey din' eat right hyah dey cah'ied
off 'cross dey saddles."

they--  they--  they--  was there no end to what 'they" had done?
was it not enough to burn and kill?  must they also leave women and
children and helpless negroes to starve in a country which they had
desolated?

"miss scarlett, ah got some apples mammy buhied unner de house.  we
been eatin' on dem today."

"bring them before you dig the potatoes.  and, pork--i--i feel so
faint.  is there any wine in the cellar, even blackberry?"

"oh, miss scarlett, de cellar wuz de fust place dey went."

a swimming nausea compounded of hunger, sleeplessness, exhaustion
and stunning blows came on suddenly and she gripped the carved
roses under her hand.

"no wine," she said dully, remembering the endless rows of bottles
in the cellar.  a memory stirred.

"pork, what of the corn whisky pa buried in the oak barrel under
the scuppernong arbor?"

another ghost of a sm
 
 ___________________________
 
ile lit the black face, a smile of pleasure
and respect.

"miss scarlett, you sho is de beatenes' chile!  ah done plum fergit
dat bah'l.  but, miss scarlett, dat whisky ain' no good.  ain' been
dar but 'bout a year an' whisky ain' no good fer ladies nohow."

how stupid negroes were!  they never thought of anything unless
they were told.  and the yankees wanted to free them.

"it'll be good enough for this lady and for pa.  hurry, pork, and
dig it up and bring us two glasses and some mint and sugar and i'll
mix a julep."

"miss scarlett, you knows dey ain' been no sugar at tara fer de
longes'.  an' dey hawses done et up all de mint an' dey done broke
all de glasses."

if he says "they" once more, i'll scream.  i can't help it, she
thought, and then, aloud:  "well, hurry and get the whisky,
quickly.  we'll take it neat."  and, as he turned:  "wait, pork.
there's so many things to do that i can't seem to think. . . .  oh,
yes. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i brought home a horse and a cow and the cow needs milking,
badly, and unharness the horse and water him.  go tell mammy to
look after the cow.  tell her she's got to fix the cow up somehow.
miss melanie's baby will die if he doesn't get something to eat
and--"

"miss melly ain'--kain--?"  pork paused delicately.

"miss melanie has no milk."  dear god, but mother would faint at
that!

"well, miss scarlett, mah dilcey ten' ter miss melly's chile.  mah
dilcey got a new chile herseff an' she got mo'n nuff fer both."

"you've got a new baby, pork?"

babies, babies, babies.  why did god make so many babies?  but no,
god didn't make them.  stupid people made them.

"yas'm, big fat black boy.  he--"

"go tell dilcey to leave the girls.  i'll look after them.  tell
her to nurse miss melanie's
 
 ___________________________
 
 baby and do what she can for miss
melanie.  tell mammy to look after the cow and put that poor horse
in the stable."

"dey ain' no stable, miss scarlett.  dey use it fer fiah wood."

"don't tell me any more what 'they' did.  tell dilcey to look after
them.  and you, pork, go dig up that whisky and then some
potatoes."

"but, miss scarlett, ah ain' got no light ter dig by."

"you can use a stick of firewood, can't you?"

"dey ain' no fiah wood--dey--"

"do something. . . .  i don't care what.  but dig those things and
dig them fast.  now, hurry."

pork scurried from the room as her voice roughened and scarlett was
left alone with gerald.  she patted his leg gently.  she noted how
shrunken were the thighs that once bulged with saddle muscles.  she
must do somethi
 
 ___________________________
 
led rose in her.
this house, sacred because ellen had lived in it, and those--those--
in it.

"so they were, daughter.  we saw the smoke from twelve oaks, across
the river, before they came.  but miss honey and miss india and
some of their darkies had refugeed to macon, so we did not worry
about them.  but we couldn't be going to macon.  the girls were so
sick--your mother--we couldn't be going.  our darkies ran--i'm not
knowing where.  they stole the wagons and the mules.  mammy and
dilcey and pork--they didn't run.  the girls--your mother--we
couldn't be moving them."

"yes, yes."  he mustn't talk about mother.  anything else.  even
that general sherman himself had used this room, mother's office,
for his headquarters.  anything else.

"the yankees were moving on jonesboro, to cut the railroad.  and
they came up the road from the river--thousands and thousands--and
cannon and horses--thousands.  i met them on the front porch."

"oh, gallant little gerald!" thought scarlett, her heart swe
 
 ___________________________
 
with an effort he
spoke again.

"they camped all round the house, everywhere, in the cotton, in the
corn.  the pasture was blue with them.  that night there were a
thousand campfires.  they tore down the fences and burned them to
cook with and the barns and the stables and the smokehouse.  they
killed the cows and the hogs and the chickens--even my turkeys."
gerald's precious turkeys.  so they were gone.  "they took things,
even the pictures--some of the furniture, the china--"

"the silver?"

"pork and mammy did something with the silver--put it in the well--
but i'm not remembering now," gerald's voice was fretful.  "then
they fought the battle from here--from tara--there was so much
noise, people galloping up and stamping about.  and later the
cannon at jonesboro--it sounded like thunder--even the girls could
hear it, sick as they were, and they kept saying over and over:
'papa, make it stop thundering.'"

"and--and mother?  did she know yankees were in the house?"

"she--never knew any
 
 ___________________________
 
--too frail to stand it all.  he said she had
undermined her strength. . . ."

in the silence that fell, scarlett saw her mother as she must have
been in those last days, a thin power of strength in tara, nursing,
working, doing without sleep and food that the others might rest
and eat.

"and then, they moved on.  then, they moved on."

he was silent for a long time and then fumbled at her hand.

"it's glad i am you are home," he said simply.

there was a scraping noise on the back porch.  poor pork, trained
for forty years to clean his shoes before entering the house, did
not forget, even in a time like this.  he came in, carefully
carrying two gourds, and the strong smell of dripping spirits
entered before him.

"ah spilt a plen'y, miss scarlett.  it's pow'ful hard ter po' outer
a bung hole inter a go'de."

"that's quite all right, pork, and thank you."  she took the wet
gourd dipper from him, her nostrils wrinkling in distaste at the
reek.

"drink this, father," she said, pushing the wh
 
 ___________________________
 
isky in its strange
receptacle into his hand and taking the second gourd of water from
pork.  gerald raised it, obedient as a child, and gulped noisily.
she handed the water to him but he shook his head.

as she took the whisky from him and held it to her mouth, she saw
his eyes follow her, a vague stirring of disapproval in them.

"i know no lady drinks spirits," she said briefly.  "but today i'm
no lady, pa, and there is work to do tonight."

she tilted the dipper, drew a deep breath and drank swiftly.  the
hot liquid burned down her throat to her stomach, choking her and
bringing t
 
 ___________________________
 
 take
you upstairs and put you to bed."

she caught herself.  why, this was the way she talked to wade--she
should not address her father like this.  it was disrespectful.
but he hung on her words.

"yes, put you to bed," she added lightly, "and give you another
drink--maybe all the dipper and make you go to sleep.  you need
sleep and katie scarlett is here, so you need not worry about
anything.  drink."

he drank again obediently and, slipping her arm through his, she
pulled him to his feet.

"pork. . . ."

pork took the gourd in one hand and gerald's arm in the other.
scarlett picked up the flaring candle and the three walked slowly
into the dark hall and up the winding steps toward gerald's room.

the room where suellen and carreen lay mumbling and tossing on the
same bed stank vilely with the smell of the twisted rag burning in
a saucer of bacon fat, which provided the only light.  when
scarlett first opened the door the thick atmosphere of the room,
with all windows closed and the air
 
 ___________________________
 
 crack with this added strain.  "no, no.
he's just dazed by it all.  it's like he was sick.  he'll get over
it.  he must get over it.  what will i do if he doesn't?--i won't
think about it now.  i won't think of him or mother or any of these
awful things now.  no, not till i can stand it.  there are too many
other things to think about--things that can be helped without my
thinking of those i can't help."

she left the dining room without eating, and went out onto the back
porch where she found pork, barefooted and in the ragged remains of
his best livery, sitting on the steps cracking peanuts.  her head
was hammering and throbbing and the bright, sunlight stabbed into
her eyes.  merely holding herself erect required an effort of will
power and she talked as briefly as possible, dispensing with the
usual forms of courtesy her mother had always taught her to use
with negroes.

she began asking questions so brusquely and giving orders so
decisively pork's eyebrows went up in mystification.  
 
 ___________________________
 
miss ellen
didn't never talk so short to nobody, not even when she caught them
stealing pullets and watermelons.  she asked again about the
fields, the gardens, the stock, and her green eyes had a hard
bright glaze which pork had never seen in them before.

"yas'm, dat hawse daid, lyin' dar whar ah tie him wid his nose in
de water bucket he tuhned over.  no'm, de cow ain' daid.  din' you
know?  she done have a calf las' night.  dat why she beller so."

"a fine midwife your prissy will make," scarlett remarked
caustically.  "she said she was bellowing because she needed
milking."

"well'm, prissy ain' fixin' ter be no cow midwife, miss scarlett,"
pork said tactfully.  "an' ain' no use quarrelin' wid blessin's,
'cause
 
 ___________________________
 
 dat calf gwine ter mean a full cow an' plen'y buttermilk fer
de young misses, lak dat yankee doctah say dey' need."

"all right, go on.  any stock left?"

"no'm.  nuthin' 'cept one ole sow an' her litter.  ah driv dem
inter de swamp de day de yankees come, but de lawd knows how we
gwine git dem.  she mean, dat sow."

"we'll get them all right.  you and prissy can start right now
hunting for her."

pork was amazed and indignant.

"miss scarlett, dat a fe'el han's bizness.  ah's allus been a house
nigger."

a small fiend with a pair of hot tweezers plucked behind scarlett's
eyeballs.

"you two will catch the sow--or get out of here, like the field
hands did."

tears trembled in pork's hurt eyes.  oh, if only miss ellen was
here!  she understood such niceties and realized the wide gap
between the duties of a field hand and those of a house nigger.

"git out, miss scarlett?  whar'd ah git out to,
 
 ___________________________
 
 miss scarlett?"

"i don't know and i don't care.  but anyone at tara who won't work
can go hunt up the yankees.  you can tell the others that too."

"now, what about the corn and the cotton, pork?"

"de cawn?  lawd, miss scarlett, dey pasture dey hawses in de cawn
an' cah'ied off whut de hawses din' eat or spile.  an' dey driv dey
cannons an' waggins 'cross de cotton till it plum ruint, 'cept a
few acres over on de creek bottom dat dey din' notice.  but dat
cotton ain' wuth foolin' wid, 'cause ain' but 'bout three bales
over dar."

three bales.  scarlett thought of the scores of bales tara usually
yielded and her head hurt worse.  three bales.  that was little
more than the shiftless sl
 
 ___________________________
 
nfederate government took
cotton for taxes in lieu of money, but three bales wouldn't even
cover the taxes.  little did it matter though, to her or the
confederacy, now that all the field hands had run away and there
was no one to pick the cotton.

"well, i won't think of that either," she told herself.  "taxes
aren't a woman's job anyway.  pa ought to look after such things,
but pa--  i won't think of pa now.  the confederacy can whistle for
its taxes.  what we need now is something to eat."

"pork, have any of you been to twelve oaks or the macintosh place
to see if there's anything left in the gardens there?"

"no, ma'm!  us ain' lef' tara.  de yankees mout git us."

"i'll send dilcey over to macintosh.  perhaps she'll find something
there.  and i'll go to twelve oaks."

"who wid, chile?"

"by myself.  mammy must stay with the girls and mr. gerald can't--"

pork set up an outcry which she found infuriating.  there might be
yankees or mean niggers at twelve oaks.  she mustn't go alone.


 
 ___________________________
 
"that will be enough, pork.  tell dilcey to start immediately.  and
you and prissy go bring in the sow and her litter," she said
briefly, turning on her heel.

mammy's old sunbonnet, faded but clean, hung on its peg on the back
porch and scarlett put it on her head, remembering, as from another
world, the bonnet with the curling green plume which rhett had
brought her from paris.  she picked up a large split-oak basket and
started down the back stairs, each step jouncing her head until her
spine seemed to be trying to cr
 
 ___________________________
 
 to authority, all the bullying instincts in her nature
rose to the surface.  it was not that she was basically unkind.  it
was because she was so frightened and unsure of herself she was
harsh lest others learn her inadequacies and refuse her authority.
besides, there was some pleasure in shouting at people and knowing
they were afraid.  scarlett found that it relieved her overwrought
nerves.  she was not blind to the fact that her personality was
changing.  sometimes when her curt orders made pork stick out his
under lip and mammy mutter:  "some folks rides mighty high dese
days," she wondered where her good manners had gone.  all the
courtesy, all the gentleness ellen had striven to instill in her
had fallen away from her as quickly as leaves fall from trees in
the first chill wind of autumn.

time and again, ellen had said:  "be firm but be gentle with
inferiors, especially darkies."  but if she was gentle the darkies
would sit in the kitchen all day, talking endlessly about the good
o
 
 ___________________________
 
tality.  ellen was the
audience before which the blustering drama of gerald o'hara had
been played.  now the curtain had been rung down forever, the
footlights dimmed and the audience suddenly vanished, while the
stunned old actor remained on his empty stage, waiting for his
cues.

that morning the house was still, for everyone except scarlett,
wade and the three sick girls was in the swamp hunting the sow.
even gerald had aroused a little and stumped off across the
furrowed fields, one hand on pork's arm and a coil of rope in the
other.  suellen and careen had cried themselves to sleep, as they
did at least twice a day when they thought of ellen, tears of grief
and weakness oozing down their sunken cheeks.  melanie, who had
been propped up on pillows for the first time that day, lay covered
with a mended sheet between two babies, the downy flaxen head of
one cuddled in her arm, the kinky black head of dilcey's child held
as gently in the other.  wade sat at the bottom of the bed,
listenin
 
 ___________________________
 
tt's arm.

"he must be alone," said scarlett.  "i didn't see anyone else from
the upstairs window.  he must be a deserter."

"even if he is alone, no one must know about it.  the negroes might
talk and then they'd come and get you.  scarlett, we must get him
hidden before the folks come back from the swamp."

her mind prodded to action by the feverish urgency of melanie's
voice, scarlett thought hard.

"i could bury him in the corner of the garden under the arbor--the
ground is soft there where pork dug up the whisky barrel.  but how
will i get him there?"

"we'll both take a leg and drag him," said melanie firmly.

reluctantly, scarlett's admiration went still higher.

"you couldn't drag a cat.  i'll drag him," she said roughly.  "you
go back to bed.  you'll kill yourself.  don't dare try to help me
either or i'll carry you upstairs myself."

melanie's white face broke into a sweet understanding smile.  "you
are very dear, scarlett," she said and softly brushed her lips
against scarlett's
 
 ___________________________
 
randma, as if she regretted hearing anything good
about the invaders.  "and how are the girls now?"

"oh, they are better, much better, almost well but quite weak,"
answered scarlett.  then, seeing the question she feared hovering
on the old lady's lips, she cast hastily about for some other topic
of conversation.

"i--i wonder if you could lend us something to eat?  the yankees
cleaned us out like a swarm of locusts.  but, if you are on short
rations, just tell me so plainly and--"

"send over pork with a wagon and you shall have half of what we've
got, rice, meal, ham, some chickens," said old miss, giving
scarlett a sudden keen look.

"oh, that's too much!  really, i--"

"not a word!  i won't hear it.  what are neighbors for?"

"you are so kind that i can't--  but i have to be going now.  the
folks at home will be worrying about me."

grandma rose abruptly and took scarlett by the arm.

"you two stay here," she commanded, pushing scarlett toward the
back porch.  "i have a private word f
 
 ___________________________
 
off and she stood silent with eyes looking back
over half a century to the day when she had been afraid.  scarlett
moved impatiently.  she had thought grandma was going to understand
and perhaps show her some way to solve her problems.  but like all
old people she'd gotten to talking about things that happened
before anyone was born, things no one was interested in.  scarlett
wished she had not confided in her.

"well, go home, child, or they'll be worrying about you," she said
suddenly.  "send pork with the wagon this afternoon. . . .  and
don't think you can lay down the load, ever.  because you can't.
i know."



indian summer lingered into november that year and the warm days
were bright days for those at tara.  the worst was over.  they had
a horse now and they could ride instead of walk.  they had fried
eggs for breakfast and fried ham for supper to vary the monotony of
the yams, peanuts and dried apples, and on one festal occasion they
even had roast chicken.  the old sow had finall
 
 ___________________________
 
y been captured and
she and her brood rooted and grunted happily under the house where
they were penned.  sometimes they squealed so loudly no one in the
house could talk but it was a pleasant sound.  it meant fresh pork
for the white folks and chitterlings for the negroes when cold
weather and hog-killing time should arrive, and it meant food for
the winter for all.

scarlett's visit to the fontaines had heartened her more than she
realized.  just the knowledge that she had neighbors, that some of
the family friends and old homes had survived, drove out the
terrible loss and alone feeling which had oppressed her in her
first weeks at tara.  and the fontaines and tarletons, whose
plantations had not been in the
 
 ___________________________
 
re most
generous in sharing what little they had.  it was the tradition of
the county that neighbor helped neighbor and they refused to accept
a penny from scarlett, telling her that she would do the same for
them and she could pay them back, in kind, next year when tara was
again producing.

scarlett now had food for her household, she had a horse, she had
the money and jewelry taken from the yankee straggler, and the
greatest need was new clothing.  she knew it would be risky
business sending pork south to buy clothes, when the horse might be
captured by either yankees or confederates.  but, at least, she had
the money with which to buy the clothes, a horse and wagon for the
trip, and perhaps pork could make the trip without getting caught.
yes, the worst was over.

every morning when scarlett arose she thanked god for the pale-blue
sky and the warm sun, for each day of good weather put off the
inevitable time when warm clothing would be needed.  and each warm
day saw more and more cotto
 
 ___________________________
 
n piling up in the empty slave quarters,
the only storage place left on the plantation.  there was more
cotton in the fields than she or pork had estimated, probably four
bales, and soon the cabins would be full.

scarlett had not intended to do any cotton picking herself, even
after grandma fontaine's tart remark.  it was unthinkable that she,
an o'hara lady, now the mistress of tara, should work in the
fields.  it put her on the same level with the snarly haired mrs.
slattery and emmie.  she had intended that the negroes should do
the field work, while she and the convalescent girls attended to
the house, but here she was confronte
 
 ___________________________
 
d with a caste feeling even
stronger than her own.  pork, mammy and prissy set up outcries at
the idea of working in the fields.  they reiterated that they were
house niggers, not field hands.  mammy, in particular, declared
vehemently that she had never even been a yard nigger.  she had
been born in the robillard great house, not in the quarters, and
had been raised in ole miss' bedroom, sleeping on a pallet at the
foot of the bed.  dilcey alone said nothing and she fixed her
prissy with an unwinking eye that made her squirm.

scarlett refused to li
 
 ___________________________
 
sten to the protests and drove them all into
the cotton rows.  but mammy and pork worked so slowly and with so
many lamentations that scarlett sent mammy back to the kitchen to
cook and pork to the woods and the river with snares for rabbits
and possums and lines for fish.  cotton picking was beneath pork's
dignity but hunting and fishing were not.

scarlett next had tried her sisters and melanie in the fields, but
that had worked no better.  melanie had picked neatly, quickly and
willingly for an hour in the hot sun and then fainted quietly and
had to stay in bed for a week.  suellen, sullen and tearful,
pretended to faint too, but came back to consciousness spitting
like an angry cat when scarlett poured a gourdful of water in her
face.  finally she refused point-blank.

"i won't work in the f
 
 ___________________________
 
rops with some certainty of reaping
them!

there was hope now.  the war couldn't last forever.  she had her
little cotton, she had food, she had a horse, she had her small but
treasured hoard of money.  yes, the worst was over!



chapter xxvii


on a noonday in mid-november, they all sat grouped about the dinner
table, eating the last of the dessert concocted by mammy from corn
meal and dried huckleberries, sweetened with sorghum.  there was a
chill in the air, the first chill of the year, and pork, standing
behind scarlett's chair, rubbed his hands together in glee and
questioned:  "ain' it 'bout time fer de hawg killin', miss
scarlett?"

"you can taste those chitlins already, can't you?" said scarlett
with a grin.  "well, i can taste fresh pork myself and if the
weather holds for a few days more, we'll--"

melanie interrupted, her spoon at her lips,

"listen, dear!  somebody's coming!"

"somebody hollerin'," said pork uneasily.

on the crisp autumn air came clear the sound of horse's ho
 
 ___________________________
 
tened eyes.  for a swift instant there went through her memory
again the horrors of her last night in atlanta, the ruined homes
that dotted the countryside, all the stories of rape and torture
and murder.  she saw again the yankee soldier standing in the hall
with ellen's sewing box in his hand.  she thought:  "i shall die.
i shall die right here.  i thought we were through with all that.
i shall die.  i can't stand any more."

then her eyes fell on the horse saddled and hitched and waiting for
pork to ride him to the tarleton place on an errand.  her horse!
her only horse!  the yankees would take him and the cow and the
calf.  and the sow and her litter--  oh, how many tiring hours it
had taken to catch that sow and her agile young!  and they'd take
the rooster and the setting hens and the ducks the fontaines had
given her.  and the apples and the yams in the pantry bins.  and
the flour and rice and dried peas.  and the money in the yankee
soldier's wallet.  they'd take everything and lea
 
 ___________________________
 
hey all turned
startled faces to her, fearful her mind had cracked under the
tidings.  "i won't go hungry!  they shan't have them!"

"what is it, scarlett?  what is it?"

"the horse!  the cow!  the pigs!  they shan't have them!  i won't
let them have them!"

she turned swiftly to the four negroes who huddled in the doorway,
their black faces a peculiarly ashen shade.

"the swamp," she said rapidly.

"whut swamp?"

"the river swamp, you fools!  take the pigs to the swamp.  all of
you.  quickly.  pork, you and prissy crawl under the house and get
the pigs out.  suellen, you and carreen fill the baskets with as
much food as you can carry and get to the woods.  mammy, put the
silver in the well again.  and pork!  pork, listen to me, don't
stand there like that!  take pa with you.  don't ask me where!
anywhere!  go with pork, pa.  that's a sweet pa."

even in her frenzy she thought what the sight of bluecoats might do
to gerald's wavering mind.  she stopped and wrung her hands and the
frightene
 
 ___________________________
 
 ashley's baby?  go on!"

melly looked despairingly backward but hammered her heels into the
horse and, with a scattering of gravel, was off down the drive
toward the pasture.

scarlett thought:  "i never expected to see melly hamilton
straddling a horse!" and then she ran into the house.  wade was at
her heels, sobbing, trying to catch her flying skirts.  as she went
up the steps, three at a bound, she saw suellen and carreen with
split-oak baskets on their arms, running toward the pantry, and
pork tugging none too gently at gerald's arm, dragging him toward
the back porch.  gerald was mumbling querulously and pulling away
like a child.

from the back yard she heard mammy's strident voice:  "you, priss!
you git unner dat house an' han' me dem shoats!  you knows mighty
well ah's too big ter crawl thoo dem lattices.  dilcey, comyere an'
mek dis wuthless chile--"

"and i thought it was such a good idea to keep the pigs under the
house, so nobody could steal them," thought scarlett, running i
 
 ___________________________
 
er, scarlett ran across the hall to the
room where little beau was sleeping in the low cradle.  she
snatched him up into her arms and he awoke, waving small fists and
slobbering sleepily.

she heard suellen crying:  "come on, carreen!  come on!  we've got
enough.  oh, sister, hurry!"  there were wild squealings, indignant
gruntings in the back yard and, running to the widow, scarlett saw
mammy waddling hurriedly across the cotton field with a struggling
young pig under each arm.  behind her was pork also carrying two
pigs and pushing gerald before him.  gerald was stumping across the
furrows, waving his cane.

leaning out of the window scarlett yelled:  "get the sow, dilcey!
make prissy drive her out.  you can chase her across the fields!"

dilcey looked up, her bronzed face harassed.  in her apron was a
pile of silver tableware.  she pointed under the house.

"the sow done bit prissy and got her penned up unner the house."

"good for the sow," thought scarlett.  she hurried back into her

 
 ___________________________
 
r, but there was not a head of livestock,
not a fowl, not an ear of corn left on the place.

at tara and throughout the county, the problem was food.  most of
the families had nothing at all but the remains of their yam crops
and their peanuts and such game as they could catch in the woods.
what they had, each shared with less fortunate friends, as they had
done in more prosperous days.  but the time soon came when there
was nothing to share.

at tara, they ate rabbit and possum and catfish, if pork was lucky.
on other days a small amount of milk, hickory nuts, roasted acorns
and yams.  they were always hungry.  to scarlett it seemed that at
every turn she met outstretched hands, pleading eyes.  the sight of
them drove her almost to madness, for she was as hungry as they.

she ordered the calf killed, because he drank so much of the
precious milk, and that night everyone ate so much fresh veal all
of them were ill.  she knew that she should kill one of the shoats
but she put it off from da
 
 ___________________________
 
y to day, hoping to raise them to
maturity.  they were so small.  there would be so little of them to
eat if they were killed now and so much more if they could be saved
a little longer.  nightly she debated with melanie the advisability
of sending pork abroad on the horse with some greenbacks to try to
buy food.  but the fear that the horse might be captured and the
money taken from pork deterred them.  they did not know where the
yankees were.  they might be a thousand miles away or only across
the river.  once, scarlett, in desperation, started to ride out
herself to search for food, but the hysterical outbursts of the
whole family fearful of the yankees made her abandon the plan.

pork foraged far, at times not coming home all night, and scarlett
did not ask him where he went.  sometimes he returned with game,
sometimes with a few ears of corn, a bag of dried peas.  once he

 
 ___________________________
 
brought home a rooster which he said he found in the woods.  the
family ate it with relish but a sense of guilt, knowing very well
pork had stolen it, as he had stolen the peas and corn.  one night
soon after this, he tapped on scarlett's door long after the house
was asleep and sheepishly exhibited a leg peppered with small shot.
as she bandaged it for him, he explained awkwardly that when
attempting to get into a hen coop at fayetteville, he had been
discovered.  scarlett did not ask whose hen coop but patted pork's
shoulder gently, tears in her eyes.  negroes were provoking
sometimes and stupid and lazy, but there was loyalt
 
 ___________________________
 
y in them that
money couldn't buy, a feeling of oneness with their white folks
which made them risk their lives to keep food on the table.

in other days pork's pilferings would have been a serious matter,
probably calling for a whipping.  in other days she would have been
forced at least to reprimand him severely.  "always remember,
dear," ellen had said, "you are responsible for the moral as well
as the physical welfare of the darkies god has intrusted to your
care.  you must realize that they are like children and must be
guarded from themselves like children, and you must always set them
a good example."

but now, scarlett pushed that admonition 
 
 ___________________________
 
into the back of her mind.
that she was encouraging theft, and perhaps theft from people worse
off than she, was no longer a matter for conscience.  in fact the
morals of the affair weighed lightly upon her.  instead of
punishment or reproof, she only regretted he had been shot.

"you must be more careful, pork.  we don't want to lose you.  what
would we do without you?  you've been mighty good and faithful and
when we get some money again, i'm going to buy you a big gold watch
and engrave on it something out of the bible.  'well done, good and
faithful servant.'"

pork beamed under the praise and gingerly rubbed his bandaged leg.

"dat soun' mighty fine, miss scarlett.  w'en you speckin' ter git
dat money?"

"i don't know, pork, but i'm going to get it some time, somehow."
she bent on him an unseeing
 
 ___________________________
 
tter
he stirred uneasily, "some day, when this war is over, i'm going to
have lots of money, and when i do i'll never be hungry or cold
again.  none of us will ever be hungry or cold.  we'll all wear
fine clothes and have fried chicken every day and--"

then she stopped.  the strictest rule at tara, one which she
herself had made and which she rigidly enforced, was that no one
should ever talk of the fine meals they had eaten in the past or
what they would eat now, if they had the opportunity.

pork slipped from the room as she remained staring moodily into the
distance.  in the old days, now dead and gone, life had been so
complex, so full of intricate and complicated problems.  there had
been the problem of trying to win ashley's love and trying to keep
a dozen other beaux dangling and unhappy.  there had been small
breaches of conduct to be concealed from her elders, jealous girls
to be flouted or placated, styles of dresses and materials to be
chosen, different coiffures to be tried an
 
 ___________________________
 
t was always the
same dream, the details never varied, but the terror of it mounted
each time it came to her and the fear of experiencing it again
troubled even her waking hours.  she remembered so well the
incidents of the day when she had first dreamed it.

cold rain had fallen for days and the house was chill with drafts
and dampness.  the logs in the fireplace were wet and smoky and
gave little heat.  there had been nothing to eat except milk since
breakfast, for the yams were exhausted and pork's snares and
fishlines had yielded nothing.  one of the shoats would have to be
killed the next day if they were to eat at all.  strained and
hungry faces, black and white, were staring at her, mutely asking
her to provide food.  she would have to risk losing the horse and
send pork out to buy something.  and to make matters worse, wade
was ill with a sore throat and a raging fever and there was neither
doctor nor medicine for him.

hungry, weary with watching her child, scarlett left him to
me
 
 ___________________________
 
was doing everything possible to make the soldiers enjoy their
christmas eve.  scarlett alone took no pleasure in the guests.

the troop had added their ration of parched corn and side meat to
the supper of dried peas, stewed dried apples and peanuts which
mammy set before them and they declared it was the best meal they
had had in months.  scarlett watched them eat and she was uneasy.
she not only begrudged them every mouthful they ate but she was on
tenterhooks lest they discover somehow that pork had slaughtered
one of the shoats the day before.  it now hung in the pantry and
she had grimly promised her household that she would scratch out
the eyes of anyone who mentioned the shoat to their guests or the
presence of the dead pig's sisters and brothers, safe in their pen
in the swamp.  these hungry men could devour the whole shoat at one
meal and, if they knew of the live hogs, they could commandeer them
for the army.  she was alarmed, too, for the cow and the horse and
wished they were 
 
 ___________________________
 

this section since we retook atlanta and there isn't enough to feed
a jaybird.  it's the same way for three hundred miles south to
savannah.  the folks are starving and the railroads are torn up and
there aren't any new rifles and the ammunition is giving out and
there's no leather at all for shoes. . . .  so, you see, the end is
almost here."

but the fading hopes of the confederacy weighed less heavily on
scarlett than his remark about the scarcity of food.  it had been
her intention to send pork out with the horse and wagon, the gold
pieces and the united states money to scour the countryside for
provisions and material for clothes.  but if what frank said was
true--

but macon hadn't fallen.  there must be food in macon.  just as
soon as the commissary department was safely on its way, she'd
start pork for macon and take the chance of having the precious
horse picked up by the army.  she'd have to risk it.

"well, let's don't talk about unpleasant things tonight, mr.
kennedy," she sai
 
 ___________________________
 
ed."



chapter xxix


the following april general johnston, who had been given back the
shattered remnants of his old command, surrendered them in north
carolina and the war was over.  but not until two weeks later did
the news reach tara.  there was too much to do at tara for anyone
to waste time traveling abroad and hearing gossip and, as the
neighbors were just as busy as they, there was little visiting and
news spread slowly.

spring plowing was at its height and the cotton and garden seed
pork had brought from macon was being put into the ground.  pork
had been almost worthless since the trip, so proud was he of
returning safely with his wagon-load of dress goods, seed, fowls,
hams, side meat and meal.  over and over, he told the story of his
many narrow escapes, of the bypaths and country lanes he had taken
on his return to tara, the unfrequented roads, the old trails, the
bridle paths.  he had been five weeks on the road, agonizing weeks
for scarlett.  but she did not upbraid him o
 
 ___________________________
 
n his return, for she
was happy that he had made the trip successfully and pleased that
he brought back so much of the money she had given him.  she had a
shrewd suspicion that the reason he had so much money left over was
that he had not bought the fowls or most of the food.  pork would
have taken shame to himself had he spent her money when there were
unguarded hen coops along the road and smokehouses handy.

now that they had a little food, everyone at tara was busy trying
to restore some semblance of naturalness to life.  there was work
for every pair of hands, too much work, never-ending work.  the
withered stalks of last year's cotton had to be removed to make way
for this year's seeds and the balky horse, unaccustomed to the
plow, dragged unwillingly through the fi
 
 ___________________________
 
elds.  weeds had to be
pulled from the garden and the seeds planted, firewood had to be
cut, a beginning had to be made toward replacing the pens and the
miles and miles of fences so casually burned by the yankees.  the
snares pork set for rabbits had to be visited twice a day and the
fishlines in the river rebaited.  there were beds to be made and
floors to be swept, food to be cooked and dishes washed, hogs and
chickens to be fed and eggs gathered.  the cow had to be milked and
pastured near the swamp and someone had to watch her all day for
fear the yankees or frank kennedy's men would return and take her.
even little wade had his duties.  every morning he went out
importantly with a basket to pick up twigs and chips t
 
 ___________________________
 
e ashley was concerned.

somewhere, on the long road that wound through those four years,
the girl with her sachet and dancing slippers had slipped away and
there was left a woman with sharp green eyes, who counted pennies
and turned her hands to many menial tasks, a woman to whom nothing
was left from the wreckage except the indestructible red earth on
which she stood.

as she stood in the hall, listening to the girls sobbing, her mind
was busy.

"we'll plant more cotton, lots more.  i'll send pork to macon
tomorrow to buy more seed.  now the yankees won't burn it and our
troops won't need it.  good lord!  cotton ought to go sky high this
fall!"

she went into the little office and, disregarding the weeping girls
on the sofa, seated herself at the secretary and picked up a quill
to balance the cost of more cotton seed against her remaining cash.

"the war is over," she thought and suddenly she dropped the quill
as a wild happiness flooded her.  the war was over and ashley--if
ashley was a
 
 ___________________________
 
t never news of ashley.



after the surrender, an ever-present feud over the horse smoldered
between scarlett and suellen.  now that there was no danger of
yankees, suellen wanted to go calling on the neighbors.  lonely and
missing the happy sociability of the old days, suellen longed to
visit friends, if for no other reason than to assure herself that
the rest of the county was as bad off as tara.  but scarlett was
adamant.  the horse was for work, to drag logs from the woods, to
plow and for pork to ride in search of food.  on sundays he had
earned the right to graze in the pasture and rest.  if suellen
wanted to go visiting she could go afoot.

before the last year suellen had never walked a hundred yards in
her life and this prospect was anything but pleasing.  so she
stayed at home and nagged and cried and said, once too often:  "oh,
if only mother was here!"  at that, scarlett gave her the long-
promised slap, hitting her so hard it knocked her screaming to the
bed and caused great 
 
 ___________________________
 
sh, but after all a girl couldn't live
alone on a plantation; she had to have a husband to help her run
it.

"melly, it's like i said the other day.  there isn't anybody for
girls to marry and they've got to marry someone."

"oh, they don't have to marry!  there's nothing shameful in being a
spinster.  look at aunt pitty.  oh, i'd rather see cathleen dead!
i know cade would rather see her dead.  it's the end of the
calverts.  just think what her--what their children will be.  oh,
scarlett, have pork saddle the horse quickly and you ride after her
and tell her to come live with us!"

"good lord!" cried scarlett, shocked at the matter-of-fact way in
which melanie was offering tara.  scarlett certainly had no
intention of feeding another mouth.  she started to say this but
something in melanie's stricken face halted the words.

"she wouldn't come, melly," she amended.  "you know she wouldn't.
she's so proud and she'd think it was charity."

"that's true, that's true!" said melanie distractedl
 
 ___________________________
 
sn't
got any boots."

then at the thought of ashley barefooted, scarlett could have
cried.  let other soldiers limp by in rags with their feet tied up
in sacks and strips of carpet, but not ashley.  he should come home
on a prancing horse, dressed in fine clothes and shining boots, a
plume in his hat.  it was the final degradation for her to think of
ashley reduced to the state of these other soldiers.

one afternoon in june when everyone at tara was assembled on the
back porch eagerly watching pork cut the first half-ripe watermelon
of the season, they heard hooves on the gravel of the front drive.
prissy started languidly toward the front door, while those left
behind argued hotly as to whether they should hide the melon or
keep it for supper, should the caller at the door prove to be a
soldier.

melly and carreen whispered that the soldier guest should have a
share and scarlett, backed by suellen and mammy, hissed to pork to
hide it quickly.

"don't be a goose, girls!  there's not enoug
 
 ___________________________
 
h for us as it is and
if there are two or three famished soldiers out there, none of us
will even get a taste," said scarlett.

while pork stood with the little melon clutched to him, uncertain
as to the final decision, they heard prissy cry out.

"gawdlmighty!  miss scarlett!  miss melly!  come quick!"

"who is it?" cried scarlett, leaping up from the steps and racing
through the hall with melly at her shoulder and the others
streaming after her.

ashley! she thought.  oh, perhaps--

"it's uncle peter!  miss pittypat's uncle peter!"

they all ran out to the front porch and saw the tall grizzled old
despot of aunt pitty's house cl
 
 ___________________________
 
 their smiles.  "you young misses ought ter tek
shame, leavin' po' miss pitty 'lone, wid half her frens daid an' de
other half in macom, an' 'lanta full of yankee sojers an' trashy
free issue niggers."

the two girls had borne the castigation with straight faces as long
as they could, but the thought of aunt pitty sending peter to scold
them and bring them back bodily to atlanta was too much for their
control.  they burst into laughter and hung on each other's
shoulders for support.  naturally, pork and dilcey and mammy gave
vent to loud guffaws at hearing the detractor of their beloved tara
set at naught.  suellen and carreen giggled and even gerald's face
wore a vague smile.  everyone laughed except peter, who shifted
from one large splayed foot to the other in mounting indignation.

"whut's wrong wid you, nigger?" inquired mammy with a grin.  "is
you gittin' too ole ter perteck yo' own missus?"

peter was outraged.

"too ole!  me too ole?  no, ma'm!  ah kin perteck miss pitty lak ah
all
 
 ___________________________
 
the never-ending line went by, her heart hardened.  they were
eating the food meant for the mouths of tara, vegetables over whose
long rows she had wearied her back, food she had driven endless
miles to buy.  food was so hard to get and the money in the
yankee's wallet would not last forever.  only a few greenbacks and
the two gold pieces were left now.  why should she feed this horde
of hungry men?  the war was over.  they would never again stand
between her and danger.  so, she gave orders to pork that when
soldiers were in the house, the table should be set sparely.  this
order prevailed until she noticed that melanie, who had never been
strong since beau was born, was inducing pork to put only dabs of
food on her plate and giving her share to the soldiers.

"you'll have to stop it, melanie," she scolded.  "you're half sick
yourself and if you don't eat more, you'll be sick in bed and we'll
have to nurse you.  let these men go hungry.  they can stand it.
they've stood it for four years 
 
 ___________________________
 
never knew, for he died without
regaining consciousness and a search of his pockets yielded no
information.

a nice-looking boy, obviously a gentleman, and somewhere to the
south, some woman was watching the roads, wondering where he was
and when he was coming home, just as she and melanie, with a wild
hope in their hearts, watched every bearded figure that came up
their walk.  they buried the cadet in the family burying ground,
next to the three little o'hara boys, and melanie cried sharply as
pork filled in the grave, wondering in her heart if strangers were
doing this same thing to the tall body of ashley.

will benteen was another soldier, like the nameless boy, who
arrived unconscious across the saddle of a comrade.  will was
acutely ill with pneumonia and when the girls put him to bed, they
feared he would soon join the boy in the burying ground.

he had the sallow malarial face of the south georgia cracker, pale
pinkish hair and washed-out blue eyes which even in delirium were
patie
 
 ___________________________
 
mn,
chewing a straw.  undoubtedly, as mammy frequently declared, will
was something the lord had provided and scarlett often wondered how
tara could have lived through the last few months without him.  he
never had much to say, never displayed any energy, never seemed to
take much interest in anything that went on about him, but he knew
everything about everybody at tara.  and he did things.  he did
them silently, patiently and competently.  though he had only one
leg, he could work faster than pork.  and he could get work out of
pork, which was, to scarlett, a marvelous thing.  when the cow had
the colic and the horse fell ill with a mysterious ailment which
threatened to remove him permanently from them, will sat up nights
with them and saved them.  that he was a shrewd trader brought him
scarlett's respect, for he could ride out in the mornings with a
bushel or two of apples, sweet potatoes and other vegetables and
return with seeds, lengths of cloth, flour and other necessities
which s
 
 ___________________________
 
tle birth.  scarlett knew that ellen would have fainted
at the thought of a daughter of hers marrying such a man, but now
scarlett had been by necessity forced too far away from ellen's
teachings to let that worry her.  men were scarce, girls had to
marry someone and tara had to have a man.  but carreen, deeper and
deeper immersed in her prayer book and every day losing more of her
touch with the world of realities, treated will as gently as a
brother and took him as much for granted as she did pork.

"if carreen had any sense of gratitude to me for what i've done for
her, she'd marry him and not let him get away from here," scarlett
thought indignantly.  "but no, she must spend her time mooning
about a silly boy who probably never gave her a serious thought."

so will remained at tara, for what reason she did not know and she
found his businesslike man-to-man attitude with her both pleasant
and helpful.  he was gravely deferential to the vague gerald but it
was to scarlett that he turned 
 
 ___________________________
 
et changed
conditions because they think it'll all be over soon.  they think
god is going to work a miracle especially for their benefit.  but
he won't.  the only miracle that's going to be worked around here
is the one i'm going to work on rhett butler. . . .  they won't
change.  maybe they can't change.  i'm the only one who's changed--
and i wouldn't have changed if i could have helped it."

mammy finally turned the men out of the dining room and closed the
door, so the fitting could begin.  pork helped gerald upstairs to
bed and ashley and will were left alone in the lamplight in the
front hall.  they were silent for a while and will chewed his
tobacco like a placid ruminant animal.  but his mild face was far
from placid.

"this goin' to atlanta," he said at last in a slow voice, "i don't
like it.  not one bit."

ashley looked at will quickly and then looked away, saying nothing
but wondering if will had the same awful suspicion which was
haunting him.  but that was impossible.  will d
 
 ___________________________
 
 along with
them.

not trust a darky!  scarlett trusted them far more than most white
people, certainly more than she trusted any yankee.  there were
qualities of loyalty and tirelessness and love in them that no
strain could break, no money could buy.  she thought of the
faithful few who remained at tara in the face of the yankee
invasion when they could have fled or joined the troops for lives
of leisure.  but they had stayed.  she thought of dilcey toiling in
the cotton fields beside her, of pork risking his life in
neighboring hen houses that the family might eat, of mammy coming
to atlanta with her to keep her from doing wrong.  she thought of
the servants of her neighbors who had stood loyally beside their
white owners, protecting their mistresses while the men were at the
front, refugeeing with them through the terrors of the war, nursing
the wounded, burying the dead, comforting the bereaved, working,
begging, stealing to keep food on the tables.  and even now, with
the freedmen's 
 
 ___________________________
 
ld her that after the cotton came in in the fall, she
need send no more money--unless some other carpetbagger coveted
tara and skyrocketed the taxes.  scarlett knew will would have a
hard pull without her help but she admired and respected his
independence.  as long as he was in the position of hired help he
would take her money, but now that he was to become her brother-in-
law and the man of the house, he intended to stand on his own
efforts.  yes, will was something the lord had provided.



pork had dug the grave the night before, close by ellen's grave,
and he stood, spade in hand, behind the moist red clay he was soon
to shovel back in place.  scarlett stood behind him in the patchy
shade of a gnarled low-limbed cedar, the hot sun of the june
morning dappling her, and tried to keep her eyes away from the red
trench in front of her.  jim tarleton, little hugh munroe, alex
fontaine and old man mcrae's youngest grandson came slowly and
awkwardly down the path from the house bearing gera
 
 ___________________________
 
ld's coffin on
two lengths of split oak.  behind them, at a respectful distance,
followed a large straggling crowd of neighbors and friends,
shabbily dressed, silent.  as they came down the sunny path through
the garden, pork bowed his head upon the top of the spade handle
and cried; and scarlett saw with incurious surprise that the kinks
on his head, so jettily black when she went to atlanta a few months
before, were now grizzled.

she thanked god tiredly that she had cried all her tears the night
before, so now she could stand erect and dry eyed.  the sound of
suellen's tears, just back of her shoulder, irritated her
unbearably and she had to clench her fists to keep from turning and
slapping the swollen face.  su
 
 ___________________________
 
e had been the cause of her father's
death, whether she intended it or not, and she should have the
decency to control herself in front of the hostile neighbors.  not
a single person had spoken to her that morning or given her one
look of sympathy.  they had kissed scarlett quietly, shaken her
hand, murmured kind words to carreen and even to pork but had
looked through suellen as if she were not there.

to them she had done worse than murder her father.  she had tried
to betray him into disloyalty to the south.  and to that grim and
close-knit community it was as if she had tried to betray the honor
of them all.  she had broken the solid front the county presented
to the world.  by her attempt to get money from the yankee
government she had aligned herself with carpetbaggers and
scallawags, more hated enemies than the yankee soldiers ha
 
 ___________________________
 
llen marry will?
not that he isn't a sight too good for her but you know he is a
cracker and--"

scarlett's eyes met those of grandma.  there was a wicked sparkle
in the old eyes that found an answer in her own.



chapter xli


when the last good-by had been said and the last sound of wheels
and hooves died away, scarlett went into ellen's office and removed
a gleaming object from where she had hidden it the night before
between the yellowed papers in the pigeon-holes of the secretary.
hearing pork sniffling in the dining room as he went about laying
the table for dinner she called to him.  he came to her, his black
face as forlorn as a lost and masterless hound.

"pork," she said sternly, "you cry just once more and i'll--i'll
cry, too.  you've got to stop."

"yas'm.  ah try but eve'y time ah try ah thinks of mist' gerald
an'--"

"well, don't think.  i can stand everybody else's tears but not
yours.  there," she broke off gently, "don't you see?  i can't
stand yours because i know how yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u loved him.  blow your nose,
pork.  i've got a present for you."

a little interest flickered in pork's eyes as he blew his nose
loudly but it was more politeness than interest.

"you remember that night you got shot robbing somebody's hen
house?"

"lawd gawd, miss scarlett!  ah ain' never--"

"well, you did, so don't lie to me about it at this late date.  you
remember i said i was going to give you a watch for being so
faithful?"

"yas'm, ah 'members.  ah figgered you'd done fergot."

"no, i didn't forget and here it is."

she held out for him a massive gold watch, heavily embossed, from
which
 
 ___________________________
 
 dangled a chain with many fobs and seals.

"fo' gawd, miss scarlett!" cried pork.  "dat's mist' gerald's
watch!  ah done seen him look at dat watch a milyun times!"

"yes, it's pa's watch, pork, and i'm giving it to you.  take it."

"oh, no'm!" pork retreated in horror.  "dat's a w'ite gempmum's
watch an' mist' gerald's ter boot.  huccome you talk 'bout givin'
it ter me, miss scnrlett?  dat watch belong by rights ter lil wade
hampton."

"it belongs to you.  what did wade hampton ever do for pa?  did he
look after him when he was sick and feeble?  did he bathe him and
dress him and shave him?  did he stick by him when the yankees
came?  did he steal for him?  don't be a fool, pork.  if ever
anyone deserved a watch, you do, and i know pa wou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld approve.
here."

she picked up the black hand and laid the watch in the palm.  pork
gazed at it reverently and slowly delight spread over his face.

"fer me, truly, miss scarlett?"

"yes, indeed."

"well'm--thankee, ma'm."

"would you like for me to take it to atlanta and have it engraved?"

"whut's dis engrabed mean?"  pork's voice was suspicious.

"it means to put writing on the back of it, like--like 'to pork
from the o'haras--well done good and faithful servant.'"

"no'm--thankee.  ma'm.  never mind de engrabin'."  pork retreated a
step, clutching the watch firmly.

a little smile twitched her lips.

"what's the matter, pork?  don't you trust me to bring it back?"

"yas'm, ah trus'es you--only, well'm, you mout change yo' mind."

"i wouldn't do that."

"well'm, you mout sell it.  ah spec it's wuth a heap."

"do you think i'd sell pa's watch?"

"yas'm--ef you needed de money."

"you ought to be beat
 
 ___________________________
 
 for that, pork.  i've a mind to take the
watch back."

"no'm, you ain'!"  the first faint smile of the day showed on
pork's grief-worn face.  "ah knows you--an' miss scarlett--"

"yes, pork?"

"ef you wuz jes' half as nice ter w'ite folks as you is ter
niggers, ah spec de worl' would treat you better."

"it treats me well enough," she said.  "now, go find mr. ashley and
tell him i want to see him here, right away."

ashley sat on ellen's little writing chair, his long body dwarfing
the frail bit of furniture while scarlett offered him a half-
interest in the mill.  not once did his eyes meet hers and he spoke
no word of interruption.  he sat looking down at his hands, turning
them
 
 ___________________________
 
d full
of tired futility.

"scarlett, i will come to atlanta. . . .  i cannot fight you both."

he turned and walked out of the room.  some of the triumph in her
heart was dulled by a nagging fear.  the look in his eyes when he
spoke had been the same as when he said he would be lost forever if
he came to atlanta.



after suellen and will married and carreen went off to charleston
to the convent, ashley, melanie and beau came to atlanta, bringing
dilcey with them to cook and nurse.  prissy and pork were left at
tara until such a time as will could get other darkies to help him
in the fields and then they, too, would come to town.

the little brick house that ashley took for his family was on ivy
street directly behind aunt pitty's house and the two back yards
ran together, divided only by a ragged overgrown privet hedge.
melanie had chosen it especially for this reason.  she said, on the
first morning of her return to atlanta as she laughed and cried and
embraced scarlett and aunt pitty, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ll, what else did you expect?"  and her family
would take on dreadfully again and try to stop her.  and she had no
intention of stopping her trips.

thank heaven, there were no ragged women along the roadside today!
as she passed the trail leading down to the settlement she looked
with distaste at the group of shacks squatting in the hollow in the
dreary slant of the afternoon sun.  there was a chill wind blowing,
and as she passed there came to her nose the mingled smells of wood
smoke, frying pork and untended privies.  averting her nose, she
flapped the reins smartly across the horse's back and hurried him
past and around the bend of the road.

just as she was beginning to draw a breath of relief, her heart
rose in her throat with sudden fright, for a huge negro slipped
silently from behind a large oak tree.  she was frightened but not
enough to lose her wits and, in an instant, the horse was pulled up
and she had frank's pistol in her hand.

"what do you want?" she cried with all the s
 
 ___________________________
 
e.  mother died when sherman men came
through tara and pa--he went last june.  oh, sam, don't cry.
please don't!  if you do, i'll cry too.  sam, don't!  i just can't
stand it.  let's don't talk about it now.  i'll tell you all about
it some other time. . . .  miss suellen is at tara and she's
married to a mighty fine man, mr. will benteen.  and miss carreen,
she's in a--"  scarlett paused.  she could never make plain to the
weeping giant what a convent was.  "she's living in charleston now.
but pork and prissy are at tara. . . .  there, sam, wipe your nose.
do you really want to go home?"

"yas'm but it ain' gwine be lak ah thought wid miss ellen an'--"

"sam, how'd you like to stay here in atlanta and work for me?  i
need a driver and i need one bad with so many mean folks around
these days."

"yas'm. you sho do.  ah been aimin' ter say you ain' got no bizness
drivin' 'round by yo'seff, miss scarlett.  you ain' got no notion
how mean some niggers is dese days, specially dem whut live hyah
 
 ___________________________
 
frowning for a moment.  she was not in the least
alarmed or distressed that sam had committed murder, but she was
disappointed that she could not have him as a driver.  a big negro
like sam would be as good a bodyguard as archie.  well, she must
get him safe to tara somehow, for of course the authorities must
not get him.  he was too valuable a darky to be hanged.  why, he
was the best foreman tara had ever had!  it did not enter
scarlett's mind that he was free.  he still belonged to her, like
pork and mammy and peter and cookie and prissy.  he was still "one
of our family" and, as such, must be protected.

"i'll send you to tara tonight," she said finally.  "now sam, i've
got to drive out the road a piece, but i ought to be back here
before sundown.  you be waiting here for me when i come back.
don't tell anyone where you are going and if you've got a hat,
bring it along to hide your face."

"ah ain' got no hat."

"well, here's a quarter.  you buy a hat from one of those shanty
darkies a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd meet me here."

"yas'm."  his face glowed with relief at once more having someone
to tell him what to do.

scarlett drove on thoughtfully.  will would certainly welcome a
good field hand at tara.  pork had never been any good in the
fields and never would be any good.  with sam on the place, pork
could come to atlanta and join dilcey as she had promised him when
gerald died.

when she reached the mill the sun was setting and it was later than
she cared to be out.  johnnie gallegher was standing in the doorway
of the miserable shack that served as cook room for the little
lumber camp.  sitting on a log in front of the slab-sided shack
that was their sleeping quarters were four of the five convicts
scarlett had apportioned to johnnie's mill.  their convict uniforms
were dirty and foul wit
 
 ___________________________
 
re
was a loneliness, an isolation, about it that chilled her.  these
convicts were so far away from everything, so completely at the
mercy of johnnie gallegher, and if he chose to whip them or
otherwise mistreat them, she would probably never know about it.
the convicts would be afraid to complain to her for fear of worse
punishment after she was gone.

"the men look thin.  are you giving them enough to eat?  god knows,
i spend enough money on their food to make them fat as hogs.  the
flour and pork alone cost thirty dollars last month.  what are you
giving them for supper?"

she stepped over to the cook shack and looked in.  a fat mulatto
woman, who was leaning over a rusty old stove, dropped a half
curtsy as she saw scarlett and went on stirring a pot in which
black-eyed peas were cooking.  scarlett knew johnnie gallegher
lived with her but thought it best to ignore the fact.  she saw
that except for the peas and a pan of corn pone there was no other
food being prepared.

"haven't you go