 if my voice is carrying
a message into her soul," he thought and began to hope
that on future sunday mornings he might be able to say
words that would touch and awaken the woman apparently
far gone in secret sin.

the house next door to the presbyterian church, through
the windows of which the minister had seen the sight
that had so upset him, was occupied by two women. aunt
elizabeth swift, a grey competent-looking widow with
money in the winesburg national bank, lived there with
her daughter kate swift, a school teacher. the school
teacher was thirty years old and had a neat
trim-looking figure. she had few friends and bore a
reputation of having a sharp tongue. when he began to
think about her, curtis hartman remembered that she had
been to europe and had lived for two years in new york
city. "perhaps after all her smoking means nothing," he
thought. he began to remember that when he was a
student in college and occasionally read novels, good
although somewhat worldly women, had smoked throu
 
 ___________________________
 
n for the most part by
the girl herself. on his marriage day the underwear
manufacturer had given his daughter five thousand
dollars and he promised to leave her at least twice
that amount in his will. the minister had thought
himself fortunate in marriage and had never permitted
himself to think of other women. he did not want to
think of other women. what he wanted was to do the work
of god quietly and earnestly.

in the soul of the minister a struggle awoke. from
wanting to reach the ears of kate swift, and through
his sermons to delve into her soul, he began to want
also to look again at the figure lying white and quiet
in the bed. on a sunday morning when he could not sleep
because of his thoughts he arose and went to walk in
the streets. when he had gone along main street almost
to the old richmond place he stopped and picking up a
stone rushed off to the room in the bell tower. with
the stone he broke out a corner of the window and then
locked the door and sat down at the desk before the

 
 ___________________________
 
open bible to wait. when the shade of the window to
kate swift's room was raised he could see, through the
hole, directly into her bed, but she was not there. she
also had arisen and had gone for a walk and the hand
that raised the shade was the hand of aunt elizabeth
swift.

the minister almost wept with joy at this deliverance
from the carnal desire to "peep" and went back to his
own house praising god. in an ill moment he forgot,
however, to stop the hole in the window. the piece of
glass broken out at the corner of the window just
nipped off the bare h
 
 ___________________________
 
e minister put the thoughts of the woman
in the bed out of his mind and began to be something
like a lover in the presence of his wife. one evening
when they drove out together he turned the horse out of
buckeye street and in the darkness on gospel hill,
above waterworks pond, put his arm about sarah
hartman's waist. when he had eaten breakfast in the
morning and was ready to retire to his study at the
back of his house he went around the table and kissed
his wife on the cheek. when thoughts of kate swift came
into his head, he smiled and raised his eyes to the
skies. "intercede for me, master," he muttered, "keep
me in the narrow path intent on thy work."

and now began the real struggle in the soul of the
brown-bearded minister. by chance he discovered that
kate swift was in the habit of lying in her bed in the
evenings and reading a book. a lamp stood on a table by
the side of the bed and the light streamed down upon
her white shoulders and bare throat. on the evening
when he made the discove
 
 ___________________________
 
ry the minister sat at the desk
in the dusty room from nine until after eleven and when
her light was put out stumbled out of the church to
spend two more hours walking and praying in the
streets. he did not want to kiss the shoulders and the
throat of kate swift and had not allowed his mind to
dwell on such thoughts. he did not know what he wanted.
"i am god's child and he must save me from myself," he
cried, in the darkness under the trees as he wandered
in the streets. by a tree he stood and looked at the
sky that was covered with hurrying clouds. he began to
talk to god intimately and closely. "please, father, do
not forget me. give me power to go tomorrow and repair
the hole in the window. lift my eyes again to the
skies. stay with me, thy servant,
 
 ___________________________
 
he began to blame god, saying to himself that he
had tried to keep his feet in the true path and had not
run about seeking sin. "through my days as a young man
and all through my life here i have gone quietly about
my work," he declared. "why now should i be tempted?
what have i done that this burden should be laid on
me?"

three times during the early fall and winter of that
year curtis hartman crept out of his house to the room
in the bell tower to sit in the darkness looking at the
figure of kate swift lying in her bed and later went to
walk and pray in the streets. he could not understand
himself. for weeks he would go along scarcely thinking
of the school teacher and telling himself that he had
conquered the carnal desire to look at her body. and
then something would happen. as he sat in the study of
his own house, hard at work on a sermon, he would
become nervous and begin to walk up and down the room.
"i will go out into the streets," he told himself and
even as he let himself in at the c
 
 ___________________________
 
re is such that i cannot resist
sin, i shall give myself over to sin. at least i shall
not be a hypocrite, preaching the word of god with my
mind thinking of the shoulders and neck of a woman who
does not belong to me."

it was cold in the room of the bell tower of the church
on that january night and almost as soon as he came
into the room curtis hartman knew that if he stayed he
would be ill. his feet were wet from tramping in the
snow and there was no fire. in the room in the house
next door kate swift had not yet appeared. with grim
determination the man sat down to wait. sitting in the
chair and gripping the edge of the desk on which lay
the bible he stared into the darkness thinking the
blackest thoughts of his life. he thought of his wife
and for the moment almost hated her. "she has always
been ashamed of passion and has cheated me," he
thought. "man has a right to expect living passion and
beauty in a woman. he has no right to forget that he is
an animal and in me there is something tha
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
until the woman suddenly appeared sitting in the bed in
her white nightrobe. when the light was turned up she
propped herself up among the pillows and read a book.
sometimes she smoked one of the cigarettes. only her
bare shoulders and throat were visible.

on the january night, after he had come near dying with
cold and after his mind had two or three times actually
slipped away into an odd land of fantasy so that he had
by an exercise of will power to force himself back into
consciousness, kate swift appeared. in the room next
door a lamp was lighted and the waiting man stared into
an empty bed. then upon the bed before his eyes a naked
woman threw herself. lying face downward she wept and
beat with her fists upon the pillow. with a final
outburst of weeping she half arose, and in the presence
of the man who had waited to look and not to think
thoughts the woman of sin began to pray. in the
lamplight her figure, slim and strong, looked like the
figure of the boy in the presence of the chris
 
 ___________________________
 
g," he cried, running in quickly and
closing the door. he began to advance upon the young
man, his eyes glowing and his voice ringing with
fervor. "i have found the light," he cried. "after ten
years in this town, god has manifested himself to me in
the body of a woman." his voice dropped and he began to
whisper. "i did not understand," he said. "what i took
to be a trial of my soul was only a preparation for a
new and more beautiful fervor of the spirit. god has
appeared to me in the person of kate swift, the school
teacher, kneeling naked on a bed. do you know kate
swift? although she may not be aware of it, she is an
instrument of god, bearing the message of truth."

reverend curtis hartman turned and ran out of the
office. at the door he stopped, and after looking up
and down the deserted street, turned again to george
willard. "i am delivered. have no fear." he held up a
bleeding fist for the young man to see. "i smashed the
glass of the window," he cried. "now it will have to be
wholly rep
 
 ___________________________
 
egan to fall on
thursday. at eight o'clock, after the morning train had
passed, he put a pair of skates in his pocket and went
up to waterworks pond but did not go skating. past the
pond and along a path that followed wine creek he went
until he came to a grove of beech trees. there he built
a fire against the side of a log and sat down at the
end of the log to think. when the snow began to fall
and the wind to blow he hurried about getting fuel for
the fire.

the young reporter was thinking of kate swift, who had
once been his school teacher. on the evening before he
had gone to her house to get a book she wanted him to
read and had been alone with her for an hour. for the
fourth or fifth time the woman had talked to him with
great earnestness and he could not make out what she
meant by her talk. he began to believe she must be in
love with him and the thought was both pleasing and
annoying.

up from the log he sprang and began to pile sticks on
the fire. looking about to be sure he was alone h
 
 ___________________________
 
. in the morning he
was almost as refreshed as though he had slept.

with hop higgins safely stowed away in the chair behind
the stove only three people were awake in winesburg.
george willard was in the office of the eagle
pretending to be at work on the writing of a story but
in reality continuing the mood of the morning by the
fire in the wood. in the bell tower of the presbyterian
church the reverend curtis hartman was sitting in the
darkness preparing himself for a revelation from god,
and kate swift, the school teacher, was leaving her
house for a walk in the storm.

it was past ten o'clock when kate swift set out and the
walk was unpremeditated. it was as though the man and
the boy, by thinking of her, had driven her forth into
the wintry streets. aunt elizabeth swift had gone to
the county seat concerning some business in connection
with mortgages in which she had money invested and
would not be back until the next day. by a huge stove,
called a base burner, in the living room of the hou
 
 ___________________________
 
se
sat the daughter reading a book. suddenly she sprang to
her feet and, snatching a cloak from a rack by the
front door, ran out of the house.

at the age of thirty kate swift was not known in
winesburg as a pretty woman. her complexion was not
good and her face was covered with blotches that
indicated ill health. alone in the night in the winter
streets she was lovely. her back was straight, her
shoulders square, and her features were as the features
of a tiny goddess on a pedestal in a garden in the dim
light of a summer evening.

during the afternoon the school teacher had been to see
doctor welling concerning her health. the doctor had
scolded her and had declare
 
 ___________________________
 
d she was in danger of
losing her hearing. it was foolish for kate swift to be
abroad in the storm, foolish and perhaps dangerous.

the woman in the streets did not remember the words of
the doctor and would not have turned back had she
remembered. she was very cold but after walking for
five minutes no longer minded the cold. first she went
to the end of her own street and then across a pair of
hay scales set in the ground before a feed barn and
into trunion pike. along trunion pike she went to ned
winters' barn and turning east followed a street of low
frame house
 
 ___________________________
 
s that led over gospel hill and into sucker
road that ran down a shallow valley past ike smead's
chicken farm to waterworks pond. as she went along, the
bold, excited mood that had driven her out of doors
passed and then returned again.

there was something biting and forbidding in the
character of kate swift. everyone felt it. in the
schoolroom she was silent, cold, and stern, and yet in
an odd way very close to her pupils. once in a long
while something seemed to have come over her and she
was happy. all of the children in the schoolroom felt
the effect of her happiness. for a time they did not
work but sat back in their chairs and looked at her.

with hands clasped behind her back the school teacher
walked up and down in the schoolroom and talked very
rapidly. it did not seem to matter what subje
 
 ___________________________
 
someone who had once
lived in winesburg.

on another occasion the teacher talked to the children
of benvenuto cellini. that time they laughed. what a
bragging, blustering, brave, lovable fellow she made of
the old artist! concerning him also she invented
anecdotes. there was one of a german music teacher who
had a room above cellini's lodgings in the city of
milan that made the boys guffaw. sugars mcnutts, a fat
boy with red cheeks, laughed so hard that he became
dizzy and fell off his seat and kate swift laughed with
him. then suddenly she became again cold and stern.

on the winter night when she walked through the
deserted snow-covered streets, a crisis had come into
the life of the school teacher. although no one in
winesburg would have suspected it, her life had been
very adventurous. it was still adventurous. day by day
as she worked in the schoolroom or walked in the
streets, grief, hope, and desire fought within her.
behind a cold exterior the most extraordinary events
transpired in her 
 
 ___________________________
 
k half
through the night fighting out some battle raging
within. once on a night when it rained she had stayed
out six hours and when she came home had a quarrel with
aunt elizabeth swift. "i am glad you're not a man,"
said the mother sharply. "more than once i've waited
for your father to come home, not knowing what new mess
he had got into. i've had my share of uncertainty and
you cannot blame me if i do not want to see the worst
side of him reproduced in you."

            *       *       *

kate swift's mind was ablaze with thoughts of george
willard. in something he had written as a school boy
she thought she had recognized the spark of genius and
wanted to blow on the spark. one day in the summer she
had gone to the eagle office and finding the boy
unoccupied had taken him out main street to the fair
ground, where the two sat on a grassy bank and talked.
the school teacher tried to bring home to the mind of
the boy some conception of the difficulties he would
have to face as a writer. "you
 
 ___________________________
 
at you think of attempting. you must not become a
mere peddler of words. the thing to learn is to know
what people are thinking about, not what they say."

on the evening before that stormy thursday night when
the reverend curtis hartman sat in the bell tower of
the church waiting to look at her body, young willard
had gone to visit the teacher and to borrow a book. it
was then the thing happened that confused and puzzled
the boy. he had the book under his arm and was
preparing to depart. again kate swift talked with great
earnestness. night was coming on and the light in the
room grew dim. as he turned to go she spoke his name
softly and with an impulsive movement took hold of his
hand. because the reporter was rapidly becoming a man
something of his man's appeal, combined with the
winsomeness of the boy, stirred the heart of the lonely
woman. a passionate desire to have him understand the
import of life, to learn to interpret it truly and
honestly, swept over her. leaning forward, her lips
bru
 
 ___________________________
 
shed his cheek. at the same moment he for the first
time became aware of the marked beauty of her features.
they were both embarrassed, and to relieve her feeling
she became harsh and domineering. "what's the use? it
will be ten years before you begin to understand what i
mean when i talk to you," she cried passionately.

            *       *       *

on the night of the storm and while the minister sat in
the church waiting for her, kate swift went to the
office of the winesburg eagle, intending to have
another talk with the boy. after the long walk in the
snow she was cold, lonely, and tired. as she came
through main street she saw the fight from the
printshop window shining on the snow and on an impulse
opened the door and went in. for an hour she sat by the
stove in the office talking of life. she talked with
passionate earnestness. the impulse that had driven her
out into the snow poured itself out into talk. she
became inspired 
 
 ___________________________
 
d been her pupil and who
she thought might possess a talent for the
understanding of life, had possession of her. so strong
was her passion that it became something physical.
again her hands took hold of his shoulders and she
turned him about. in the dim light her eyes blazed. she
arose and laughed, not sharply as was customary with
her, but in a queer, hesitating way. "i must be going,"
she said. "in a moment, if i stay, i'll be wanting to
kiss you."

in the newspaper office a confusion arose. kate swift
turned and walked to the door. she was a teacher but
she was also a woman. as she looked at george willard,
the passionate desire to be loved by a man, that had a
thousand times before swept like a storm over her body,
took possession of her. in the lamplight george willard
looked no longer a boy, but a man ready to play the
part of a man.

the school teacher let george willard take her into his
arms. in the warm little office the air became suddenly
heavy and the strength went out of her body.
 
 ___________________________
 
truth.

            *       *       *

george blew out the lamp by the window and locking the
door of the printshop went home. through the hotel
office, past hop higgins lost in his dream of the
raising of ferrets, he went and up into his own room.
the fire in the stove had gone out and he undressed in
the cold. when he got into bed the sheets were like
blankets of dry snow.

george willard rolled about in the bed on which he had
lain in the afternoon hugging the pillow and thinking
thoughts of kate swift. the words of the minister, who
he thought had gone suddenly insane, rang in his ears.
his eyes stared about the room. the resentment, natural
to the baffled male, passed and he tried to understand
what had happened. he could not make it out. over and
over he turned the matter in his mind. hours passed and
he began to think it must be time for another day to
come. at four o'clock he pulled the covers up about his
neck and tried to sleep. when he became drowsy and
closed his eyes, he raised a ha
 
 ___________________________
 
nd and with it groped
about in the darkness. "i have missed something. i have
missed something kate swift was trying to tell me," he
muttered sleepily. then he slept and in all winesburg
he was the last soul on that winter night to go to
sleep.




loneliness

he was the son of mrs. al robinson who once owned a
farm on a side road leading off trunion pike, east of
winesburg and two miles beyond the town limits. the
farmhouse was painted brown and the blinds to all of
the windows facing the road were kept closed. in the
road before the house a flock of chickens, accompanied
by two guinea hens, lay i