who was bald and whose nervous little
hands fiddled about the bare white forehead as though
arranging a mass of tangled locks.

wing biddlebaum, forever frightened and beset by a
ghostly band of doubts, did not think of himself as in
any way a part of the life of the town where he had
lived for twenty years. among all the people of
winesburg but one had come close to him. with george
willard, son of tom willard, the proprietor of the new
willard house, he had formed something like a
friendship. george willard was the reporter on the
winesburg eagle and sometimes in the evenings he walked
out along the highway to wing biddlebaum's house. now
as the old man walked up and down on the veranda, his
hands moving nervously about, he was hoping that george
willard would come and spend the evening with him.
after the wagon containing the berry pickers had
passed, he went across the field through the tall
mustard weeds and climbing a rail fence peered
anxiously along the road to the town. for a moment he
stoo
 
 ___________________________
 
d thus, rubbing his hands together and looking up
and down the road, and then, fear overcoming him, ran
back to walk again upon the porch on his own house.

in the presence of george willard, wing biddlebaum, who
for twenty years had been the town mystery, lost
something of his timidity, and his shadowy personality,
submerged in a sea of doubts, came forth to look at the
world. with the young reporter at his side, he ventured
in the light of day into main street or strode up and
down on the rickety front porch of his own house,
talking excitedly. the voice that had been low and
trembling became shrill and loud. the bent figure
straightened. with a kind of wriggle, like a fish
retur
 
 ___________________________
 
e the piston rods of his machinery
of expression.

the story of wing biddlebaum is a story of hands. their
restless activity, like unto the beating of the wings
of an imprisoned bird, had given him his name. some
obscure poet of the town had thought of it. the hands
alarmed their owner. he wanted to keep them hidden away
and looked with amazement at the quiet inexpressive
hands of other men who worked beside him in the fields,
or passed, driving sleepy teams on country roads.

when he talked to george willard, wing biddlebaum
closed his fists and beat with them upon a table or on
the walls of his house. the action made him more
comfortable. if the desire to talk came to him when the
two were walking in the fields, he sought out a stump
or the top board of a fence and with his hands pounding
busily talked with renewed ease.

the story of wing biddlebaum's hands is worth a book in
itself. sympathetically set forth it would tap many
strange, beautiful qualities in obscure men. it is a
job for a poet. i
 
 ___________________________
 
ir activity. with them
wing biddlebaum had picked as high as a hundred and
forty quarts of strawberries in a day. they became his
distinguishing feature, the source of his fame. also
they made more grotesque an already grotesque and
elusive individuality. winesburg was proud of the hands
of wing biddlebaum in the same spirit in which it was
proud of banker white's new stone house and wesley
moyer's bay stallion, tony tip, that had won the
two-fifteen trot at the fall races in cleveland.

as for george willard, he had many times wanted to ask
about the hands. at times an almost overwhelming
curiosity had taken hold of him. he felt that there
must be a reason for their strange activity and their
inclination to keep hidden away and only a growing
respect for wing biddlebaum kept him from blurting out
the questions that were often in his mind.

once he had been on the point of asking. the two were
walking in the fields on a summer afternoon and had
stopped to sit upon a grassy bank. all afternoon wing
b
 
 ___________________________
 
iddlebaum had talked as one inspired. by a fence he
had stopped and beating like a giant woodpecker upon
the top board had shouted at george willard, condemning
his tendency to be too much influenced by the people
about him, "you are destroying yourself," he cried.
"you have the inclination to be alone and to dream and
you are afraid of dreams. you want to be like others in
town here. you hear them talk and you try to imitate
them."

on the grassy bank wing biddlebaum had tried again to
drive his point home. his voice became soft and
reminiscent, and with a sigh of contentment he launched
into a long rambling talk, speaking as one lost in a
 
 ___________________________
 

dream.

out of the dream wing biddlebaum made a picture for
george willard. in the picture men lived again in a
kind of pastoral golden age. across a green open
country came clean-limbed young men, some afoot, some
mounted upon horses. in crowds the young men came to
gather about the feet of an old man who sat beneath a
tree in a tiny garden and who talked to them.

wing biddlebaum became wholly inspired. for once he
forgot the hands. slowly they stole forth and lay upon
george willard's shoulders. something new and bold came
into the voice that talked. "you must try to forget all
you have learned," said the old man. "you must begin to
dream. from this time on you must shut your ears to the
roaring of the voices."

pausing in his speech, wing biddlebaum looked long and
earnestly at george willard. his eyes glowed. again he
raised the hands to caress the boy and then a look of
horror swept over his face.

with a convulsive movement of his body, wing biddlebaum
sprang to his fe
 
 ___________________________
 
et and thrust his hands deep into his
trousers pockets. tears came to his eyes. "i must be
getting along home. i can talk no more with you," he
said nervously.

without looking back, the old man had hurried down the
hillside and across a meadow, leaving george willard
perplexed and frightened upon the grassy slope. with a
shiver of dread the boy arose and went along the road
toward town. "i'll not ask him about his hands," he
thought, touched by the memory of the terror he had
seen in the man's eyes. "there's something wrong, but i
don't want to know what it is. his hands have something
to do with his fear of me and of everyone."

and george willard was right. let us look briefly into
the story of the hands. perhaps our talking of them
will arouse the poet w
 
 ___________________________
 
sted apples, she could not get her mind fixed again
upon the round perfect fruit that is eaten in the city
apartments. in the fall after the beginning of her
acquaintanceship with him she married doctor reefy and
in the following spring she died. during the winter he
read to her all of the odds and ends of thoughts he had
scribbled on the bits of paper. after he had read them
he laughed and stuffed them away in his pockets to
become round hard balls.




mother

elizabeth willard, the mother of george willard, was
tall and gaunt and her face was marked with smallpox
scars. although she was but forty-five, some obscure
disease had taken the fire out of her figure.
listlessly she went about the disorderly old hotel
looking at the faded wall-paper and the ragged carpets
and, when she was able to be about, doing the work of a
chambermaid among beds soiled by the slumbers of fat
traveling men. her husband, tom willard, a slender,
graceful man with square shoulders, a quick military
step, and a black must
 
 ___________________________
 
d she clenched her fists. "if i am dead and
see him becoming a meaningless drab figure like myself,
i will come back," she declared. "i ask god now to give
me that privilege. i demand it. i will pay for it. god
may beat me with his fists. i will take any blow that
may befall if but this my boy be allowed to express
something for us both." pausing uncertainly, the woman
stared about the boy's room. "and do not let him become
smart and successful either," she added vaguely.

the communion between george willard and his mother was
outwardly a formal thing without meaning. when she was
ill and sat by the window in her room he sometimes went
in the evening to make her a visit. they sat by a
window that looked over the roof of a small frame
building into main street. by turning their heads they
could see through another window, along an alleyway
that ran behind the main street stores and into the
back door of abner groff's bakery. sometimes as they
sat thus a picture of village life presented itself to
th
 
 ___________________________
 
in the evening when the son sat in the room with his
mother, the silence made them both feel awkward.
darkness came on and the evening train came in at the
station. in the street below feet tramped up and down
upon a board sidewalk. in the station yard, after the
evening train had gone, there was a heavy silence.
perhaps skinner leason, the express agent, moved a
truck the length of the station platform. over on main
street sounded a man's voice, laughing. the door of the
express office banged. george willard arose and
crossing the room fumbled for the doorknob. sometimes
he knocked against a chair, making it scrape along the
floor. by the window sat the sick woman, perfectly
still, listless. her long hands, white and bloodless,
could be seen drooping over the ends of the arms of the
chair. "i think you had better be out among the boys.
you are too much indoors," she said, striving to
relieve the embarrassment of the departure. "i thought
i would take a walk," replied george willard, who felt
awkwar
 
 ___________________________
 
osing patronage because of its shabbiness and she
thought of herself as also shabby. her own room was in
an obscure corner and when she felt able to work she
voluntarily worked among the beds, preferring the labor
that could be done when the guests were abroad seeking
trade among the merchants of winesburg.

by the door of her son's room the mother knelt upon the
floor and listened for some sound from within. when she
heard the boy moving about and talking in low tones a
smile came to her lips. george willard had a habit of
talking aloud to himself and to hear him doing so had
always given his mother a peculiar pleasure. the habit
in him, she felt, strengthened the secret bond that
existed between them. a thousand times she had
whispered to herself of the matter. "he is groping
about, trying to find himself," she thought. "he is not
a dull clod, all words and smartness. within him there
is a secret something that is striving to grow. it is
the thing i let be killed in myself."

in the darkness in th
 
 ___________________________
 
ssly along and holding the long wicked
scissors in her hand.

with a little broken sob in her throat, elizabeth
willard blew out the light that stood upon the table
and stood weak and trembling in the darkness. the
strength that had been as a miracle in her body left
and she half reeled across the floor, clutching at the
back of the chair in which she had spent so many long
days staring out over the tin roofs into the main
street of winesburg. in the hallway there was the sound
of footsteps and george willard came in at the door.
sitting in a chair beside his mother he began to talk.
"i'm going to get out of here," he said. "i don't know
where i shall go or what i shall do but i am going
away."

the woman in the chair waited and trembled. an impulse
came to her. "i suppose you had better wake up," she
said. "you think that? you will go to the city and make
money, eh? it will be better for you, you think, to be
a business man, to be brisk and smart and alive?" she
waited and trembled.

the son shook 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng opposite the railroad station. in the
summer the lunch room was filled with flies and biff
carter's white apron was more dirty than his floor.
doctor parcival did not mind. into the lunch room he
stalked and deposited twenty cents upon the counter.
"feed me what you wish for that," he said laughing.
"use up food that you wouldn't otherwise sell. it makes
no difference to me. i am a man of distinction, you
see. why should i concern myself with what i eat."

the tales that doctor parcival told george willard
began nowhere and ended nowhere. sometimes the boy
thought they must all be inventions, a pack of lies.
and then again he was convinced that they contained the
very essence of truth.

"i was a reporter like you here," doctor parcival
began. "it was in a town in iowa--or was it in
illinois? i don't remember and anyway it makes no
difference. perhaps i am trying to conceal my identity
and don't want to be very definite. have you ever
thought it strange that i have money for my needs
although i do
 
 ___________________________
 
 wonder what put that
notion into my head. wouldn't my brother, the painter,
have laughed, though. there i stood over the dead body
and spread out my hands. the superintendent of the
asylum and some of his helpers came in and stood about
looking sheepish. it was very amusing. i spread out my
hands and said, 'let peace brood over this carcass.'
that's what i said."

jumping to his feet and breaking off the tale, doctor
parcival began to walk up and down in the office of the
winesburg eagle where george willard sat listening. he
was awkward and, as the office was small, continually
knocked against things. "what a fool i am to be
talking," he said. "that is not my object in coming
here and forcing my acquaintanceship upon you. i have
something else in mind. you are a reporter just as i
was once and you have attracted my attention. you may
end by becoming just such another fool. i want to warn
you and keep on warning you. that's why i seek you
out."

doctor parcival began talking of george willard's
att
 
 ___________________________
 
her. there was a fellow, eh?
he despised everyone, you see. you have no idea with
what contempt he looked upon mother and me. and was he
not our superior? you know he was. you have not seen
him and yet i have made you feel that. i have given you
a sense of it. he is dead. once when he was drunk he
lay down on the tracks and the car in which he lived
with the other painters ran over him."

            *       *       *

one day in august doctor parcival had an adventure in
winesburg. for a month george willard had been going
each morning to spend an hour in the doctor's office.
the visits came about through a desire on the part of
the doctor to read to the boy from the pages of a book
he was in the process of writing. to write the book
doctor parcival declared was the object of his coming
to winesburg to live.

on the morning in august before the coming of the boy,
an incident had happened in the doctor's office. there
had been an accident on main street. a team of horses
had been frightened by a tra
 
 ___________________________
 
ad become excited and a cry
for doctors had gone up. all three of the active
practitioners of the town had come quickly but had
found the child dead. from the crowd someone had run to
the office of doctor parcival who had bluntly refused
to go down out of his office to the dead child. the
useless cruelty of his refusal had passed unnoticed.
indeed, the man who had come up the stairway to summon
him had hurried away without hearing the refusal.

all of this, doctor parcival did not know and when
george willard came to his office he found the man
shaking with terror. "what i have done will arouse the
people of this town," he declared excitedly. "do i not
know human nature? do i not know what will happen? word
of my refusal will be whispered about. presently men
will get together in groups and talk of it. they will
come here. we will quarrel and there will be talk of
hanging. then they will come again bearing a rope in
their hands."

doctor parcival shook with fright. "i have a
presentiment," he declar
 
 ___________________________
 
ed emphatically. "it may be
that what i am talking about will not occur this
morning. it may be put off until tonight but i will be
hanged. everyone will get excited. i will be hanged to
a lamp-post on main street."

going to the door of his dirty office, doctor parcival
looked timidly down the stairway leading to the street.
when he returned the fright that had been in his eyes
was beginning to be replaced by doubt. coming on tiptoe
across the room he tapped george willard on the
shoulder. "if not now, sometime," he whispered, shaking
his head. "in the end i will be crucified, uselessly
crucified."

doctor parcival began to plead with george willard.
"you must pay attention to me," he urged. "if something
happens perhaps you will be able to write the book that
i may never get written. the idea is very simple, so
simple that if you are not careful you will forget it.
it is this--that everyone in the world is christ and
they are all crucified. that's what i want to
 
 ___________________________
 
 say.
don't you forget that. whatever happens, don't you dare
let yourself forget."




nobody knows

looking cautiously about, george willard arose from his
desk in the office of the winesburg eagle and went
hurriedly out at the back door. the night was warm and
cloudy and although it was not yet eight o'clock, the
alleyway back of the eagle office was pitch dark. a
team of horses tied to a post somewhere in the darkness
stamped on the hard-baked ground. a cat sprang from
under george willard's feet and ran away into the
night. the young man was nervous. all day he had gone
about his work like one dazed by a blow. in the
alleyway he trembled as though with fright.

in the darkness george willard walked along the
alleyway, going carefully and cautiously. the back
doors of the winesburg stores were open and he could
see men sitting about under the store lamps. in
myerbaum's notion store mrs. willy the saloon keeper's
wife stood by the counter with a basket on her arm. sid
green the cl
 
 ___________________________
 
erk was waiting on her. he leaned over the
counter and talked earnestly.

george willard crouched and then jumped through the
path of light that came out at the door. he began to
run forward in the darkness. behind ed griffith's
saloon old jerry bird the town drunkard lay asleep on
the ground. the runner stumbled over the sprawling
legs. he laughed brokenly.

george willard had set forth upon an adventure. all day
he had been trying to make up his mind to go through
with the adventure and now he was acting. in the office
of the winesburg eagle he had been sitting since six
o'clock trying to think.

there had been no decision. he had just jumped to his
feet, hurried past will henderson who was reading proof
in the printshop and started to run along the alleyway.

through street after street went george willard,
avoiding the people who passed. he crossed and
recross
 
 ___________________________
 
ed the road. when he passed a street lamp he
pulled his hat down over his face. he did not dare
think. in his mind there was a fear but it was a new
kind of fear. he was afraid the adventure on which he
had set out would be spoiled, that he would lose
courage and turn back.

george willard found louise trunnion in the kitchen of
her father's house. she was washing dishes by the light
of a kerosene lamp. there she stood behind the screen
door in the little shedlike kitchen at the back of the
house. george willard stopped by a picket fence and
tried to control the shaking of his body. only a narrow
potato patch separated him from the adventure. five
minutes passed before he felt sure enough of himself to
call to her. "louise! oh, louise!" he called. the cry
stuck in his throat. his
 
 ___________________________
 
 voice became a hoarse whisper.

louise trunnion came out across the potato patch
holding the dish cloth in her hand. "how do you know i
want to go out with you," she said sulkily. "what makes
you so sure?"

george willard did not answer. in silence the two
stood in the darkness with the fence between them. "you
go on along," she said. "pa's in there. i'll come
along. you wait by williams' barn."

the young newspaper reporter had received a letter from
louise trunnion. it had come that morning to the office
of the winesburg eagle. the letter was brief. "i'm
yours if you want me," it said. he thought it annoying
that in the darkness by the fence she had pretended
there was nothing between them. "she has a nerve! w
 
 ___________________________
 
 corn grew. the corn was shoulder high and had
been planted right down to the sidewalk.

when louise trunnion came out of the front door of her
house she still wore the gingham dress in which she had
been washing dishes. there was no hat on her head. the
boy could see her standing with the doorknob in her
hand talking to someone within, no doubt to old jake
trunnion, her father. old jake was half deaf and she
shouted. the door closed and everything was dark and
silent in the little side street. george willard
trembled more violently than ever.

in the shadows by williams' barn george and louise
stood, not daring to talk. she was not particularly
comely and there was a black smudge on the side of her
nose. george thought she must have rubbed her nose with
her finger after she had been handling some of the
kitchen pots.

the young man began to laugh nervously. "it's warm,"
he said. he wanted to touch her with his hand. "i'm not
very bold," he thought. just to touch the folds of the
soiled gingham dres
 
 ___________________________
 
s would, he decided, be an exquisite
pleasure. she began to quibble. "you think you're
better than i am. don't tell me, i guess i know," she
said drawing closer to him.

a flood of words burst from george willard. he
remembered the look that had lurked in the girl's eyes
when they had met on the streets and thought of the
note she had written. doubt left him. the whispered
tales concerning her that had gone about town gave him
confidence. he became wholly the male, bold and
aggressive. in his heart there was no sympathy for her.
"ah, come on, it'll be all right. there won't be anyone
know anything. how can they know?" he urged.

they began to walk along a narrow brick sidewalk
between the cracks of whic
 
 ___________________________
 
small. "i can't go far,"
she said and her voice was quiet, unperturbed.

they crossed a bridge that ran over a tiny stream and
passed another vacant lot in which corn grew. the
street ended. in the path at the side of the road they
were compelled to walk one behind the other. will
overton's berry field lay beside the road and there was
a pile of boards. "will is going to build a shed to
store berry crates here," said george and they sat down
upon the boards.

            *       *       *

when george willard got back into main street it was
past ten o'clock and had begun to rain. three times he
walked up and down the length of main street. sylvester
west's drug store was still open and he went in and
bought a cigar. when shorty crandall the clerk came out
at the door with him he was pleased. for five minutes
the two stood in the shelter of the store awning and
talked. george willard felt satisfied. he had wanted
more than anything else to talk to some man. around a
corner toward the new willard hou
 
 ___________________________
 
le old wine creek brought us the news.
that's interesting. i laughed. i thought i'd tell
you--it's interesting, eh?"

joe welling turned and went out at the door. taking a
book from his pocket, he stopped and ran a finger down
one of the pages. again he was absorbed in his duties
as agent of the standard oil company. "hern's grocery
will be getting low on coal oil. i'll see them," he
muttered, hurrying along the street, and bowing
politely to the right and left at the people walking
past.

when george willard went to work for the winesburg
eagle he was besieged by joe welling. joe envied the
boy. it seemed to him that he was meant by nature to be
a reporter on a newspaper. "it is what i should be
doing, there is no doubt of that," he declared,
stopping george willard on the sidewalk before
daugherty's feed store. his eyes began to glisten and
his forefinger to tremble. "of course i make more money
with the standard oil company and i'm only telling
you," he added. "i've got nothing against you but i

 
 ___________________________
 
d is on fire.' that will make 'em
look up. they'll say you're a smart one. i don't care.
i don't envy you. i just snatched that idea out of the
air. i would make a newspaper hum. you got to admit
that."'

turning quickly, joe welling walked rapidly away. when
he had taken several steps he stopped and looked back.
"i'm going to stick to you," he said. "i'm going to
make you a regular hummer. i should start a newspaper
myself, that's what i should do. i'd be a marvel.
everybody knows that."

when george willard had been for a year on the
winesburg eagle, four things happened to joe welling.
his mother died, he came to live at the new willard
house, he became involved in a love affair, and he
organized the winesburg baseball club.

joe organized the baseball club because he wanted to be
a coach and in that position he began to win the
respect of his townsmen. "he is a wonder," they
declared after joe's team had whipped the team from
medina county. "he gets everybody working together. you
just watch him
 
 ___________________________
 
 the stores. men stood
by the bar in the new willard house laughing and
talking of joe's courtship. after the laughter came the
silence. the winesburg baseball team, under his
management, was winning game after game, and the town
had begun to respect him. sensing a tragedy, they
waited, laughing nervously.

late on a saturday afternoon the meeting between joe
welling and the two kings, the anticipation of which
had set the town on edge, took place in joe welling's
room in the new willard house. george willard was a
witness to the meeting. it came about in this way:

when the young reporter went to his room after the
evening meal he saw tom king and his father sitting in
the half darkness in joe's room. the son had the heavy
walking stick in his hand and sat near the door. old
edward king walked nervously about, scratching his left
elbow with his right hand. the hallways were empty and
silent.

george willard went to his own room and sat down at his
desk. he tried to write but his hand trembled so th
 
 ___________________________
 
at
he could not hold the pen. he also walked nervously up
and down. like the rest of the town of winesburg he was
perplexed and knew not what to do.

it was seven-thirty and fast growing dark when joe
welling came along the station platform toward the new
willard house. in his arms he held a bundle of weeds
and grasses. in spite of the terror that made his body
shake, george willard was amused at the sight of the
small spry figure holding the grasses and half running
along the platform.

shaking with fright and anxiety, the young reporter
lurked in the hallway outside the door of the room in
which joe welling talked to the two kings. there had
been an oath, the nervous giggle of old edward king,
and then silence. now the voice of joe welling, sharp
and clear, broke forth. george willard began to laugh.
he understood. as he had swept all men before him, so
now joe welling w
 
 ___________________________
 
as carrying the two men in the room
off their feet with a tidal wave of words. the listener
in the hall walked up and down, lost in amazement.

inside the room joe welling had paid no attention to
the grumbled threat of tom king. absorbed in an idea he
closed the door and, lighting a lamp, spread the
handful of weeds and grasses upon the floor. "i've got
something here," he announced solemnly. "i was going to
tell george willard about it, let him make a piece out
of it for the paper. i'm glad you're here. i wish sarah
were here also. i've been going to come to your house
and tell you of some of my ideas. they're interesting.
sarah wouldn't let me. she said we'd quarrel. that's
foolish."

running up and down before the two perplexed men, joe
welling began to explain. "don't you make a mistake
now," he cried. "this is something big." his voice was
shrill with excitement. "you just follow me, you'll be
interested. i know 
 
 ___________________________
 
. soon we'd regain all we
had lost. mind, i don't say the new things would be the
same as the old. they wouldn't. maybe they'd be better,
maybe not so good. that's interesting, eh? you can
think about that. it starts your mind working, now
don't it?"

in the room there was silence and then again old edward
king laughed nervously. "say, i wish sarah was here,"
cried joe welling. "let's go up to your house. i want
to tell her of this."

there was a scraping of chairs in the room. it was
then that george willard retreated to his own room.
leaning out at the window he saw joe welling going
along the street with the two kings. tom king was
forced to take extraordinary long strides to keep pace
with the little man. as he strode along, he leaned
over, listening--absorbed, fascinated. joe welling
again talked excitedly. "take milkweed now," he cried.
"a lot might be done with milkweed, eh? it's almost
unbelievable. i want you to think about it. i want you
two to think about it. there would be a new vegetabl
 
 ___________________________
 
 and given
to drink. his story is an odd one. it will be worth
telling some day.

at twenty-seven alice was tall and somewhat slight.
her head was large and overshadowed her body. her
shoulders were a little stooped and her hair and eyes
brown. she was very quiet but beneath a placid exterior
a continual ferment went on.

when she was a girl of sixteen and before she began to
work in the store, alice had an affair with a young
man. the young man, named ned currie, was older than
alice. he, like george willard, was employed on the
winesburg eagle and for a long time he went to see
alice almost every evening. together the two walked
under the trees through the streets of the town and
talked of what they would do with their lives. alice
was then a very pretty girl and ned currie took her
into his arms and kissed her. he became excited and
said things he did not intend to say and alice,
betrayed by her desire to have something beautiful come
into her rather narrow life, also grew excited. she
also talke
 
 ___________________________
 
ght of his own wife as he tore up the letter.

wash williams once had a wife. when he was still a
young man he married a woman at dayton, ohio. the woman
was tall and slender and had blue eyes and yellow hair.
wash was himself a comely youth. he loved the woman
with a love as absorbing as the hatred he later felt
for all women.

in all of winesburg there was but one person who knew
the story of the thing that had made ugly the person
and the character of wash williams. he once told the
story to george willard and the telling of the tale
came about in this way:

george willard went one evening to walk with belle
carpenter, a trimmer of women's hats who worked in a
millinery shop kept by mrs. kate mchugh. the young man
was not in love with the woman, who, in fact, had a
suitor who worked as bartender in ed griffith's saloon,
but as they walked about under the trees they
occasionally embraced. the night and their own thoughts
had aroused something in them. as they were returning
to main street they pas
 
 ___________________________
 
sed the little lawn beside the
railroad station and saw wash williams apparently
asleep on the grass beneath a tree. on the next evening
the operator and george willard walked out together.
down the railroad they went and sat on a pile of
decaying railroad ties beside the tracks. it was then
that the operator told the young reporter his story of
hate.

perhaps a dozen times george willard and the strange,
shapeless man who lived at his father's hotel had been
on the point of talking. the young man looked at the
hideous, leering face staring about the hotel dining
room and was consumed with curiosity. something he saw
lurking in the staring eyes told him that the man who
had nothing to say to others had nevertheless something
to say to him. on the pile of railroad ties on the
summer evening, he waited expectantly. when the
operator remained silent and seemed to have changed his
m
 
 ___________________________
 
e to me. i was a fool, do
you see, as you are now, and so i married this woman. i
would like to see men a little begin to understand
women. they are sent to prevent men making the world
worth while. it is a trick in nature. ugh! they are
creeping, crawling, squirming things, they with their
soft hands and their blue eyes. the sight of a woman
sickens me. why i don't kill every woman i see i don't
know."

half frightened and yet fascinated by the light burning
in the eyes of the hideous old man, george willard
listened, afire with curiosity. darkness came on and he
leaned forward trying to see the face of the man who
talked. when, in the gathering darkness, he could no
longer see the purple, bloated face and the burning
eyes, a curious fancy came to him. wash williams talked
in low even tones that made his words seem the more
terrible. in the darkness the young reporter found
himself imagining that he sat on the railroad ties
beside a comely young man with black hair and black
shining eyes. there was
 
 ___________________________
 
ghter of a dentist who was
the youngest of three sisters. on his marriage day,
because of his ability, he was promoted to a position
as dispatcher at an increased salary and sent to an
office at columbus, ohio. there he settled down with
his young wife and began buying a house on the
installment plan.

the young telegraph operator was madly in love. with a
kind of religious fervor he had managed to go through
the pitfalls of his youth and to remain virginal until
after his marriage. he made for george willard a
picture of his life in the house at columbus, ohio,
with the young wife. "in the garden back of our house
we planted vegetables," he said, "you know, peas and
corn and such things. we went to columbus in early
march and as soon as the days became warm i went to
work in the garden. with a spade i turned up the black
ground while she ran about laughing and pretending to
be afraid of the worms i uncovered. late in april came
the planting. in the little paths among the seed beds
she stood holding
 
 ___________________________
 
er two years of that life i found she had managed to
acquire three other lovers who came regularly to our
house when i was away at work, i didn't want to touch
them or her. i just sent her home to her mother and
said nothing. there was nothing to say. i had four
hundred dollars in the bank and i gave her that. i
didn't ask her reasons. i didn't say anything. when she
had gone i cried like a silly boy. pretty soon i had a
chance to sell the house and i sent that money to her."

wash williams and george willard arose from the pile of
railroad ties and walked along the tracks toward town.
the operator finished his tale quickly, breathlessly.

"her mother sent for me," he said. "she wrote me a
letter and asked me to come to their house at dayton.
when i got there it was evening about this time."

wash williams' voice rose to a half scream. "i sat in
the parlor of that house two hours. her mother took me
in there and left me. their house was stylish. they
were what is called respectable people. there wer
 
 ___________________________
 
e became soft and low. "she came into the
room naked," he went on. "her mother did that. while i
sat there she was taking the girl's clothes off,
perhaps coaxing her to do it. first i heard voices at
the door that led into a little hallway and then it
opened softly. the girl was ashamed and stood perfectly
still staring at the floor. the mother didn't come into
the room. when she had pushed the girl in through the
door she stood in the hallway waiting, hoping we
would--well, you see--waiting."

george willard and the telegraph operator came into the
main street of winesburg. the lights from the store
windows lay bright and shining on the sidewalks. people
moved about laughing and talking. the young reporter
felt ill and weak. in imagination, he also became old
and shapeless. "i didn't get the mother killed," said
wash williams, staring up and down the street. "i
struck her once with a chair and then the neighbors
came in and took it away. she screamed so loud you see.
i won't ever have a chance to k
 
 ___________________________
 
lept with us. when i stole a lunch
basket out of a farmer's wagon i couldn't help thinking
of his children going all day without food. i was sick
of the whole affair, but i was determined to stick it
out until the other boys were ready to come back."

"i'm glad you did stick it out," replied the mother,
half resentfully, and kissing him upon the forehead
pretended to busy herself with the work about the
house.

on a summer evening seth richmond went to the new
willard house to visit his friend, george willard. it
had rained during the afternoon, but as he walked
through main street, the sky had partially cleared and
a golden glow lit up the west. going around a corner,
he turned in at the door of the hotel and began to
climb the stairway leading up to his friend's room. in
the hotel office the proprietor and two traveling men
were engaged in a discussion of politics.

on the stairway seth stopped and listened to the voices
of the men below. they were excited and talked rapidly.
tom willard was berat
 
 ___________________________
 
d sometimes wondered if he would
ever be particularly interested in anything. now, as he
stood in the half-darkness by the window watching the
baker, he wished that he himself might become
thoroughly stirred by something, even by the fits of
sullen anger for which baker groff was noted. "it would
be better for me if i could become excited and wrangle
about politics like windy old tom willard," he thought,
as he left the window and went again along the hallway
to the room occupied by his friend, george willard.

george willard was older than seth richmond, but in the
rather odd friendship between the two, it was he who
was forever courting and the younger boy who was being
courted. the paper on which george worked had one
policy. it strove to mention by name in each issue, as
many as possible of the inhabitants of the village.
like an excited dog, george willard ran here and there,
noting on his pad of paper who had gone on business to
the county seat or had returned from a visit to a
neighboring vil
 
 ___________________________
 
lage. all day he wrote little facts upon
the pad. "a. p. wringlet had received a shipment of
straw hats. ed byerbaum and tom marshall were in
cleveland friday. uncle tom sinnings is building a new
barn on his place on the valley road."

the idea that george willard would some day become a
writer had given him a place of distinction in
winesburg, and to seth richmond he talked continually
of the matter, "it's the easiest of all lives to live,"
he declared, becoming excited and boastful. "here and
there you go and there is no one to boss you. though
you are in india or in the south seas in a boat, you
have but to write and there you are. wait till i get my
name up and then see what fun i shall have."

in george willard's room, which had a window looking
dow
 
 ___________________________
 
n into an alleyway and one that looked across
railroad tracks to biff carter's lunch room facing the
railroad station, seth richmond sat in a chair and
looked at the floor. george willard, who had been
sitting for an hour idly playing with a lead pencil,
greeted him effusively. "i've been trying to write a
love story," he explained, laughing nervously. lighting
a pipe he began walking up and down the room. "i know
what i'm going to do. i'm going to fall in love. i've
been sitting here and thinking it over and i'm going to
do it."

as though embarrassed by his declaration, george went
to a window and turning his back to his friend leaned
out. "i know who i'm going to fall in love
 
 ___________________________
 
ossing a little
dusty street and climbing a low iron railing, he went
to sit upon the grass in the station yard. george
willard he thought a profound fool, and he wished that
he had said so more vigorously. although his
acquaintanceship with helen white, the banker's
daughter, was outwardly but casual, she was often the
subject of his thoughts and he felt that she was
something private and personal to himself. "the busy
fool with his love stories," he muttered, staring back
over his shoulder at george willard's room, "why does
he never tire of his eternal talking."

it was berry harvest time in winesburg and upon the
station platform men and boys loaded the boxes of red,
fragrant berries into two express cars that stood upon
the siding. a june moon was in the sky, although in the
west a storm threatened, and no street lamps were
lighted. in the dim light the figures of the men
standing upon the express truck and pitching the boxes
in at the doors of the cars were but dimly discernible.
upon the iron
 
 ___________________________
 
rk! steady now, old
boy!" the old man shouted to himself, and laughed so
that the load of boards rocked dangerously.

seth knew turk smollet, the half dangerous old wood
chopper whose peculiarities added so much of color to
the life of the village. he knew that when turk got
into main street he would become the center of a
whirlwind of cries and comments, that in truth the old
man was going far out of his way in order to pass
through main street and exhibit his skill in wheeling
the boards. "if george willard were here, he'd have
something to say," thought seth. "george belongs to
this town. he'd shout at turk and turk would shout at
him. they'd both be secretly pleased by what they had
said. it's different with me. i don't belong. i'll not
make a fuss about it, but i'm going to get out of
here."

seth stumbled forward through the half-darkness,
feeling himself an outcast in his own town. he began to
pity himself, but a sense of the absurdity of his
thoughts made him smile. in the end he decided tha
 
 ___________________________
 
n
gate. standing outside the gate, the man leaned over
and kissed the woman. "for old times' sake," he said
and, turning, walked rapidly away along the sidewalk.

"that's belle turner," whispered helen, and put her
hand boldly into seth's hand. "i didn't know she had a
fellow. i thought she was too old for that." seth
laughed uneasily. the hand of the girl was warm and a
strange, dizzy feeling crept over him. into his mind
came a desire to tell her something he had been
determined not to tell. "george willard's in love with
you," he said, and in spite of his agitation his voice
was low and quiet. "he's writing a story, and he wants
to be in love. he wants to know how it feels. he wanted
me to tell you and see what you said."

again helen and seth walked in silence. they came to
the garden surrounding the old richmond place and going
through a gap in the hedge sat on a wooden bench
beneath a bush.

on the street as he walked beside the girl new and
daring thoughts had come into seth richmond's mind. 
 
 ___________________________
 
and flashes of heat lightning lit
up the eastern sky. the garden that had been so
mysterious and vast, a place that with seth beside her
might have become the background for strange and
wonderful adventures, now seemed no more than an
ordinary winesburg back yard, quite definite and
limited in its outlines.

"what will you do up there?" she whispered.

seth turned half around on the bench, striving to see
her face in the darkness. he thought her infinitely
more sensible and straightforward than george willard,
and was glad he had come away from his friend. a
feeling of impatience with the town that had been in
his mind returned, and he tried to tell her of it.
"everyone talks and talks," he began. "i'm sick of it.
i'll do something, get into some kind of work where
talk don't count. maybe i'll just be a mechanic in a
shop. i don't know. i guess i don't care much. i just
want to work and keep quiet. that's all i've got in my
mind."

seth arose from the bench and put out his hand. he did
not want to b
 
 ___________________________
 
d, turning and staring in the
direction taken by helen white. "that's how things'll
turn out. she'll be like the rest. i suppose she'll
begin now to look at me in a funny way." he looked at
the ground and pondered this thought. "she'll be
embarrassed and feel strange when i'm around," he
whispered to himself. "that's how it'll be. that's how
everything'll turn out. when it comes to loving
someone, it won't never be me. it'll be someone
else--some fool--someone who talks a lot--someone like
that george willard."




tandy

until she was seven years old she lived in an old
unpainted house on an unused road that led off trunion
pike. her father gave her but little attention and her
mother was dead. the father spent his time talking and
thinking of religion. he proclaimed himself an agnostic
and was so absorbed in destroying the ideas of god that
had crept into the minds of his neighbors that he never
saw god manifesting himself in the little child that,
half forgotten, lived here and there on the bount
 
 ___________________________
 
as
destroying him.

his sojourn in winesburg was not a success. the
dullness of the passing hours led to his drinking
harder than ever. but he did succeed in doing
something. he gave a name rich with meaning to tom
hard's daughter.

one evening when he was recovering from a long debauch
the stranger came reeling along the main street of the
town. tom hard sat in a chair before the new willard
house with his daughter, then a child of five, on his
knees. beside him on the board sidewalk sat young
george willard. the stranger dropped into a chair
beside them. his body shook and when he tried to talk
his voice trembled.

it was late evening and darkness lay over the town and
over the railroad that ran along the foot of a little
incline before the hotel. somewhere in the distance,
off to the west, there was a prolonged blast from the
whistle of a passenger engine. a dog that had been
sleeping in the roadway arose and barked. the stranger
began to babble and made a prophecy concerning the
child that lay i
 
 ___________________________
 
began to pray. in the
lamplight her figure, slim and strong, looked like the
figure of the boy in the presence of the christ on the
leaded window.

curtis hartman never remembered how he got out of the
church. with a cry he arose, dragging the heavy desk
along the floor. the bible fell, making a great clatter
in the silence. when the light in the house next door
went out he stumbled down the stairway and into the
street. along the street he went and ran in at the door
of the winesburg eagle. to george willard, who was
tramping up and down in the office undergoing a
struggle of his own, he began to talk half
incoherently. "the ways of god are beyond human
understanding," he cried, running in quickly and
closing the door. he began to advance upon the young
man, his eyes glowing and his voice ringing with
fervor. "i have found the light," he cried. "after ten
years in this town, god has manifested himself to me in
the body of a woman." his voice dropped and he began to
whisper. "i did not understand," 
 
 ___________________________
 
will henderson, standing
by the bar in ed griffith's saloon. out of the saloon
he went and met sylvester west the druggist stumbling
along in the kind of heavy overshoes called arctics.
"snow will bring the people into town on saturday,"
said the druggist. the two men stopped and discussed
their affairs. will henderson, who had on a light
overcoat and no overshoes, kicked the heel of his left
foot with the toe of the right. "snow will be good for
the wheat," observed the druggist sagely.

young george willard, who had nothing to do, was glad
because he did not feel like working that day. the
weekly paper had been printed and taken to the post
office wednesday evening and the snow began to fall on
thursday. at eight o'clock, after the morning train had
passed, he put a pair of skates in his pocket and went
up to waterworks pond but did not go skating. past the
pond and along a path that followed wine creek he went
until he came to a grove of beech trees. there he built
a fire against the side of a lo
 
 ___________________________
 
hall have twelve
or fifteen. in another year i shall be able to begin
advertising ferrets for sale in the sporting papers."

the nightwatchman settled into his chair and his mind
became a blank. he did not sleep. by years of practice
he had trained himself to sit for hours through the
long nights neither asleep nor awake. in the morning he
was almost as refreshed as though he had slept.

with hop higgins safely stowed away in the chair behind
the stove only three people were awake in winesburg.
george willard was in the office of the eagle
pretending to be at work on the writing of a story but
in reality continuing the mood of the morning by the
fire in the wood. in the bell tower of the presbyterian
church the reverend curtis hartman was sitting in the
darkness preparing himself for a revelation from god,
and kate swift, the school teacher, was leaving her
house for a walk in the storm.

it was past ten o'clock when kate swift set out and the
walk was unpremeditated. it was as though the man and
th
 
 ___________________________
 
e thought she had recognized the spark of genius and
wanted to blow on the spark. one day in the summer she
had gone to the eagle office and finding the boy
unoccupied had taken him out main street to the fair
ground, where the two sat on a grassy bank and talked.
the school teacher tried to bring home to the mind of
the boy some conception of the difficulties he would
have to face as a writer. "you will have to know life,"
she declared, and her voice trembled with earnestness.
she took hold of george willard's shoulders and turned
him about so that she could look into his eyes. a
passer-by might have thought them about to embrace. "if
you are to become a writer you'll have to stop fooling
with words," she explained. "it would be better to give
up the notion of writing until you are better prepared.
now it's time to be living. i don't want to frighten
you, but i would like to make you understand the import
of what you think of attempting. you must not become a
mere peddler of words. the thing to lea
 
 ___________________________
 
on of her. so strong
was her passion that it became something physical.
again her hands took hold of his shoulders and she
turned him about. in the dim light her eyes blazed. she
arose and laughed, not sharply as was customary with
her, but in a queer, hesitating way. "i must be going,"
she said. "in a moment, if i stay, i'll be wanting to
kiss you."

in the newspaper office a confusion arose. kate swift
turned and walked to the door. she was a teacher but
she was also a woman. as she looked at george willard,
the passionate desire to be loved by a man, that had a
thousand times before swept like a storm over her body,
took possession of her. in the lamplight george willard
looked no longer a boy, but a man ready to play the
part of a man.

the school teacher let george willard take her into his
arms. in the warm little office the air became suddenly
heavy and the strength went out of her body. leaning
against a low counter by the door she waited. when he
came and put a hand on her shoulder she turn
 
 ___________________________
 
ed and let
her body fall heavily against him. for george willard
the confusion was immediately increased. for a moment
he held the body of the woman tightly against his body
and then it stiffened. two sharp little fists began to
beat on his face. when the school teacher had run away
and left him alone, he walked up and down the office
swearing furiously.

it was into this confusion that the reverend curtis
hartman protruded himself. when he came in george
willard thought the town had gone mad. shaking a
bleeding fist in the air, the minister proclaimed the
w
 
 ___________________________
 
oman george had only a moment before held in his arms
an instrument of god bearing a message of truth.

            *       *       *

george blew out the lamp by the window and locking the
door of the printshop went home. through the hotel
office, past hop higgins lost in his dream of the
raising of ferrets, he went and up into his own room.
the fire in the stove had gone out and he undressed in
the cold. when he got into bed the sheets were like
blankets of dry snow.

george willard rolled about in the bed on which he had
lain in the afternoon hugging the pillow and thinking
thoughts of kate swift. the words of the minister, who
he thought had gone suddenly insane, rang in his ears.
his eyes stared about the room. the resentment, natural
to the baffled male, passed and he tried to understand
what had happened. he could not make it out. over and
over he turned the matter in his mind. hours passed and
he began to think it must be time for another day to
come. at four o'clock
 
 ___________________________
 
ng when the sun was going down behind the roof of
wesley moyer's livery barn.

about the thing that happened. enoch told george
willard about it one night. he wanted to talk to
someone, and he chose the young newspaper reporter
because the two happened to be thrown together at a
time when the younger man was in a mood to understand.

youthful sadness, young man's sadness, the sadness of a
growing boy in a village at the year's end, opened the
lips of the old man. the sadness was in the heart of
george willard and was without meaning, but it appealed
to enoch robinson.

it rained on the evening when the two met and talked, a
drizzly wet october rain. the fruition of the year had
come and the night should have been fine with a moon in
the sky and the crisp sharp promise of frost in the
air, but it wasn't that way. it rained and little
puddles of water shone under the street lamps on main
street. in the woods in the darkness beyond the fair
ground water dripped from the black trees. beneath the
trees w
 
 ___________________________
 
et leaves were pasted against tree roots that
protruded from the ground. in gardens back of houses in
winesburg dry shriveled potato vines lay sprawling on
the ground. men who had finished the evening meal and
who had planned to go uptown to talk the evening away
with other men at the back of some store changed their
minds. george willard tramped about in the rain and was
glad that it rained. he felt that way. he was like
enoch robinson on the evenings when the old man came
down out of his room and wandered alone in the streets.
he was like that only that george willard had become a
tall young man and did not think it manly to weep and
carry on. for a month his mother had been very ill and
that had something to do with his sadness, but not
much. he thought about himself and to the young that
always brings sadness.

enoch robinso
 
 ___________________________
 
n and george willard met beneath a wooden
awning that extended out over the sidewalk before
voight's wagon shop on maumee street just off the main
street of winesburg. they went together from there
through the rain-washed streets to the older man's room
on the third floor of the heffner block. the young
reporter went willingly enough. enoch robinson asked
him to go after the two had talked for ten minutes. the
boy was a little afraid but had never been more curious
in his life. a hundred times he had heard the old 
 
 ___________________________
 
ry beginning, in the street in the rain, the old man
talked in a queer way, trying to tell the story of the
room in washington square and of his life in the room.
"you'll understand if you try hard enough," he said
conclusively. "i have looked at you when you went past
me on the street and i think you can understand. it
isn't hard. all you have to do is to believe what i
say, just listen and believe, that's all there is to
it."

it was past eleven o'clock that evening when old enoch,
talking to george willard in the room in the heffner
block, came to the vital thing, the story of the woman
and of what drove him out of the city to live out his
life alone and defeated in winesburg. he sat on a cot
by the window with his head in his hand and george
willard was in a chair by a table. a kerosene lamp sat
on the table and the room, although almost bare of
furniture, was scrupulously clean. as the man talked
george willard began to feel that he would like to get
out of the chair and sit on the cot also. he
 
 ___________________________
 
don't know just what she did in her own
room. i never went there. i think she was a musician
and played a violin. every now and then she came and
knocked at the door and i opened it. in she came and
sat down beside me, just sat and looked about and said
nothing. anyway, she said nothing that mattered."

the old man arose from the cot and moved about the
room. the overcoat he wore was wet from the rain and
drops of water kept falling with a soft thump on the
floor. when he again sat upon the cot george willard
got out of the chair and sat beside him.

"i had a feeling about her. she sat there in the room
with me and she was too big for the room. i felt that
she was driving everything else away. we just talked of
little things, but i couldn't sit still. i wanted to
touch her with my fingers and to kiss her. her hands
were so strong and her face was so good and she looked
at me all the time."

the trembling voice of the old man became silent and
his body shook as from a chill. "i was afraid," he
whispe
 
 ___________________________
 
red. "i was terribly afraid. i didn't want to let
her come in when she knocked at the door but i couldn't
sit still. 'no, no,' i said to myself, but i got up and
opened the door just the same. she was so grown up, you
see. she was a woman. i thought she would be bigger
than i was there in that room."

enoch robinson stared at george willard, his childlike
blue eyes shining in the lamplight. again he shivered.
"i wanted her and all the time i didn't want her," he
explained. "then i began to tell her about my people,
about everything that meant anything to me. i tried to
keep quiet, to keep myself to myself, but i couldn't. i
felt just as i did about opening the door. sometimes i
ached to have her go away and never come back any
more."

the old man sprang to his feet and his voice shook with
excitement. "one night something happened
 
 ___________________________
 
e.
i was furious. i couldn't stand it. i wanted her to
understand but, don't you see, i couldn't let her
understand. i felt that then she would know everything,
that i would be submerged, drowned out, you see. that's
how it is. i don't know why."

the old man dropped into a chair by the lamp and the
boy listened, filled with awe. "go away, boy," said the
man. "don't stay here with me any more. i thought it
might be a good thing to tell you but it isn't. i don't
want to talk any more. go away."

george willard shook his head and a note of command
came into his voice. "don't stop now. tell me the rest
of it," he commanded sharply. "what happened? tell me
the rest of the story."

enoch robinson sprang to his feet and ran to the window
that looked down into the deserted main street of
winesburg. george willard followed. by the window the
two stood, the tall awkward boy-man and the little
wrinkled man-boy. the childish, eager voice carried
forward the tale. "i swore at her," he explained. "i
said vile wo
 
 ___________________________
 
kept at it. i
screamed and stamped on the floor. i made the house
ring with my curses. i didn't want ever to see her
again and i knew, after some of the things i said, that
i never would see her again."

the old man's voice broke and he shook his head.
"things went to smash," he said quietly and sadly. "out
she went through the door and all the life there had
been in the room followed her out. she took all of my
people away. they all went out through the door after
her. that's the way it was."

george willard turned and went out of enoch robinson's
room. in the darkness by the window, as he went through
the door, he could hear the thin old voice whimpering
and complaining. "i'm alone, all alone here," said the
voice. "it was warm and friendly in my room but now i'm
all alone."




an awakening

belle carpenter had a dark skin, grey eyes, and thick
lips. she was tall and strong. when black thoughts
visited her she grew angry and wished she were a man
and could fight someone with her fists. she worked
 
 ___________________________
 
cover his
equilibrium for a week.

the bank cashier was a little bully and was afraid of
his daughter. she, he realized, knew the story of his
brutal treatment of her mother and hated him for it.
one day she went home at noon and carried a handful of
soft mud, taken from the road, into the house. with the
mud she smeared the face of the boards used for the
pressing of trousers and then went back to her work
feeling relieved and happy.

belle carpenter occasionally walked out in the evening
with george willard. secretly she loved another man,
but her love affair, about which no one knew, caused
her much anxiety. she was in love with ed handby,
bartender in ed griffith's saloon, and went about with
the young reporter as a kind of relief to her feelings.
she did not think that her station in life would permit
her to be seen in the company of the bartender and
walked about under the trees with george willard and
let him kiss her to relieve a longing that was very
insistent in her nature. she felt that s
 
 ___________________________
 
he next time," he said. "you
might as well make up your mind to that. it's you and
me for it and i'm going to have you before i get
through."

one night in january when there was a new moon george
willard, who was in ed handby's mind the only obstacle
to his getting belle carpenter, went for a walk. early
that evening george went into ransom surbeck's pool
room with seth richmond and art wilson, son of the town
butcher. seth richmond stood with his back against the
wall and remained silent, but george willard talked.
the pool room was filled with winesburg boys and they
talked of women. the young reporter got into that vein.
he said that women should look out for themselves, that
the fellow who went out with a girl was not responsible
for what happened. as he talked he looked about, eager
for attention. he held the floor for five minutes and
then art wilson began to talk. art was learning the
barber's trade in cal prouse's shop and already began
to consider himself an authority in such matters as
ba
 
 ___________________________
 
n to tell of a night when he with two men
from winesburg went into a house of prostitution at the
county seat. the butcher's son held a cigar in the side
of his mouth and as he talked spat on the floor. "the
women in the place couldn't embarrass me although they
tried hard enough," he boasted. "one of the girls in
the house tried to get fresh, but i fooled her. as soon
as she began to talk i went and sat in her lap.
everyone in the room laughed when i kissed her. i
taught her to let me alone."

george willard went out of the pool room and into main
street. for days the weather had been bitter cold with
a high wind blowing down on the town from lake erie,
eighteen miles to the north, but on that night the wind
had died away and a new moon made the night unusually
lovely. without thinking where he was going or what he
wanted to do, george went out of main street and began
walking in dimly lighted streets filled with frame
houses.

out of doors under the black sky filled with stars he
forgot his compan
 
 ___________________________
 
mies and for men too," he muttered, lost in
reflection. "the law begins with little things and
spreads out until it covers everything. in every little
thing there must be order, in the place where men work,
in their clothes, in their thoughts. i myself must be
orderly. i must learn that law. i must get myself into
touch with something orderly and big that swings
through the night like a star. in my little way i must
begin to learn something, to give and swing and work
with life, with the law."

george willard stopped by a picket fence near a street
lamp and his body began to tremble. he had never before
thought such thoughts as had just come into his head
and he wondered where they had come from. for the
moment it seemed to him that some voice outside of
himself had been talking as he walked. he was amazed
and delighted with his own mind and when he walked on
again spoke of the matter with fervor. "to come out of
ransom surbeck's pool room and think things like that,"
he whispered. "it is better to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ant lot and throwing back his head looked up at the
sky. he felt unutterably big and remade by the simple
experience through which he had been passing and in a
kind of fervor of emotion put up his hands, thrusting
them into the darkness above his head and muttering
words. the desire to say words overcame him and he said
words without meaning, rolling them over on his tongue
and saying them because they were brave words, full of
meaning. "death," he muttered, "night, the sea, fear,
loveliness."

george willard came out of the vacant lot and stood
again on the sidewalk facing the houses. he felt that
all of the people in the little street must be brothers
and sisters to him and he wished he had the courage to
call them out of their houses and to shake their hands.
"if there were only a woman here i would take hold of
her hand and we would run until we were both tired
out," he thought. "that would make me feel better."
with the thought of a woman in his mind he walked out
of the street and went toward 
 
 ___________________________
 
purpose and
had not enjoyed the feeling. now he thought he had
suddenly become too big to be used.

when george got to belle carpenter's house there had
already been a visitor there before him. ed handby had
come to the door and calling belle out of the house had
tried to talk to her. he had wanted to ask the woman to
come away with him and to be his wife, but when she
came and stood by the door he lost his self-assurance
and became sullen. "you stay away from that kid," he
growled, thinking of george willard, and then, not
knowing what else to say, turned to go away. "if i
catch you together i will break your bones and his
too," he added. the bartender had come to woo, not to
threaten, and was angry with himself because of his
failure.

when her lover had departed belle went indoors and ran
hurriedly upstairs. from a window at the upper part of
the house she saw ed handby cross the street and sit
down on a horse block before the house of a neighbor.
in the dim light the man sat motionless holding h
 
 ___________________________
 
is
head in his hands. she was made happy by the sight, and
when george willard came to the door she greeted him
effusively and hurriedly put on her hat. she thought
that, as she walked through the streets with young
willard, ed handby would follow and she wanted to make
him suffer.

for an hour belle carpenter and the young reporter
walked about under the trees in the sweet night air.
george willard was full of big words. the sense of
power that had come to him during the hour in the
darkness in the alleyway remained with him and he
talked boldly, swaggering along and swinging his arms
about. he wanted to make belle carpenter realize that
he was aware of his former weakness and that he had
changed. "you'll find me different," he declared,
thrusting his hands into his pockets and looking boldly
into her eyes. "i don't know why but it is so. you've
got to take me for a man or let me alone. t
 
 ___________________________
 
e listening to his words, the
fact that she had accompanied him to this place took
all his doubts away. "it is different. everything has
become different," he thought and taking hold of her
shoulder turned her about and stood looking at her, his
eyes shining with pride.

belle carpenter did not resist. when he kissed her
upon the lips she leaned heavily against him and looked
over his shoulder into the darkness. in her whole
attitude there was a suggestion of waiting. again, as
in the alleyway, george willard's mind ran off into
words and, holding the woman tightly he whispered the
words into the still night. "lust," he whispered, "lust
and night and women."

george willard did not understand what happened to him
that night on the hillside. later, when he got to his
own room, he wanted to weep and then grew half insane
with anger and hate. he hated belle carpenter and was
sure that all his life he would continue to hate her.
on the hillside he had led the woman to one of the
little open spaces among
 
 ___________________________
 
 his purpose without using his
fists. gripping george by the shoulder and pulling him
to his feet, he held him with one hand while he looked
at belle carpenter seated on the grass. then with a
quick wide movement of his arm he sent the younger man
sprawling away into the bushes and began to bully the
woman, who had risen to her feet. "you're no good," he
said roughly. "i've half a mind not to bother with you.
i'd let you alone if i didn't want you so much."

on his hands and knees in the bushes george willard
stared at the scene before him and tried hard to think.
he prepared to spring at the man who had humiliated
him. to be beaten seemed to be infinitely better than
to be thus hurled ignominiously aside.

three times the young reporter sprang at ed handby and
each time the bartender, catching him by the shoulder,
hurled him back into the bushes. the older man seemed
prepared to keep the exercise going indefinitely but
george willard's head struck the root of a tree and he
lay still. then ed handby
 
 ___________________________
 
cost them much to live. his
troubles were not financial. his unhappiness as a
merchant lay in the fact that when a traveling man with
wares to be sold came in at the front door he was
afraid. behind the counter he stood shaking his head.
he was afraid, first that he would stubbornly refuse to
buy and thus lose the opportunity to sell again; second
that he would not be stubborn enough and would in a
moment of weakness buy what could not be sold.

in the store on the morning when elmer cowley saw
george willard standing and apparently listening at the
back door of the eagle printshop, a situation had
arisen that always stirred the son's wrath. the
traveling man talked and ebenezer listened, his whole
figure expressing uncertainty. "you see how quickly it
is done," said the traveling man, who had for sale a
small flat metal substitute for collar buttons. with
one hand he quickly unfastened a collar from his shirt
and then fastened it on again. he assumed a flattering
wheedling tone. "i tell you what, m
 
 ___________________________
 


elmer cowley went out of winesburg and along a country
road that paralleled the railroad track. he did not
know where he was going or what he was going to do. in
the shelter of a deep cut where the road, after turning
sharply to the right, dipped under the tracks he
stopped and the passion that had been the cause of his
outburst in the store began to again find expression.
"i will not be queer--one to be looked at and listened
to," he declared aloud. "i'll be like other people.
i'll show that george willard. he'll find out. i'll
show him!"

the distraught young man stood in the middle of the
road and glared back at the town. he did not know the
reporter george willard and had no special feeling
concerning the tall boy who ran about town gathering
the town news. the reporter had merely come, by his
presence in the office and in the printshop of the
winesburg eagle, to stand for something in the young
merchant's mind. he thought the boy who passed and
repassed cowley & son's store and who stopped to
 
 ___________________________
 
 talk
to people in the street must be thinking of him and
perhaps laughing at him. george willard, he felt,
belonged to the town, typified the town, represented in
his person the spirit of the town. elmer cowley could
not have believed that george willard had also his days
of unhappiness, that vague hungers and secret unnamable
desires visited also his mind. did he not represent
public opinion and had not the public opinion of
winesburg condemned the cowleys to queerness? did he
not walk whistling and laughing through main street?
might not one by striking his person strike also the
greater enemy--the thing that smiled and went its own
way--the judgment of winesburg?

elmer cowley was extraordinarily tall and his arms were
long and powerful. his
 
 ___________________________
 
n on the log by the
fire, elmer turned and glared at him as he had glared
back along the road at the town of winesburg. "go on
back to work," he screamed. "what good does it do me to
talk to you?" a thought came to him and his voice
dropped. "i'm a coward too, eh?" he muttered. "do you
know why i came clear out here afoot? i had to tell
someone and you were the only one i could tell. i
hunted out another queer one, you see. i ran away,
that's what i did. i couldn't stand up to someone like
that george willard. i had to come to you. i ought to
tell him and i will."

again his voice arose to a shout and his arms flew
about. "i will tell him. i won't be queer. i don't care
what they think. i won't stand it."

elmer cowley ran out of the woods leaving the half-wit
sitting on the log before the fire. presently the old
man arose and climbing over the fence went back to his
work in the corn. "i'll be washed and ironed and
starched," he declared. "well, well, i'll be washed and
ironed." mook was interested.
 
 ___________________________
 
 he went along a lane to a
field where two cows stood nibbling at a straw stack.
"elmer was here," he said to the cows. "elmer is crazy.
you better get behind the stack where he don't see you.
he'll hurt someone yet, elmer will."

at eight o'clock that evening elmer cowley put his head
in at the front door of the office of the winesburg
eagle where george willard sat writing. his cap was
pulled down over his eyes and a sullen determined look
was on his face. "you come on outside with me," he
said, stepping in and closing the door. he kept his
hand on the knob as though prepared to resist anyone
else coming in. "you just come along outside. i want to
see you."

george willard and elmer cowley walked through the main
street of winesburg. the night was cold and george
willard had on a new overcoat and looked very spruce
and dressed up. he thrust his hands 
 
 ___________________________
 
there isn't anyone
running," he thought.

in the main street of winesburg, on the cold november
evening, but few citizens appeared and these hurried
along bent on getting to the stove at the back of some
store. the windows of the stores were frosted and the
wind rattled the tin sign that hung over the entrance
to the stairway leading to doctor welling's office.
before hern's grocery a basket of apples and a rack
filled with new brooms stood on the sidewalk. elmer
cowley stopped and stood facing george willard. he
tried to talk and his arms began to pump up and down.
his face worked spasmodically. he seemed about to
shout. "oh, you go on back," he cried. "don't stay out
here with me. i ain't got anything to tell you. i don't
want to see you at all."

for three hours the distracted young merchant wandered
through the resident streets of winesburg blind with
anger, brought on by his failure to declare his
determination not to be queer. bitterly the sense of
defeat settled upon him and he wanted to weep
 
 ___________________________
 
n. he would steal a ride on the local and when he
got to cleveland would lose himself in the crowds
there. he would get work in some shop and become
friends with the other workmen and would be
indistinguishable. then he could talk and laugh. he
would no longer be queer and would make friends. life
would begin to have warmth and meaning for him as it
had for others.

the tall awkward young man, striding through the
streets, laughed at himself because he had been angry
and had been half afraid of george willard. he decided
he would have his talk with the young reporter before
he left town, that he would tell him about things,
perhaps challenge him, challenge all of winesburg
through him.

aglow with new confidence elmer went to the office of
the new willard house and pounded on the door. a
sleep-eyed boy slept on a cot in the office. he
received no salary but was fed at the hotel table and
bore with pride the title of "night clerk." before the
boy elmer was bold, insistent. "you 'wake him up," he
comm
 
 ___________________________
 
in. he wet his lips with his
tongue and looked at the train that had begun to groan
and get under way. "well, you see," he began, and then
lost control of his tongue. "i'll be washed and ironed.
i'll be washed and ironed and starched," he muttered
half incoherently.

elmer cowley danced with fury beside the groaning train
in the darkness on the station platform. lights leaped
into the air and bobbed up and down before his eyes.
taking the two ten-dollar bills from his pocket he
thrust them into george willard's hand. "take them," he
cried. "i don't want them. give them to father. i stole
them." with a snarl of rage he turned and his long arms
began to flay the air. like one struggling for release
from hands that held him he struck out, hitting george
willard blow after blow on the breast, the neck, the
mouth. the young reporter rolled over on the platform
half unconscious, stunned by the terrific force of the
blows. springing aboard the passing train and running
over the tops of cars, elmer sprang d
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was sure to meet the down train but
windpeter slashed at him with his whip and drove on.
when the train struck and killed him and his two horses
a farmer and his wife who were driving home along a
nearby road saw the accident. they said that old
windpeter stood up on the seat of his wagon, raving and
swearing at the onrushing locomotive, and that he
fairly screamed with delight when the team, maddened by
his incessant slashing at them, rushed straight ahead
to certain death. boys like young george willard and
seth richmond will remember the incident quite vividly
because, although everyone in our town said that the
old man would go straight to hell and that the
community was better off without him, they had a secret
conviction that he knew what he was doing and admired
his foolish courage. most boys have seasons of wishing
they could die gloriously instead of just being grocery
clerks and going on with their humdrum lives.

but this is not the story of windpeter winters nor yet
of his son hal wh
 
 ___________________________
 
e said again.

for three hours the two young men, thus strangely
thrown together, stayed in the printshop. when he had a
little recovered george took tom for a walk. they went
into the country and sat on a log near the edge of a
wood. something in the still night drew them together
and when the drunken boy's head began to clear they
talked.

"it was good to be drunk," tom foster said. "it taught
me something. i won't have to do it again. i will think
more dearly after this. you see how it is."

george willard did not see, but his anger concerning
helen white passed and he felt drawn toward the pale,
shaken boy as he had never before been drawn toward
anyone. with motherly solicitude, he insisted that tom
get to his feet and walk about. again they went back to
the printshop and sat in silence in the darkness.

the reporter could not get the purpose of tom foster's
action straightened out in his mind. when tom spoke
again of helen white he again grew angry and began to
scold. "you quit that," he said 
 
 ___________________________
 
sharply. "you haven't
been with her. what makes you say you have? what makes
you keep saying such things? now you quit it, do you
hear?"

tom was hurt. he couldn't quarrel with george willard
because he was incapable of quarreling, so he got up to
go away. when george willard was insistent he put out
his hand, laying it on the older boy's arm, and tried
to explain.

"well," he said softly, "i don't know how it was. i was
happy. you see how that was. helen white made me happy
and the night did too. i wanted to suffer, to be hurt
somehow. i thought that was what i should do. i wanted
to suffer, you see, because everyone suffers and does
wrong. i thought of a lot of things to do, but they
wouldn't work. they all hurt someone else."

tom foster's voice arose, and for on
 
 ___________________________
 
s mother's mind had played with
the thought of death. he closed his eyes and imagined
that the red young lips of helen white touched his own
lips. his body trembled and his hands shook. and then
something happened. the boy sprang to his feet and
stood stiffly. he looked at the figure of the dead
woman under the sheets and shame for his thoughts swept
over him so that he began to weep. a new notion came
into his mind and he turned and looked guiltily about
as though afraid he would be observed.

george willard became possessed of a madness to lift
the sheet from the body of his mother and look at her
face. the thought that had come into his mind gripped
him terribly. he became convinced that not his mother
but someone else lay in the bed before him. the
conviction was so real that it was almost unbearable.
the body under the sheets was long and in death looked
young and graceful. to the boy, held by some strange
fancy, it was unspeakably lovely. the feeling that the
body before him was alive, that in
 
 ___________________________
 
ift, who had come to
watch over the body, came out of an adjoining room he
put his hand into hers and began to sob, shaking his
head from side to side, half blind with grief. "my
mother is dead," he said, and then forgetting the woman
he turned and stared at the door through which he had
just come. "the dear, the dear, oh the lovely dear,"
the boy, urged by some impulse outside himself,
muttered aloud.

as for the eight hundred dollars the dead woman had
kept hidden so long and that was to give george willard
his start in the city, it lay in the tin box behind the
plaster by the foot of his mother's bed. elizabeth had
put it there a week after her marriage, breaking the
plaster away with a stick. then she got one of the
workmen her husband was at that time employing about
the hotel to mend the wall. "i jammed the corner of the
bed against it," she had explained to her husband,
unable at the moment to give up her dream of release,
the release that after all came to her but twice in her
life, in the m
 
 ___________________________
 
n the straw scattered
on wagon beds. their hair was full of dust and their
fingers black and sticky. the dust rolled away over the
fields and the departing sun set it ablaze with colors.

in the main street of winesburg crowds filled the
stores and the sidewalks. night came on, horses
whinnied, the clerks in the stores ran madly about,
children became lost and cried lustily, an american
town worked terribly at the task of amusing itself.

pushing his way through the crowds in main street,
young george willard concealed himself in the stairway
leading to doctor reefy's office and looked at the
people. with feverish eyes he watched the faces
drifting past under the store lights. thoughts kept
coming into his head and he did not want to think. he
stamped impatiently on the wooden steps and looked
sharply about. "well, is she going to stay with him all
day? have i done all this waiting for nothing?" he
muttered.

george willard, the ohio village boy, was fast growing
into manhood and new thoughts had be
 
 ___________________________
 
d and a stranger. she knew that the fact of his
presence would create an impression. during the day she
was happy, but when night came on she began to grow
restless. she wanted to drive the instructor away, to
get out of his presence. while they sat together in the
grand-stand and while the eyes of former schoolmates
were upon them, she paid so much attention to her
escort that he grew interested. "a scholar needs money.
i should marry a woman with money," he mused.

helen white was thinking of george willard even as he
wandered gloomily through the crowds thinking of her.
she remembered the summer evening when they had walked
together and wanted to walk with him again. she thought
that the months she had spent in the city, the going to
theaters and the seeing of great crowds wandering in
lighted thoroughfares, had changed her profoundly. she
wanted him to feel and be conscious of the change in
her nature.

the summer evening together that had left its mark on
the memory of both the young man and wo
 
 ___________________________
 
s livery
barn and stopped in the shadows to listen to a group of
men who talked of a race wesley's stallion, tony tip,
had won at the fair during the afternoon. a crowd had
gathered in front of the barn and before the crowd
walked wesley, prancing up and down boasting. he held a
whip in his hand and kept tapping the ground. little
puffs of dust arose in the lamplight. "hell, quit your
talking," wesley exclaimed. "i wasn't afraid, i knew i
had 'em beat all the time. i wasn't afraid."

ordinarily george willard would have been intensely
interested in the boasting of moyer, the horseman. now
it made him angry. he turned and hurried away along the
street. "old windbag," he sputtered. "why does he want
to be bragging? why don't he shut up?"

george went into a vacant lot and, as he hurried along,
fell over a pile of rubbish. a nail protruding from an
empty barrel tore his trousers. he sat down on the
ground and swore. with a pin he mended the torn place
and then arose and went on. "i'll go to helen white
 
 ___________________________
 
n a flight of stairs at the back of the
house and into the garden. in the darkness she stopped
and stood trembling. it seemed to her that the world
was full of meaningless people saying words. afire with
eagerness she ran through a garden gate and, turning a
corner by the banker's barn, went into a little side
street. "george! where are you, george?" she cried,
filled with nervous excitement. she stopped running,
and leaned against a tree to laugh hysterically. along
the dark little street came george willard, still
saying words. "i'm going to walk right into her house.
i'll go right in and sit down," he declared as he came
up to her. he stopped and stared stupidly. "come on,"
he said and took hold of her hand. with hanging heads
they walked away along the street under the trees. dry
leaves rustled under foot. now that he had found her
george wondered what he had better do and say.

            *       *       *

at the upper end of the fair ground, in winesburg,
there is a half decayed old grand-st
 
 ___________________________
 
e and helen climbed the hill to the fair ground,
coming by the path past waterworks pond. the feeling of
loneliness and isolation that had come to the young man
in the crowded streets of his town was both broken and
intensified by the presence of helen. what he felt was
reflected in her.

in youth there are always two forces fighting in
people. the warm unthinking little animal struggles
against the thing that reflects and remembers, and the
older, the more sophisticated thing had possession of
george willard. sensing his mood, helen walked beside
him filled with respect. when they got to the
grand-stand they climbed up under the roof and sat down
on one of the long bench-like seats.

there is something memorable in the experience to be
had by going into a fair ground that stands at the edge
of a middle western town on a night after the annual
fair has been held. the sensation is one never to be
forgotten. on all sides are ghosts, not of the dead,
but of living people. here, during the day just pass
 
 ___________________________
 
s itched and squirmed
with life and now it is night and the life has all gone
away. the silence is almost terrifying. one conceals
oneself standing silently beside the trunk of a tree
and what there is of a reflective tendency in his
nature is intensified. one shudders at the thought of
the meaninglessness of life while at the same instant,
and if the people of the town are his people, one loves
life so intensely that tears come into the eyes.

in the darkness under the roof of the grand-stand,
george willard sat beside helen white and felt very
keenly his own insignificance in the scheme of
existence. now that he had come out of town where the
presence of the people stirring about, busy with a
multitude of affairs, had been so irritating, the
irritation was all gone. the presence of helen renewed
and refreshed him. it was as though her woman's hand
was assisting him to make some minute readjustment of
the machinery of his life. he began to think of the
people in the town where he had always lived w
 
 ___________________________
 
 the crowded day had run itself out into
the long night of the late fall. farm horses jogged
away along lonely country roads pulling their portion
of weary people. clerks began to bring samples of goods
in off the sidewalks and lock the doors of stores. in
the opera house a crowd had gathered to see a show and
further down main street the fiddlers, their
instruments tuned, sweated and worked to keep the feet
of youth flying over a dance floor.

in the darkness in the grand-stand helen white and
george willard remained silent. now and then the spell
that held them was broken and they turned and tried in
the dim light to see into each other's eyes. they
kissed but that impulse did not last. at the upper end
of the fair ground a half dozen men worked over horses
that had raced during the afternoon. the men had built
a fire and were heating kettles of water. only their
legs could be seen as they passed back and forth in the
light. when the wind blew the little flames of the fire
danced crazily about.

g
 
 ___________________________
 
darkness.
there was no way of knowing what woman's thoughts went
through her mind but, when the bottom of the hill was
reached and she came up to the boy, she took his arm
and walked beside him in dignified silence. for some
reason they could not have explained they had both got
from their silent evening together the thing needed.
man or boy, woman or girl, they had for a moment taken
hold of the thing that makes the mature life of men and
women in the modern world possible.



departure

young george willard got out of bed at four in the
morning. it was april and the young tree leaves were
just coming out of their buds. the trees along the
residence streets in winesburg are maple and the seeds
are winged. when the wind blows they whirl crazily
about, filling the air and making a carpet underfoot.

george came downstairs into the hotel office carrying a
brown leather bag. his trunk was packed for departure.
since two o'clock he had been awake thinking of the
journey he was about to take and wonderin
 
 ___________________________
 
 voiced what
everyone felt. "good luck," she said sharply and then
turning went on her way.

when the train came into the station george felt
relieved. he scampered hurriedly aboard. helen white
came running along main street hoping to have a parting
word with him, but he had found a seat and did not see
her. when the train started tom little punched his
ticket, grinned and, although he knew george well and
knew on what adventure he was just setting out, made no
comment. tom had seen a thousand george willards go out
of their towns to the city. it was a commonplace enough
incident with him. in the smoking car there was a man
who had just invited tom to go on a fishing trip to
sandusky bay. he wanted to accept the invitation and
talk over details.

george glanced up and down the car to be sure no one
was looking, then took out his pocket-book and counted
his money. his mind was occupied with a desire not to
appear green. almost the last words his father had said
to him concerned the matter of his beh