blow on the breast, the neck, the
mouth. the young reporter rolled over on the platform
half unconscious, stunned by the terrific force of the
blows. springing aboard the passing train and running
over the tops of cars, elmer sprang down to a flat car
and lying on his face looked back, trying to see the
fallen man in the darkness. pride surged up in him. "i
showed him," he cried. "i guess i showed him. i ain't
so queer. i guess i showed him i ain't so queer."




the untold lie

ray pearson and hal winters were farm hands employed on
a farm three miles north of winesburg. on saturday
afternoons they came into town and wandered about
through the streets with other fellows from the
country.

ray was a quiet, rather nervous man of perhaps fifty
with a brown beard and shoulders rounded by too much
and too hard labor. in his nature he was as unlike hal
winters as two men can be unlike.

ray was an altogether serious man and had a little
sharp-featured wife who had also a sharp voice. the
two, with hal
 
 ___________________________
 
f a dozen thin-legged children, lived in a
tumble-down frame house beside a creek at the back end
of the wills farm where ray was employed.

hal winters, his fellow employee, was a young fellow.
he was not of the ned winters family, who were very
respectable people in winesburg, but was one of the
three sons of the old man called windpeter winters who
had a sawmill near unionville, six miles away, and who
was looked upon by everyone in winesburg as a confirmed
old reprobate.

people from the part of northern ohio in which
winesburg lies will remember old windpeter by his
unusual and tragic death. he got drunk one evening in
town and started to 
 
 ___________________________
 
o loaf about and
smoke his pipe. his marriage had come about through one
of his days of wandering. he had induced a girl who
waited on trade in his father's shop to go with him and
something had happened. he was thinking of that
afternoon and how it had affected his whole life when a
spirit of protest awoke in him. he had forgotten about
hal and muttered words. "tricked by gad, that's what i
was, tricked by life and made a fool of," he said in a
low voice.

as though understanding his thoughts, hal winters spoke
up. "well, has it been worth while? what about it, eh?
what about marriage and all that?" he asked and then
laughed. hal tried to keep on laughing but he too was
in an earnest mood. he began to talk earnestly. "has a
fellow got to do it?" he asked. "has he got to be
harnessed up and driven through life like a horse?"

hal didn't wait for an answer but sprang to his feet
and began to walk back and forth between the corn
shocks. he was getting more and more excited. bending
down suddenly he
 
 ___________________________
 
ut what do you say? shall i marry and settle down?
shall i put myself into the harness to be worn out like
an old horse? you know me, ray. there can't anyone
break me but i can break myself. shall i do it or shall
i tell nell to go to the devil? come on, you tell me.
whatever you say, ray, i'll do."

ray couldn't answer. he shook hal's hands loose and
turning walked straight away toward the barn. he was a
sensitive man and there were tears in his eyes. he knew
there was only one thing to say to hal winters, son of
old windpeter winters, only one thing that all his own
training and all the beliefs of the people he knew
would approve, but for his life he couldn't say what he
knew he should say.

at half-past four that afternoon ray was puttering
about the barnyard when his wife came up the lane along
the creek and called him. after the talk with hal he
hadn't returned to the cornfield but worked about the
barn. he had already done the evening chores and had
seen hal, dressed and ready for a roister
 
 ___________________________
 
 he ran he remembered his children and in fancy
felt their hands clutching at him. all of his thoughts
of himself were involved with the thoughts of hal and
he thought the children were clutching at the younger
man also. "they are the accidents of life, hal," he
cried. "they are not mine or yours. i had nothing to do
with them."

darkness began to spread over the fields as ray pearson
ran on and on. his breath came in little sobs. when he
came to the fence at the edge of the road and
confronted hal winters, all dressed up and smoking a
pipe as he walked jauntily along, he could not have
told what he thought or what he wanted.

ray pearson lost his nerve and this is really the end
of the story of what happened to him. it was almost
dark when he got to the fence and he put his hands on
the top bar and stood staring. hal winters jumped a
ditch and coming up close to ray put his hands into his
pockets and laughed. he seemed to have lost his own
sense of what had happened in the corn field and when
he
 
 ___________________________
 
old of the lapel of
ray's coat he shook the old man as he might have shaken
a dog that had misbehaved.

"you came to tell me, eh?" he said. "well, never mind
telling me anything. i'm not a coward and i've already
made up my mind." he laughed again and jumped back
across the ditch. "nell ain't no fool," he said. "she
didn't ask me to marry her. i want to marry her. i want
to settle down and have kids."

ray pearson also laughed. he felt like laughing at
himself and all the world.

as the form of hal winters disappeared in the dusk that
lay over the road that led to winesburg, he turned and
walked slowly back across the fields to where he had
left his torn overcoat. as he went some memory of
pleasant evenings spent with the thin-legged children
in the tumble-down house by the creek must have come
into his mind, for he muttered words. "it's just as
well. whatever i told him would have been a lie," he
said softly, and then his form also disappeared into
the darkness of the fields.




drink

tom fost