d, fascinated. joe welling
again talked excitedly. "take milkweed now," he cried.
"a lot might be done with milkweed, eh? it's almost
unbelievable. i want you to think about it. i want you
two to think about it. there would be a new vegetable
kingdom you see. it's interesting, eh? it's an idea.
wait till you see sarah, she'll get the idea. she'll be
interested. sarah is always interested in ideas. you
can't be too smart for sarah, now can you? of course
you can't. you know that."




adventure

alice hindman, a woman of twenty-seven when george
willard was a mere boy, had lived in winesburg all her
life. she clerked in winney's dry goods store and lived
with her mother, who had married a second husband.

alice's step-father was a carriage painter, and given
to drink. his story is an odd one. it will be worth
telling some day.

at twenty-seven alice was tall and somewhat slight.
her head was large and overshadowed her body. her
shoulders were a little stooped and her hair and eyes
brown. she was ver
 
 ___________________________
 
h had passed. for the first time
she felt that she had been cheated. she did not blame
ned currie and did not know what to blame. sadness
swept over her. dropping to her knees, she tried to
pray, but instead of prayers words of protest came to
her lips. "it is not going to come to me. i will never
find happiness. why do i tell myself lies?" she cried,
and an odd sense of relief came with this, her first
bold attempt to face the fear that had become a part of
her everyday life.

in the year when alice hindman became twenty-five two
things happened to disturb the dull uneventfulness of
her days. her mother married bush milton, the carriage
painter of winesburg, and she herself became a member
of the winesburg methodist church. alice joined the
church because she had become frightened by the
loneliness of her position in life. her mother's second
marriage had emphasized her isolation. "i am becoming
old and queer. if ned comes he will not want me. in the
city where he is living men are perpetually you