once on a hot day in august
he tried but found it stuck fast and after that he
forgot all about it.

winesburg had forgotten the old man, but in doctor
reefy there were the seeds of something very fine.
alone in his musty office in the heffner block above
the paris dry goods company's store, he worked
ceaselessly, building up something that he himself
destroyed. little pyramids of truth he erected and
after erecting knocked them down again that he might
have the truths to erect other pyramids.

doctor reefy was a tall man who had worn one suit of
clothes for ten years. it was frayed at the sleeves and
little holes had appeared at the knees and elbows. in
the office he wore also a linen duster with huge
pockets into which he continually stuffed scraps of
paper. after some weeks the scraps of paper became
little hard round balls, and when the pockets were
filled he dumped them out upon the floor. for ten years
he had but one friend, another old man named john
spaniard who owned a tree nursery. somet
 
 ___________________________
 
imes, in a
playful mood, old doctor reefy took from his pockets a
handful of the paper balls and threw them at the
nursery man. "that is to confound you, you blathering
old sentimentalist," he cried, shaking with laughter.

the story of doctor reefy and his courtship of the tall
dark girl who became his wife and left her money to him
is a very curious story. it is delicious, like the
twisted little apples that grow in the orchards of
winesburg. in the fall one walks in the orchards and
the ground is hard with frost underfoot. the apples
have been taken from the trees by the pickers. they
have been put in barrels and shipped to the cities
where they will be eaten in apartments that are filled
with books, magazines, furniture, and people. on
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
trees are only a few gnarled apples that the pickers
have rejected. they look like the knuckles of doctor
reefy's hands. one nibbles at them and they are
delicious. into a little round place at the side of the
apple has been gathered all of its sweetness. one runs
from tree to tree over the frosted ground picking the
gnarled, twisted apples and filling his pockets with
them. only the few know the sweetness of the twisted
apples.

the girl and doctor reefy began their courtship on a
summer afternoon. he was forty-five then and already he
had begun the practice of filling his pockets with the
scraps of paper that became hard balls and were thrown
away. the habit had been formed as he sat in his buggy
behind the jaded white horse and went slowly along
country roads. on the papers were written thoughts,
ends of thoughts, beginnings of thoughts.

one by one the mind of doctor reefy had made the
thoughts. out of many of them he formed a truth that
aro
 
 ___________________________
 
se gigantic in his mind. the truth clouded the
world. it became terrible and then faded away and the
little thoughts began again.

the tall dark girl came to see doctor reefy because she
was in the family way and had become frightened. she
was in that condition because of a series of
circumstances also curious.

the death of her father and mother and the rich acres
of land that had come down to her had set a train of
suitors on her heels. for two years she saw suitors
almost every evening. except two they were all alike.
they talked to her of passion and there was a strained
eager quality in their voices and in their eyes when
they looked at her. the two who were di
 
 ___________________________
 
times it seemed to her that as he talked he
was holding her body in his hands. she imagined him
turning it slowly about in the white hands and staring
at it. at night she dreamed that he had bitten into her
body and that his jaws were dripping. she had the dream
three times, then she became in the family way to the
one who said nothing at all but who in the moment of
his passion actually did bite her shoulder so that for
days the marks of his teeth showed.

after the tall dark girl came to know doctor reefy it
seemed to her that she never wanted to leave him again.
she went into his office one morning and without her
saying anything he seemed to know what had happened to
her.

in the office of the doctor there was a woman, the wife
of the man who kept the bookstore in winesburg. like
all old-fashioned country practitioners, doctor reefy
pulled teeth, and the woman who waited held a
handkerchief to her teeth and groaned. her husband was
with her and when the tooth was taken out they both
screamed a
 
 ___________________________
 
n had gone the doctor smiled. "i will
take you driving into the country with me," he said.

for several weeks the tall dark girl and the doctor
were together almost every day. the condition that had
brought her to him passed in an illness, but she was
like one who has discovered the sweetness of the
twisted apples, she could not get her mind fixed again
upon the round perfect fruit that is eaten in the city
apartments. in the fall after the beginning of her
acquaintanceship with him she married doctor reefy and
in the following spring she died. during the winter he
read to her all of the odds and ends of thoughts he had
scribbled on the bits of paper. after he had read them
he laughed and stuffed them away in his pockets to
become round hard balls.




mother

elizabeth willard, the mother of george willard, was
tall and gaunt and her face was marked with smallpox
scars. although she was but forty-five, some obscure
disease had taken the fire out of her figure.
listlessly she went about the disord
 
 ___________________________
 
 things to do, but they
wouldn't work. they all hurt someone else."

tom foster's voice arose, and for once in his life he
became almost excited. "it was like making love, that's
what i mean," he explained. "don't you see how it is?
it hurt me to do what i did and made everything
strange. that's why i did it. i'm glad, too. it taught
me something, that's it, that's what i wanted. don't
you understand? i wanted to learn things, you see.
that's why i did it."




death

the stairway leading up to doctor reefy's office, in
the heffner block above the paris dry goods store, was
but dimly lighted. at the head of the stairway hung a
lamp with a dirty chimney that was fastened by a
bracket to the wall. the lamp had a tin reflector,
brown with rust and covered with dust. the people who
went up the stairway followed with their feet the feet
of many who had gone before. the soft boards of the
stairs had yielded under the pressure of feet and deep
hollows marked the way.

at the top of the stairway a turn to
 
 ___________________________
 
 the right brought
you to the doctor's door. to the left was a dark
hallway filled with rubbish. old chairs, carpenter's
horses, step ladders and empty boxes lay in the
darkness waiting for shins to be barked. the pile of
rubbish belonged to the paris dry goods company. when a
counter or a row of shelves in the store became
useless, clerks carried it up the stairway and threw it
on the pile.

doctor reefy's office was as large as a barn. a stove
with a round paunch sat in the middle of the room.
around its base was piled sawdust, held in place by
heavy planks nailed to the floor. by the door stood a
huge table that had once been a part of the furniture
of herrick's clothing store and that had been used for
displaying custom-made clothes. it was covered with
books, bottles, and surgical instruments. near the edge
of the table lay three or four apples left by john
spaniard, a tree nurseryman who w
 
 ___________________________
 
as doctor reefy's
friend, and who had slipped the apples out of his
pocket as he came in at the door.

at middle age doctor reefy was tall and awkward. the
grey beard he later wore had not yet appeared, but on
the upper lip grew a brown mustache. he was not a
graceful man, as when he grew older, and was much
occupied with the problem of disposing of his hands and
feet.

on summer afternoons, when she had been married many
years and when her son george was a boy of twelve or
fourteen, elizabeth willard sometimes went up the worn
steps to doctor reefy's office. already the woman's
naturally tall figure had begun to droop an
 
 ___________________________
 
r. particularly she remembered one
who had for a time been her lover and who in the moment
of his passion had cried out to her more than a hundred
times, saying the same words madly over and over: "you
dear! you dear! you lovely dear!" the words, she
thought, expressed something she would have liked to
have achieved in life.

in her room in the shabby old hotel the sick wife of
the hotel keeper began to weep and, putting her hands
to her face, rocked back and forth. the words of her
one friend, doctor reefy, rang in her ears. "love is
like a wind stirring the grass beneath trees on a black
night," he had said. "you must not try to make love
definite. it is the divine accident of life. if you try
to be definite and sure about it and to live beneath
the trees, where soft night winds blow, the long hot
day of disappointment comes swiftly and the gritty dust
from passing wagons gathers upon lips inflamed and made
tender by kisses."

elizabeth willard could not remember her mother who had
died when she
 
 ___________________________
 
ake it
and go away."

again the sick man's voice became querulous. "you've
got to promise," he declared. "if you won't promise not
to marry, give me your word that you'll never tell tom
about the money. it is mine and if i give it to you
i've the right to make that demand. hide it away. it is
to make up to you for my failure as a father. some time
it may prove to be a door, a great open door to you.
come now, i tell you i'm about to die, give me your
promise."

            *       *       *

in doctor reefy's office, elizabeth, a tired gaunt old
woman at forty-one, sat in a chair near the stove and
looked at the floor. by a small desk near the window
sat the doctor. his hands played with a lead pencil
that lay on the desk. elizabeth talked of her life as a
married woman. she became impersonal and forgot her
husband, only using him as a lay figure to give point
to her tale. "and then i was married and it did not
turn out at all," she said bitterly. "as soon as i had
gone into it i began to be afrai
 
 ___________________________
 
hen father gave me the money and
tried to talk me out of the thought of marriage, i
would not listen. i thought of what the girls who were
married had said of it and i wanted marriage also. it
wasn't tom i wanted, it was marriage. when father went
to sleep i leaned out of the window and thought of the
life i had led. i didn't want to be a bad woman. the
town was full of stories about me. i even began to be
afraid tom would change his mind."

the woman's voice began to quiver with excitement. to
doctor reefy, who without realizing what was happening
had begun to love her, there came an odd illusion. he
thought that as she talked the woman's body was
changing, that she was becoming younger, straighter,
stronger. when he could not shake off the illusion his
mind gave it a professional twist. "it is good for both
her body and her mind, this talking," he muttered.

the woman began telling of an incident that had
happened one afternoon a few months after her marriage.
her voice became steadier. "in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
d, to drive on and on forever. i
wanted to get out of town, out of my clothes, out of my
marriage, out of my body, out of everything. i almost
killed the horse, making him run, and when he could not
run any more i got out of the buggy and ran afoot into
the darkness until i fell and hurt my side. i wanted to
run away from everything but i wanted to run towards
something too. don't you see, dear, how it was?"

elizabeth sprang out of the chair and began to walk
about in the office. she walked as doctor reefy thought
he had never seen anyone walk before. to her whole body
there was a swing, a rhythm that intoxicated him. when
she came and knelt on the floor beside his chair he
took her into his arms and began to kiss her
passionately. "i cried all the way home," she said, as
she tried to continue the story of her wild ride, but
he did not listen. "you dear! you lovely dear! oh you
lovely dear!" he muttered and thought he held in his
arms not the tired-out woman of forty-one but a lovely
and innocent
 
 ___________________________
 
 girl who had been able by some miracle to
project herself out of the husk of the body of the
tired-out woman.

doctor reefy did not see the woman he had held in his
arms again until after her death. on the summer
afternoon in the office when he was on the point of
becoming her lover a half grotesque little incident
brought his love-making quickly to an end. as the man
and woman held each other tightly heavy feet came
tramping up the office stairs. the two sprang to their
feet and stood listening and trembling. the noise on
the stairs was made by a clerk from the paris dry goods
company. with a loud bang he threw an 
 
 ___________________________
 
empty box on the
pile of rubbish in the hallway and then went heavily
down the stairs. elizabeth followed him almost
immediately. the thing that had come to life in her as
she talked to her one friend died suddenly. she was
hysterical, as was also doctor reefy, and did not want
to continue the talk. along the street she went with
the blood still singing in her body, but when she
turned out of main street and saw ahead the lights of
the new willard house, she began to tremble and her
knees shook so that for a moment she thought she would
fall in the street.

the sick woman spent the last few months of her life
hungering for death. along the road of death she went,
seeking, hungering. she personified the figure of death
and made him now a strong black-
 
 ___________________________
 
 it was almost unbearable.
the body under the sheets was long and in death looked
young and graceful. to the boy, held by some strange
fancy, it was unspeakably lovely. the feeling that the
body before him was alive, that in another moment a
lovely woman would spring out of the bed and confront
him, became so overpowering that he could not bear the
suspense. again and again he put out his hand. once he
touched and half lifted the white sheet that covered
her, but his courage failed and he, like doctor reefy,
turned and went out of the room. in the hallway outside
the door he stopped and trembled so that he had to put
a hand against the wall to support himself. "that's not
my mother. that's not my mother in there," he whispered
to himself and again his body shook with fright and
uncertainty. when aunt elizabeth swift, who had come to
watch over the body, came out of an adjoining room he
put his hand into hers and began to sob, shaking his
head from side to side, half blind with grief. "my
mother is
 
 ___________________________
 
dust and their
fingers black and sticky. the dust rolled away over the
fields and the departing sun set it ablaze with colors.

in the main street of winesburg crowds filled the
stores and the sidewalks. night came on, horses
whinnied, the clerks in the stores ran madly about,
children became lost and cried lustily, an american
town worked terribly at the task of amusing itself.

pushing his way through the crowds in main street,
young george willard concealed himself in the stairway
leading to doctor reefy's office and looked at the
people. with feverish eyes he watched the faces
drifting past under the store lights. thoughts kept
coming into his head and he did not want to think. he
stamped impatiently on the wooden steps and looked
sharply about. "well, is she going to stay with him all
day? have i done all this waiting for nothing?" he
muttered.

george willard, the ohio village boy, was fast growing
into manhood and new thoughts had been coming into his
mind. all that day, amid the jam of peo