our idly playing with a lead pencil,
greeted him effusively. "i've been trying to write a
love story," he explained, laughing nervously. lighting
a pipe he began walking up and down the room. "i know
what i'm going to do. i'm going to fall in love. i've
been sitting here and thinking it over and i'm going to
do it."

as though embarrassed by his declaration, george went
to a window and turning his back to his friend leaned
out. "i know who i'm going to fall in love with," he
said sharply. "it's helen white. she is the only girl
in town with any 'get-up' to her."

struck with a new idea, young willard turned and walked
toward his visitor. "look here," he said. "you know
helen white better than i do. i want you to tell her
what i said. you just get to talking to her and say
that i'm in love with her. see what she says to that.
see how she takes it, and then you come and tell me."

seth richmond arose and went toward the door. the words
of his comrade irritated him unbearably. "well,
good-bye," he s
 
 ___________________________
 
orward he stood in the
darkness trying to look into seth's face. "what's the
matter? what are you going to do? you stay here and
let's talk," he urged.

a wave of resentment directed against his friend, the
men of the town who were, he thought, perpetually
talking of nothing, and most of all, against his own
habit of silence, made seth half desperate. "aw, speak
to her yourself," he burst forth and then, going
quickly through the door, slammed it sharply in his
friend's face. "i'm going to find helen white and talk
to her, but not about him," he muttered.

seth went down the stairway and out at the front door
of the hotel muttering with wrath. crossing a little
dusty street and climbing a low iron railing, he went
to sit upon the grass in the station yard. george
willard he thought a profound fool, and he wished that
he had said so more vigorously. although his
acquaintanceship with helen white, the banker's
daughter, was outwardly but casual, she was often the
subject of his thoughts and he felt
 
 ___________________________
 
is own town. he began to
pity himself, but a sense of the absurdity of his
thoughts made him smile. in the end he decided that he
was simply old beyond his years and not at all a
subject for self-pity. "i'm made to go to work. i may
be able to make a place for myself by steady working,
and i might as well be at it," he decided.

seth went to the house of banker white and stood in the
darkness by the front door. on the door hung a heavy
brass knocker, an innovation introduced into the
village by helen white's mother, who had also organized
a women's club for the study of poetry. seth raised the
knocker and let it fall. its heavy clatter sounded like
a report from distant guns. "how awkward and foolish i
am," he thought. "if mrs. white comes to the door, i
won't know what to say."

it was helen white who came to the door and found seth
standing at the edge of the porch. blushing with
pleasure, she stepped forward, closing the door softly.
"i'm going to get out of town. i don't know what i'll
do, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
ees.

and then, looking down, seth had seen the bees
everywhere all about him in the long grass. he stood in
a mass of weeds that grew waist-high in the field that
ran away from the hillside. the weeds were abloom with
tiny purple blossoms and gave forth an overpowering
fragrance. upon the weeds the bees were gathered in
armies, singing as they worked.

seth imagined himself lying on a summer evening, buried
deep among the weeds beneath the tree. beside him, in
the scene built in his fancy, lay helen white, her hand
lying in his hand. a peculiar reluctance kept him from
kissing her lips, but he felt he might have done that
if he wished. instead, he lay perfectly still, looking
at her and listening to the army of bees that sang the
sustained masterful song of labor above his head.

on the bench in the garden seth stirred uneasily.
releasing the hand of the girl, he thrust his hands
into his trouser pockets. a desire to impress the mind
of his companion with the importance of the resolution
he had 
 
 ___________________________
 
made came over him and he nodded his head toward
the house. "mother'll make a fuss, i suppose," he
whispered. "she hasn't thought at all about what i'm
going to do in life. she thinks i'm going to stay on
here forever just being a boy."

seth's voice became charged with boyish earnestness.
"you see, i've got to strike out. i've got to get to
work. it's what i'm good for."

helen white was impressed. she nodded her head and a
feeling of admiration swept over her. "this is as it
should be," she thought. "this boy is not a boy at all,
but a strong, purposeful man." certain vague desires
that had been invading her body were swept away and she
sat up very straight on the bench. the thunder
continued to rumble and flashes of heat lightning lit
up the eastern sky. the garden that had been so
mysterious and vast, a place that with seth beside her
might have become the background for
 
 ___________________________
 
ing,
perplexed and puzzled by her action as he had been
perplexed and puzzled by all of the life of the town
out of which she had come. walking slowly toward the
house, he stopped in the shadow of a large tree and
looked at his mother sitting by a lighted window busily
sewing. the feeling of loneliness that had visited him
earlier in the evening returned and colored his
thoughts of the adventure through which he had just
passed. "huh!" he exclaimed, turning and staring in the
direction taken by helen white. "that's how things'll
turn out. she'll be like the rest. i suppose she'll
begin now to look at me in a funny way." he looked at
the ground and pondered this thought. "she'll be
embarrassed and feel strange when i'm around," he
whispered to himself. "that's how it'll be. that's how
everything'll turn out. when it comes to loving
someone, it won't never be me. it'll be someone
else--some fool--someone who talks a lot--someone like
that george willard."




tandy

until she was seven years old sh
 
 ___________________________
 
 the path
toward town leaving the fire blazing in the wood. as he
went through the streets the skates clanked in his
pocket. in his own room in the new willard house he
built a fire in the stove and lay down on top of the
bed. he began to have lustful thoughts and pulling down
the shade of the window closed his eyes and turned his
face to the wall. he took a pillow into his arms and
embraced it thinking first of the school teacher, who
by her words had stirred something within him, and
later of helen white, the slim daughter of the town
banker, with whom he had been for a long time half in
love.

by nine o'clock of that evening snow lay deep in the
streets and the weather had become bitter cold. it was
difficult to walk about. the stores were dark and the
people had crawled away to their houses. the evening
train from cleveland was very late but nobody was
interested in its arrival. by ten o'clock all but four
of the eighteen hundred citizens of the town were in
bed.

hop higgins, the night watch
 
 ___________________________
 
s quite innocent things, much
like his grandmother, but after that one experience in
the room he dismissed women from his mind. so gentle
was his nature that he could not hate anything and not
being able to understand he decided to forget.

and tom did forget until he came to winesburg. after he
had lived there for two years something began to stir
in him. on all sides he saw youth making love and he
was himself a youth. before he knew what had happened
he was in love also. he fell in love with helen white,
daughter of the man for whom he had worked, and found
himself thinking of her at night.

that was a problem for tom and he settled it in his own
way. he let himself think of helen white whenever her
figure came into his mind and only concerned himself
with the manner of his thoughts. he had a fight, a
quiet determined little fight of his own, to keep his
desires in the channel where he thought they belonged,
but on the whole he was victorious.

and then came the spring night when he got drunk.
 
 ___________________________
 
tive nature drunk. the trees along the residence
streets of the town were all newly clothed in soft
green leaves, in the gardens behind the houses men were
puttering about in vegetable gardens, and in the air
there was a hush, a waiting kind of silence very
stirring to the blood.

tom left his room on duane street just as the young
night began to make itself felt. first he walked
through the streets, going softly and quietly along,
thinking thoughts that he tried to put into words. he
said that helen white was a flame dancing in the air
and that he was a little tree without leaves standing
out sharply against the sky. then he said that she was
a wind, a strong terrible wind, coming out of the
darkness of a stormy sea and that he was a boat left on
the shore of the sea by a fisherman.

that idea pleased the boy and he sauntered along
playing with it. he went into main street and sat on
the curbing before wacker's tobacco store. for an hour
he lingered about listening to the talk of men, but it
did
 
 ___________________________
 
d so he sat on the stone approach to the
bridge and sighed. his head seemed to be flying about
like a pinwheel and then projecting itself off into
space and his arms and legs flopped helplessly about.

at eleven o'clock tom got back into town. george
willard found him wandering about and took him into the
eagle printshop. then he became afraid that the drunken
boy would make a mess on the floor and helped him into
the alleyway.

the reporter was confused by tom foster. the drunken
boy talked of helen white and said he had been with her
on the shore of a sea and had made love to her. george
had seen helen white walking in the street with her
father during the evening and decided that tom was out
of his head. a sentiment concerning helen white that
lurked in his own heart flamed up and he became angry.
"now you quit that," he said. "i won't let helen
white's name be dragged into this. i won't let that
happen." he began shaking tom's shoulder, trying to
make him understand. "you quit it," he said ag
 
 ___________________________
 
s strangely
thrown together, stayed in the printshop. when he had a
little recovered george took tom for a walk. they went
into the country and sat on a log near the edge of a
wood. something in the still night drew them together
and when the drunken boy's head began to clear they
talked.

"it was good to be drunk," tom foster said. "it taught
me something. i won't have to do it again. i will think
more dearly after this. you see how it is."

george willard did not see, but his anger concerning
helen white passed and he felt drawn toward the pale,
shaken boy as he had never before been drawn toward
anyone. with motherly solicitude, he insisted that tom
get to his feet and walk about. again they went back to
the printshop and sat in silence in the darkness.

the reporter could not get the purpose of tom foster's
action straightened out in his mind. when tom spoke
again of helen white he again grew angry and began to
scold. "you quit that," he said sharply. "you haven't
been with her. what makes yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u say you have? what makes
you keep saying such things? now you quit it, do you
hear?"

tom was hurt. he couldn't quarrel with george willard
because he was incapable of quarreling, so he got up to
go away. when george willard was insistent he put out
his hand, laying it on the older boy's arm, and tried
to explain.

"well," he said softly, "i don't know how it was. i was
happy. you see how that was. helen white made me happy
and the night did too. i wanted to suffer, to be hurt
somehow. i thought that was what i should do. i wanted
to suffer, you see, because everyone suffers and does
wrong. i thought of a lot of things to do, but they
wouldn't work. they all hurt someone else."

tom foster's voice arose, and for once in his life he
became almost excited. "it was like making love, that's
what i mean," he explained. "don't you see how it is?
it hurt me to do what i did and made everything
strange. that
 
 ___________________________
 


the young man went into his own room and closed the
door. he had a queer empty feeling in the region of his
stomach. for a moment he sat staring at, the floor and
then jumping up went for a walk. along the station
platform he went, and around through residence streets
past the high-school building, thinking almost entirely
of his own affairs. the notion of death could not get
hold of him and he was in fact a little annoyed that
his mother had died on that day. he had just received a
note from helen white, the daughter of the town banker,
in answer to one from him. "tonight i could have gone
to see her and now it will have to be put off," he
thought half angrily.

elizabeth died on a friday afternoon at three o'clock.
it had been cold and rainy in the morning but in the
afternoon the sun came out. before she died she lay
paralyzed for six days unable to speak or move and with
only her mind and her eyes alive. for three of the six
days she struggled, thinking of her boy, trying to say
some few wo
 
 ___________________________
 
inesburg. "i will go to some city.
perhaps i can get a job on some newspaper," he thought,
and then his mind turned to the girl with whom he was
to have spent this evening and again he was half angry
at the turn of events that had prevented his going to
her.

in the dimly lighted room with the dead woman the young
man began to have thoughts. his mind played with
thoughts of life as his mother's mind had played with
the thought of death. he closed his eyes and imagined
that the red young lips of helen white touched his own
lips. his body trembled and his hands shook. and then
something happened. the boy sprang to his feet and
stood stiffly. he looked at the figure of the dead
woman under the sheets and shame for his thoughts swept
over him so that he began to weep. a new notion came
into his mind and he turned and looked guiltily about
as though afraid he would be observed.

george willard became possessed of a madness to lift
the sheet from the body of his mother and look at her
face. the thought
 
 ___________________________
 
 the eighteen years he has
lived seem but a moment, a breathing space in the long
march of humanity. already he hears death calling. with
all his heart he wants to come close to some other
human, touch someone with his hands, be touched by the
hand of another. if he prefers that the other be a
woman, that is because he believes that a woman will be
gentle, that she will understand. he wants, most of
all, understanding.

when the moment of sophistication came to george
willard his mind turned to helen white, the winesburg
banker's daughter. always he had been conscious of the
girl growing into womanhood as he grew into manhood.
once on a summer night when he was eighteen, he had
walked with her on a country road and in her presence
had given way to an impulse to boast, to make himself
appear big and significant in her eyes. now he wanted
to see her for another purpose. he wanted to tell her
of the new impulses that had come to him. he had tried
to make her think of him as a man when he knew nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
g
of manhood and now he wanted to be with her and to try
to make her feel the change he believed had taken place
in his nature.

as for helen white, she also had come to a period of
change. what george felt, she in her young woman's way
felt also. she was no longer a girl and hungered to
reach into the grace and beauty of womanhood. she had
come home from cleveland, where she was attending
college, to spend a day at the fair. she also had begun
to have memories. during the day she sat in the
grand-stand with a young man, one of the instructors
from the college, who was a guest of her mother's. the
young man was of a pedantic turn of mind a
 
 ___________________________
 
ompany as he was well
dressed and a stranger. she knew that the fact of his
presence would create an impression. during the day she
was happy, but when night came on she began to grow
restless. she wanted to drive the instructor away, to
get out of his presence. while they sat together in the
grand-stand and while the eyes of former schoolmates
were upon them, she paid so much attention to her
escort that he grew interested. "a scholar needs money.
i should marry a woman with money," he mused.

helen white was thinking of george willard even as he
wandered gloomily through the crowds thinking of her.
she remembered the summer evening when they had walked
together and wanted to walk with him again. she thought
that the months she had spent in the city, the going to
theaters and the seeing of great crowds wandering in
lighted thoroughfares, had changed her profoundly. she
wanted him to feel and be conscious of the change in
her nature.

the summer evening together that had left its mark on
the memo
 
 ___________________________
 
ck along the
road toward town. in his desperation george boasted,
"i'm going to be a big man, the biggest that ever lived
here in winesburg," he declared. "i want you to do
something, i don't know what. perhaps it is none of my
business. i want you to try to be different from other
women. you see the point. it's none of my business i
tell you. i want you to be a beautiful woman. you see
what i want."

the boy's voice failed and in silence the two came back
into town and went along the street to helen white's
house. at the gate he tried to say something
impressive. speeches he had thought out came into his
head, but they seemed utterly pointless. "i thought--i
used to think--i had it in my mind you would marry seth
richmond. now i know you won't," was all he could find
to say as she went through the gate and toward the door
of her house.

on the warm fall evening as he stood in the stairway
and looked at the crowd drifting through main street,
george thought of the talk beside the field of young
c
 
 ___________________________
 
rge willard would have been intensely
interested in the boasting of moyer, the horseman. now
it made him angry. he turned and hurried away along the
street. "old windbag," he sputtered. "why does he want
to be bragging? why don't he shut up?"

george went into a vacant lot and, as he hurried along,
fell over a pile of rubbish. a nail protruding from an
empty barrel tore his trousers. he sat down on the
ground and swore. with a pin he mended the torn place
and then arose and went on. "i'll go to helen white's
house, that's what i'll do. i'll walk right in. i'll
say that i want to see her. i'll walk right in and sit
down, that's what i'll do," he declared, climbing over
a fence and beginning to run.

            *       *       *

on the veranda of banker white's house helen was
restless and distraught. the instructor sat between the
mother and daughter. his talk wearied the girl.
although he had also been raised in an ohio town, the
instructor began to put on the airs of the city. he
wanted to app
 
 ___________________________
 
 life and now it is night and the life has all gone
away. the silence is almost terrifying. one conceals
oneself standing silently beside the trunk of a tree
and what there is of a reflective tendency in his
nature is intensified. one shudders at the thought of
the meaninglessness of life while at the same instant,
and if the people of the town are his people, one loves
life so intensely that tears come into the eyes.

in the darkness under the roof of the grand-stand,
george willard sat beside helen white and felt very
keenly his own insignificance in the scheme of
existence. now that he had come out of town where the
presence of the people stirring about, busy with a
multitude of affairs, had been so irritating, the
irritation was all gone. the presence of helen renewed
and refreshed him. it was as though her woman's hand
was assisting him to make some minute readjustment of
the machinery of his life. he began to think of the
people in the town where he had always lived with
something like reve
 
 ___________________________
 
t.

in winesburg the crowded day had run itself out into
the long night of the late fall. farm horses jogged
away along lonely country roads pulling their portion
of weary people. clerks began to bring samples of goods
in off the sidewalks and lock the doors of stores. in
the opera house a crowd had gathered to see a show and
further down main street the fiddlers, their
instruments tuned, sweated and worked to keep the feet
of youth flying over a dance floor.

in the darkness in the grand-stand helen white and
george willard remained silent. now and then the spell
that held them was broken and they turned and tried in
the dim light to see into each other's eyes. they
kissed but that impulse did not last. at the upper end
of the fair ground a half dozen men worked over horses
that had raced during the afternoon. the men had built
a fire and were heating kettles of water. only their
legs could be seen as they passed back and forth in the
light. when the wind blew the little flames of the fire
dance
 
 ___________________________
 
nderson, who
was lazy and often slept until nine, had got out of
bed. george was embarrassed. gertrude wilmot, a tall
thin woman of fifty who worked in the winesburg post
office, came along the station platform. she had never
before paid any attention to george. now she stopped
and put out her hand. in two words she voiced what
everyone felt. "good luck," she said sharply and then
turning went on her way.

when the train came into the station george felt
relieved. he scampered hurriedly aboard. helen white
came running along main street hoping to have a parting
word with him, but he had found a seat and did not see
her. when the train started tom little punched his
ticket, grinned and, although he knew george well and
knew on what adventure he was just setting out, made no
comment. tom had seen a thousand george willards go out
of their towns to the city. it was a commonplace enough
incident with him. in the smoking car there was a man
who had just invited tom to go on a fishing trip to
sandusky 
 
 ___________________________
 
s like his
mother's death, his departure from winesburg, the
uncertainty of his future life in the city, the serious
and larger aspects of his life did not come into his
mind.

he thought of little things--turk smollet wheeling
boards through the main street of his town in the
morning, a tall woman, beautifully gowned, who had once
stayed overnight at his father's hotel, butch wheeler
the lamp lighter of winesburg hurrying through the
streets on a summer evening and holding a torch in his
hand, helen white standing by a window in the winesburg
post office and putting a stamp on an envelope.

the young man's mind was carried away by his growing
passion for dreams. one looking at him would not have
thought him particularly sharp. with the recollection
of little things occupying his mind he closed his eyes
and leaned back in the car seat. he stayed that way for
a long time and when he aroused himself and again
looked out of the car window the town of winesburg had
disappeared and his life there had 