ws lay bright and shining on the sidewalks. people
moved about laughing and talking. the young reporter
felt ill and weak. in imagination, he also became old
and shapeless. "i didn't get the mother killed," said
wash williams, staring up and down the street. "i
struck her once with a chair and then the neighbors
came in and took it away. she screamed so loud you see.
i won't ever have a chance to kill her now. she died of
a fever a month after that happened."




the thinker

the house in which seth richmond of winesburg lived
with his mother had been at one time the show place of
the town, but when young seth lived there its glory had
become somewhat dimmed. the huge brick house which
banker white had built on buckeye street had
overshadowed it. the richmond place was in a little
valley far out at the end of main street. farmers
coming into town by a dusty road from the south passed
by a grove of walnut trees, skirted the fair ground
with its high board fence covered with advertisements,
and trott
 
 ___________________________
 
 the growing demands upon
her income and had set herself to the task of
increasing it. she had learned stenography and through
the influence of her husband's friends got the position
of court stenographer at the county seat. there she
went by train each morning during the sessions of the
court, and when no court sat, spent her days working
among the rosebushes in her garden. she was a tall,
straight figure of a woman with a plain face and a
great mass of brown hair.

in the relationship between seth richmond and his
mother, there was a quality that even at eighteen had
begun to color all of his traffic with men. an almost
unhealthy respect for the youth kept the mother for the
most part silent in his presence. when she did speak
sharply to him he had only to look steadily into her
eyes to see dawning there the puzzled look he had
already noticed in the eyes of others when he looked at
them.

the truth was that the son thought with remarkable
clearness and the mother did not. she expected from all
p
 
 ___________________________
 
rtable, sleeping on wet straw, and two drunken
negroes came and slept with us. when i stole a lunch
basket out of a farmer's wagon i couldn't help thinking
of his children going all day without food. i was sick
of the whole affair, but i was determined to stick it
out until the other boys were ready to come back."

"i'm glad you did stick it out," replied the mother,
half resentfully, and kissing him upon the forehead
pretended to busy herself with the work about the
house.

on a summer evening seth richmond went to the new
willard house to visit his friend, george willard. it
had rained during the afternoon, but as he walked
through main street, the sky had partially cleared and
a golden glow lit up the west. going around a corner,
he turned in at the door of the hotel and began to
climb the stairway leading up to his friend's room. in
the hotel office the proprietor and two traveling men
were engaged in a discussion of politics.

on the stairway seth stopped and listened to the voices
of the men 
 
 ___________________________
 
hts in his mind. he was lonely and had begun to
think that loneliness was a part of his character,
something that would always stay with him. stepping
into a side hall he stood by a window that looked into
an alleyway. at the back of his shop stood abner groff,
the town baker. his tiny bloodshot eyes looked up and
down the alleyway. in his shop someone called the
baker, who pretended not to hear. the baker had an
empty milk bottle in his hand and an angry sullen look
in his eyes.

in winesburg, seth richmond was called the "deep one."
"he's like his father," men said as he went through the
streets. "he'll break out some of these days. you wait
and see."

the talk of the town and the respect with which men and
boys instinctively greeted him, as all men greet silent
people, had affected seth richmond's outlook on life
and on himself. he, like most boys, was deeper than
boys are given credit for being, but he was not what
the men of the town, and even his mother, thought him
to be. no great underlying
 
 ___________________________
 
ularly interested in anything. now, as he
stood in the half-darkness by the window watching the
baker, he wished that he himself might become
thoroughly stirred by something, even by the fits of
sullen anger for which baker groff was noted. "it would
be better for me if i could become excited and wrangle
about politics like windy old tom willard," he thought,
as he left the window and went again along the hallway
to the room occupied by his friend, george willard.

george willard was older than seth richmond, but in the
rather odd friendship between the two, it was he who
was forever courting and the younger boy who was being
courted. the paper on which george worked had one
policy. it strove to mention by name in each issue, as
many as possible of the inhabitants of the village.
like an excited dog, george willard ran here and there,
noting on his pad of paper who had gone on business to
the county seat or had returned from a visit to a
neighboring village. all day he wrote little facts upon
the p
 
 ___________________________
 
ad. "a. p. wringlet had received a shipment of
straw hats. ed byerbaum and tom marshall were in
cleveland friday. uncle tom sinnings is building a new
barn on his place on the valley road."

the idea that george willard would some day become a
writer had given him a place of distinction in
winesburg, and to seth richmond he talked continually
of the matter, "it's the easiest of all lives to live,"
he declared, becoming excited and boastful. "here and
there you go and there is no one to boss you. though
you are in india or in the south seas in a boat, you
have but to write and there you are. wait till i get my
name up and then see what fun i shall have."

in george willard's room, which had a window looking
down into an alleyway and one that looked across
railroad tracks to biff carter's lunch room facing the
ra
 
 ___________________________
 
ilroad station, seth richmond sat in a chair and
looked at the floor. george willard, who had been
sitting for an hour idly playing with a lead pencil,
greeted him effusively. "i've been trying to write a
love story," he explained, laughing nervously. lighting
a pipe he began walking up and down the room. "i know
what i'm going to do. i'm going to fall in love. i've
been sitting here and thinking it over and i'm going to
do it."

as though embarrassed by his declaration, george went
to a window and turning his back to his f
 
 ___________________________
 
riend leaned
out. "i know who i'm going to fall in love with," he
said sharply. "it's helen white. she is the only girl
in town with any 'get-up' to her."

struck with a new idea, young willard turned and walked
toward his visitor. "look here," he said. "you know
helen white better than i do. i want you to tell her
what i said. you just get to talking to her and say
that i'm in love with her. see what she says to that.
see how she takes it, and then you come and tell me."

seth richmond arose and went toward the door. the words
of his comrade irritated him unbearably. "well,
good-bye," he said briefly.

george was amazed. running forward he stood in the
darkness trying to look into seth's face. "what's the
matter? what are you going to do? you stay here and
let's talk," he urged.

a wave of resentment directed against his friend, the
men of the town who were, he thought, perpetually
talking of nothing, and most of all, against his own
habit of silence, made seth half desperate
 
 ___________________________
 
hat protected the station lawn
sat other men. pipes were lighted. village jokes went
back and forth. away in the distance a train whistled
and the men loading the boxes into the cars worked with
renewed activity.

seth arose from his place on the grass and went
silently past the men perched upon the railing and into
main street. he had come to a resolution. "i'll get out
of here," he told himself. "what good am i here? i'm
going to some city and go to work. i'll tell mother
about it tomorrow."

seth richmond went slowly along main street, past
wacker's cigar store and the town hall, and into
buckeye street. he was depressed by the thought that he
was not a part of the life in his own town, but the
depression did not cut deeply as he did not think of
himself as at fault. in the heavy shadows of a big tree
before doctor welling's house, he stopped and stood
watching half-witted turk smollet, who was pushing a
wheelbarrow in the road. the old man with his absurdly
boyish mind had a dozen long boards o
 
 ___________________________
 
 tell. "george willard's in love with
you," he said, and in spite of his agitation his voice
was low and quiet. "he's writing a story, and he wants
to be in love. he wants to know how it feels. he wanted
me to tell you and see what you said."

again helen and seth walked in silence. they came to
the garden surrounding the old richmond place and going
through a gap in the hedge sat on a wooden bench
beneath a bush.

on the street as he walked beside the girl new and
daring thoughts had come into seth richmond's mind. he
began to regret his decision to get out of town. "it
would be something new and altogether delightful to
remain and walk often through the streets with helen
white," he thought. in imagination he saw himself
putting his arm about her waist and feeling her arms
clasped tightly about his neck. one of those odd
combinations of events and places made him connect the
idea of love-making with this girl and a spot he had
visited some days before. he had gone on an errand to
the house of a f
 
 ___________________________
 

he turned to drive away. then, jumping out of the
buggy, he gripped her shoulders with his strong hands.
"i'll keep you for good the next time," he said. "you
might as well make up your mind to that. it's you and
me for it and i'm going to have you before i get
through."

one night in january when there was a new moon george
willard, who was in ed handby's mind the only obstacle
to his getting belle carpenter, went for a walk. early
that evening george went into ransom surbeck's pool
room with seth richmond and art wilson, son of the town
butcher. seth richmond stood with his back against the
wall and remained silent, but george willard talked.
the pool room was filled with winesburg boys and they
talked of women. the young reporter got into that vein.
he said that women should look out for themselves, that
the fellow who went out with a girl was not responsible
for what happened. as he talked he looked about, eager
for attention. he held the floor for five minutes and
then art wilson began to tal
 
 ___________________________
 
t the down train but
windpeter slashed at him with his whip and drove on.
when the train struck and killed him and his two horses
a farmer and his wife who were driving home along a
nearby road saw the accident. they said that old
windpeter stood up on the seat of his wagon, raving and
swearing at the onrushing locomotive, and that he
fairly screamed with delight when the team, maddened by
his incessant slashing at them, rushed straight ahead
to certain death. boys like young george willard and
seth richmond will remember the incident quite vividly
because, although everyone in our town said that the
old man would go straight to hell and that the
community was better off without him, they had a secret
conviction that he knew what he was doing and admired
his foolish courage. most boys have seasons of wishing
they could die gloriously instead of just being grocery
clerks and going on with their humdrum lives.

but this is not the story of windpeter winters nor yet
of his son hal who worked on the wi