pped beneath a tree and, taking her into his
arms, began to caress her. "be good, now," he said
sharply; but she would not be quieted. with childish
abandon she gave herself over to grief, her voice
breaking the evening stillness of the street. "i want
to be tandy. i want to be tandy. i want to be tandy
hard," she cried, shaking her head and sobbing as
though her young strength were not enough to bear the
vision the words of the drunkard had brought to her.




the strength of god

the reverend curtis hartman was pastor of the
presbyterian church of winesburg, and had been in that
position ten years. he was forty years old, and by his
nature very silent and reticent. to preach, standing in
the pulpit before the people, was always a hardship for
him and from wednesday morning until saturday evening
he thought of nothing but the two sermons that must be
preached on sunday. early on sunday morning he went
into a little room called a study in the bell tower of
the church and prayed. in his prayers there
 
 ___________________________
 
ther churches of winesburg. it was larger and more
imposing and its minister was better paid. he even had
a carriage of his own and on summer evenings sometimes
drove about town with his wife. through main street and
up and down buckeye street he went, bowing gravely to
the people, while his wife, afire with secret pride,
looked at him out of the corners of her eyes and
worried lest the horse become frightened and run away.

for a good many years after he came to winesburg things
went well with curtis hartman. he was not one to arouse
keen enthusiasm among the worshippers in his church but
on the other hand he made no enemies. in reality he was
much in earnest and sometimes suffered prolonged
periods of remorse because he could not go crying the
word of god in the highways and byways of the town. he
wondered if the flame of the spirit really burned in
him and dreamed of a day when a strong sweet new
current of power would come like a great wind into his
voice and his soul and the people would trembl
 
 ___________________________
 
 sin.

the house next door to the presbyterian church, through
the windows of which the minister had seen the sight
that had so upset him, was occupied by two women. aunt
elizabeth swift, a grey competent-looking widow with
money in the winesburg national bank, lived there with
her daughter kate swift, a school teacher. the school
teacher was thirty years old and had a neat
trim-looking figure. she had few friends and bore a
reputation of having a sharp tongue. when he began to
think about her, curtis hartman remembered that she had
been to europe and had lived for two years in new york
city. "perhaps after all her smoking means nothing," he
thought. he began to remember that when he was a
student in college and occasionally read novels, good
although somewhat worldly women, had smoked through the
pages of a book that had once fallen into his hands.
with a rush of new determination he worked on his
sermons all through the week and forgot, in his zeal to
reach the ears and the soul of this new listen
 
 ___________________________
 
ere. she
also had arisen and had gone for a walk and the hand
that raised the shade was the hand of aunt elizabeth
swift.

the minister almost wept with joy at this deliverance
from the carnal desire to "peep" and went back to his
own house praising god. in an ill moment he forgot,
however, to stop the hole in the window. the piece of
glass broken out at the corner of the window just
nipped off the bare heel of the boy standing motionless
and looking with rapt eyes into the face of the christ.

curtis hartman forgot his sermon on that sunday
morning. he talked to his congregation and in his talk
said that it was a mistake for people to think of their
minister as a man set aside and intended by nature to
lead a blameless life. "out of my own experience i know
that we, who are the ministers of god's word, are beset
by the same temptations that assail you," he declared.
"i have been tempted and have surrendered to
temptation. it is only the hand of god, placed beneath
my head, that has raised me up. as
 
 ___________________________
 
he could not understand the temptation that had come to
him nor could he fathom the reason for its coming. in a
way he began to blame god, saying to himself that he
had tried to keep his feet in the true path and had not
run about seeking sin. "through my days as a young man
and all through my life here i have gone quietly about
my work," he declared. "why now should i be tempted?
what have i done that this burden should be laid on
me?"

three times during the early fall and winter of that
year curtis hartman crept out of his house to the room
in the bell tower to sit in the darkness looking at the
figure of kate swift lying in her bed and later went to
walk and pray in the streets. he could not understand
himself. for weeks he would go along scarcely thinking
of the school teacher and telling himself that he had
conquered the carnal desire to look at her body. and
then something would happen. as he sat in the study of
his own house, hard at work on a sermon, he would
become nervous and begin to wal
 
 ___________________________
 
 in at the church door he
persistently denied to himself the cause of his being
there. "i will not repair the hole in the window and i
will train myself to come here at night and sit in the
presence of this woman without raising my eyes. i will
not be defeated in this thing. the lord has devised
this temptation as a test of my soul and i will grope
my way out of darkness into the light of
righteousness."

one night in january when it was bitter cold and snow
lay deep on the streets of winesburg curtis hartman
paid his last visit to the room in the bell tower of
the church. it was past nine o'clock when he left his
own house and he set out so hurriedly that he forgot to
put on his overshoes. in main street no one was abroad
but hop higgins the night watchman and in the whole
town no one was awake but the watchman and young george
willard, who sat in the office of the winesburg eagle
trying to write a story. along the street to the church
went the minister, plowing through the drifts and
thinking that
 
 ___________________________
 
egan to think that he would get
out of the ministry and try some other way of life. "i
shall go to some city and get into business," he
declared. "if my nature is such that i cannot resist
sin, i shall give myself over to sin. at least i shall
not be a hypocrite, preaching the word of god with my
mind thinking of the shoulders and neck of a woman who
does not belong to me."

it was cold in the room of the bell tower of the church
on that january night and almost as soon as he came
into the room curtis hartman knew that if he stayed he
would be ill. his feet were wet from tramping in the
snow and there was no fire. in the room in the house
next door kate swift had not yet appeared. with grim
determination the man sat down to wait. sitting in the
chair and gripping the edge of the desk on which lay
the bible he stared into the darkness thinking the
blackest thoughts of his life. he thought of his wife
and for the moment almost hated her. "she has always
been ashamed of passion and has cheated me," he

 
 ___________________________
 
i am a creature of carnal
lusts i will live then for my lusts."

the distracted man trembled from head to foot, partly
from cold, partly from the struggle in which he was
engaged. hours passed and a fever assailed his body.
his throat began to hurt and his teeth chattered. his
feet on the study floor felt like two cakes of ice.
still he would not give up. "i will see this woman and
will think the thoughts i have never dared to think,"
he told himself, gripping the edge of the desk and
waiting.

curtis hartman came near dying from the effects of that
night of waiting in the church, and also he found in
the thing that happened what he took to be the way of
life for him. on other evenings when he had waited he
had not been able to see, through the little hole in
the glass, any part of the school teacher's room except
that occupied by her bed. in the darkness he had waited
until the woman suddenly appeared sitting in the bed in
her white nightrobe. when the light was turned up she
propped herself up amo
 
 ___________________________
 
xt
door a lamp was lighted and the waiting man stared into
an empty bed. then upon the bed before his eyes a naked
woman threw herself. lying face downward she wept and
beat with her fists upon the pillow. with a final
outburst of weeping she half arose, and in the presence
of the man who had waited to look and not to think
thoughts the woman of sin began to pray. in the
lamplight her figure, slim and strong, looked like the
figure of the boy in the presence of the christ on the
leaded window.

curtis hartman never remembered how he got out of the
church. with a cry he arose, dragging the heavy desk
along the floor. the bible fell, making a great clatter
in the silence. when the light in the house next door
went out he stumbled down the stairway and into the
street. along the street he went and ran in at the door
of the winesburg eagle. to george willard, who was
tramping up and down in the office undergoing a
struggle of his own, he began to talk half
incoherently. "the ways of god are beyond human
 
 ___________________________
 
r ten
years in this town, god has manifested himself to me in
the body of a woman." his voice dropped and he began to
whisper. "i did not understand," he said. "what i took
to be a trial of my soul was only a preparation for a
new and more beautiful fervor of the spirit. god has
appeared to me in the person of kate swift, the school
teacher, kneeling naked on a bed. do you know kate
swift? although she may not be aware of it, she is an
instrument of god, bearing the message of truth."

reverend curtis hartman turned and ran out of the
office. at the door he stopped, and after looking up
and down the deserted street, turned again to george
willard. "i am delivered. have no fear." he held up a
bleeding fist for the young man to see. "i smashed the
glass of the window," he cried. "now it will have to be
wholly replaced. the strength of god was in me and i
broke it with my fist."




the teacher

snow lay deep in the streets of winesburg. it had
begun to snow about ten o'clock in the morning and a
wind 
 
 ___________________________
 
ice
he had trained himself to sit for hours through the
long nights neither asleep nor awake. in the morning he
was almost as refreshed as though he had slept.

with hop higgins safely stowed away in the chair behind
the stove only three people were awake in winesburg.
george willard was in the office of the eagle
pretending to be at work on the writing of a story but
in reality continuing the mood of the morning by the
fire in the wood. in the bell tower of the presbyterian
church the reverend curtis hartman was sitting in the
darkness preparing himself for a revelation from god,
and kate swift, the school teacher, was leaving her
house for a walk in the storm.

it was past ten o'clock when kate swift set out and the
walk was unpremeditated. it was as though the man and
the boy, by thinking of her, had driven her forth into
the wintry streets. aunt elizabeth swift had gone to
the county seat concerning some business in connection
with mortgages in which she had money invested and
would not be back 
 
 ___________________________
 
are to become a writer you'll have to stop fooling
with words," she explained. "it would be better to give
up the notion of writing until you are better prepared.
now it's time to be living. i don't want to frighten
you, but i would like to make you understand the import
of what you think of attempting. you must not become a
mere peddler of words. the thing to learn is to know
what people are thinking about, not what they say."

on the evening before that stormy thursday night when
the reverend curtis hartman sat in the bell tower of
the church waiting to look at her body, young willard
had gone to visit the teacher and to borrow a book. it
was then the thing happened that confused and puzzled
the boy. he had the book under his arm and was
preparing to depart. again kate swift talked with great
earnestness. night was coming on and the light in the
room grew dim. as he turned to go she spoke his name
softly and with an impulsive movement took hold of his
hand. because the reporter was rapidly becomin