 makes it sure that i
shall have to go away." he fumbled with the doorknob.
in the room the silence became unbearable to the woman.
she wanted to cry out with joy because of the words
that had come from the lips of her son, but the
expression of joy had become impossible to her. "i
think you had better go out among the boys. you are too
much indoors," she said. "i thought i would go for a
little walk," replied the son stepping awkwardly out of
the room and closing the door.




the philosopher

doctor parcival was a large man with a drooping mouth
covered by a yellow mustache. he always wore a dirty
white waistcoat out of the pockets of which protruded a
number of the kind of black cigars known as stogies.
his teeth were black and irregular and there was
something strange about his eyes. the lid of the left
eye twitched; it fell down and snapped up; it was
exactly as though the lid of the eye were a window
shade and someone stood inside the doctor's head
playing with the cord.

doctor parcival had a 
 
 ___________________________
 
e faces of men and
women had touched with red tom willy's fingers and the
backs of his hands. as he stood by the bar talking to
will henderson he rubbed the hands together. as he grew
more and more excited the red of his fingers deepened.
it was as though the hands had been dipped in blood
that had dried and faded.

as will henderson stood at the bar looking at the red
hands and talking of women, his assistant, george
willard, sat in the office of the winesburg eagle and
listened to the talk of doctor parcival.

doctor parcival appeared immediately after will
henderson had disappeared. one might have supposed that
the doctor had been watching from his office window and
had seen the editor going along the alleyway. coming in
at the front door and finding himself a chair, he
lighted one of the stogies and crossing his legs began
to talk. he seemed intent upon convincing the boy of
the advisability of adopting a line of conduct that he
was himself unable to define.

"if you have your eyes open you will 
 
 ___________________________
 
i want to talk to you
of the matter i don't know. i might keep still and get
more credit in your eyes. i have a desire to make you
admire me, that's a fact. i don't know why. that's why
i talk. it's very amusing, eh?"

sometimes the doctor launched into long tales
concerning himself. to the boy the tales were very real
and full of meaning. he began to admire the fat
unclean-looking man and, in the afternoon when will
henderson had gone, looked forward with keen interest
to the doctor's coming.

doctor parcival had been in winesburg about five years.
he came from chicago and when he arrived was drunk and
got into a fight with albert longworth, the baggageman.
the fight concerned a trunk and ended by the doctor's
being escorted to the village lockup. when he was
released he rented a room above a shoe-repairing shop
at the lower end of main street and put out the sign
that announced himself as a doctor. although he had but
few patients and these of the poorer sort who were
unable to pay, he seemed to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve plenty of money for
his needs. he slept in the office that was unspeakably
dirty and dined at biff carter's lunch room in a small
frame building opposite the railroad station. in the
summer the lunch room was filled with flies and biff
carter's white apron was more dirty than his floor.
doctor parcival did not mind. into the lunch room he
stalked and deposited twenty cents upon the counter.
"feed me what you wish for that," he said laughing.
"use up food that you wouldn't otherwise sell. it makes
no difference to me. i am a man of distinction, you
see. why should i concern myself with what i eat."

the tales that doctor parcival told george willard
began nowhere and ended nowhere. sometimes the boy
thought they must all be inventions, a pack of lies.
and then again he was convinced that they 
 
 ___________________________
 
contained the
very essence of truth.

"i was a reporter like you here," doctor parcival
began. "it was in a town in iowa--or was it in
illinois? i don't remember and anyway it makes no
difference. perhaps i am trying to conceal my identity
and don't want to be very definite. have you ever
thought it strange that i have money for my needs
although i do nothing? i may have stolen a great sum of
money or been involved in a murder before i came here.
there is food for thought in that, eh? if you were a
really smart newspaper reporter you would look me up.
in chicago there was a doctor
 
 ___________________________
 
d him and put
him in a trunk. in the early morning they hauled the
trunk across the city. it sat on the back of an express
wagon and they were on the seat as unconcerned as
anything. along they went through quiet streets where
everyone was asleep. the sun was just coming up over
the lake. funny, eh--just to think of them smoking
pipes and chattering as they drove along as unconcerned
as i am now. perhaps i was one of those men. that would
be a strange turn of things, now wouldn't it, eh?"
again doctor parcival began his tale: "well, anyway
there i was, a reporter on a paper just as you are
here, running about and getting little items to print.
my mother was poor. she took in washing. her dream was
to make me a presbyterian minister and i was studying
with that end in view.

"my father had been insane for a number of years. he
was in an asylum over at dayton, ohio. there you see i
have let it slip out! all of this took place in ohio,
right here in ohio. there is a clew if you ever get the
notion of lo
 
 ___________________________
 
he office of the
winesburg eagle where george willard sat listening. he
was awkward and, as the office was small, continually
knocked against things. "what a fool i am to be
talking," he said. "that is not my object in coming
here and forcing my acquaintanceship upon you. i have
something else in mind. you are a reporter just as i
was once and you have attracted my attention. you may
end by becoming just such another fool. i want to warn
you and keep on warning you. that's why i seek you
out."

doctor parcival began talking of george willard's
attitude toward men. it seemed to the boy that the man
had but one object in view, to make everyone seem
despicable. "i want to fill you with hatred and
contempt so that you will be a superior being," he
declared. "look at my brother. there was a fellow, eh?
he despised everyone, you see. you have no idea with
what contempt he looked upon mother and me. and was he
not our superior? you know he was. you have not seen
him and yet i have made you feel that. i have
 
 ___________________________
 
 given you
a sense of it. he is dead. once when he was drunk he
lay down on the tracks and the car in which he lived
with the other painters ran over him."

            *       *       *

one day in august doctor parcival had an adventure in
winesburg. for a month george willard had been going
each morning to spend an hour in the doctor's office.
the visits came about through a desire on the part of
the doctor to read to the boy from the pages of a book
he was in the process of writing. to write the book
doctor parcival declared was the object of his coming
to winesburg to live.

on the morning in august before the coming of the boy,
an incident had happened in the doctor's office. there
had been an accident on 
 
 ___________________________
 
main street. a team of horses
had been frightened by a train and had run away. a
little girl, the daughter of a farmer, had been thrown
from a buggy and killed.

on main street everyone had become excited and a cry
for doctors had gone up. all three of the active
practitioners of the town had come quickly but had
found the child dead. from the crowd someone had run to
the office of doctor parcival who had bluntly refused
to go down out of his office to the dead child. the
useless cruelty of his refusal had passed unnoticed.
indeed, the man who had come up the stairway to summon
him had hurried away without hearing the refusal.

all of this, doctor parcival did not know and when
george willard came to his office he found the man
shaking with terror. "what i have done will arouse the
people of this town," he declared excitedly. "do i not
know human nature? do i not know what will happen? w
 
 ___________________________
 
ord
of my refusal will be whispered about. presently men
will get together in groups and talk of it. they will
come here. we will quarrel and there will be talk of
hanging. then they will come again bearing a rope in
their hands."

doctor parcival shook with fright. "i have a
presentiment," he declared emphatically. "it may be
that what i am talking about will not occur this
morning. it may be put off until tonight but i will be
hanged. everyone will get excited. i will be hanged to
a lamp-post on main street."

going to the door of his dirty office, doctor parcival
looked timidly down the stairway leading to the street.
when he returned the fright that had been in his eyes
was beginning to be replaced by doubt. coming on tiptoe
across t
 
 ___________________________
 
he room he tapped george willard on the
shoulder. "if not now, sometime," he whispered, shaking
his head. "in the end i will be crucified, uselessly
crucified."

doctor parcival began to plead with george willard.
"you must pay attention to me," he urged. "if something
happens perhaps you will be able to write the book that
i may never get written. the idea is very simple, so
simple that if you are not careful you will forget it.
it is this--that everyone in the world is christ and
they are all crucified. that's what i want to say.
don't you forget that. whatever happens, don't you dare
let yourself forget."




nobody knows

looking cautiously about, george willard ar