mustard weeds, he could see the public highway
along which went a wagon filled with berry pickers
returning from the fields. the berry pickers, youths
and maidens, laughed and shouted boisterously. a boy
clad in a blue shirt leaped from the wagon and
attempted to drag after him one of the maidens, who
screamed and protested shrilly. the feet of the boy in
the road kicked up a cloud of dust that floated across
the face of the departing sun. over the long field came
a thin girlish voice. "oh, you wing biddlebaum, comb
your hair, it's falling into your eyes," commanded the
voice to the man, who was bald and whose nervous little
hands fiddled about the bare white forehead as though
arranging a mass of tangled locks.

wing biddlebaum, forever frightened and beset by a
ghostly band of doubts, did not think of himself as in
any way a part of the life of the town where he had
lived for twenty years. among all the people of
winesburg but one had come close to him. with george
willard, son of tom willard, the 
 
 ___________________________
 
proprietor of the new
willard house, he had formed something like a
friendship. george willard was the reporter on the
winesburg eagle and sometimes in the evenings he walked
out along the highway to wing biddlebaum's house. now
as the old man walked up and down on the veranda, his
hands moving nervously about, he was hoping that george
willard would come and spend the evening with him.
after the wagon containing the berry pickers had
passed, he went across the field through the tall
mustard weeds and climbing a rail fence peered
anxiously along the road to the town. for a moment he
stood thus, rubbing his hands together and looking up
and down the road, and then, fear overcoming him, ran
back to walk agai
 
 ___________________________
 
n upon the porch on his own house.

in the presence of george willard, wing biddlebaum, who
for twenty years had been the town mystery, lost
something of his timidity, and his shadowy personality,
submerged in a sea of doubts, came forth to look at the
world. with the young reporter at his side, he ventured
in the light of day into main street or strode up and
down on the rickety front porch of his own house,
talking excitedly. the voice that had been low and
trembling became shrill and loud. the bent figure
straightened. with a kind of wriggle, like a fish
returned to the brook 
 
 ___________________________
 
by the fisherman, biddlebaum the
silent began to talk, striving to put into words the
ideas that had been accumulated by his mind during long
years of silence.

wing biddlebaum talked much with his hands. the slender
expressive fingers, forever active, forever striving to
conceal themselves in his pockets or behind his back,
came forth and became the piston rods of his machinery
of expression.

the story of wing biddlebaum is a story of hands. their
restless activity, like unto the beating of the wings
of an imprisoned bird, had given him his name. some
obscure poet of the town had thought of it. the hands
alarmed their owner. he wanted to keep them hidden away
and looked with amazement at the quiet inexpressive
hands of other men who worked beside him in the fields,
or passed, driving sleepy teams on country roads.

when he talked to george willard, wing biddlebaum
closed his fists and beat with them upon a tabl
 
 ___________________________
 
e or on
the walls of his house. the action made him more
comfortable. if the desire to talk came to him when the
two were walking in the fields, he sought out a stump
or the top board of a fence and with his hands pounding
busily talked with renewed ease.

the story of wing biddlebaum's hands is worth a book in
itself. sympathetically set forth it would tap many
strange, beautiful qualities in obscure men. it is a
job for a poet. in winesburg the hands had attracted
attention merely because of their activity. with them
wing biddlebaum had picked as high as a hundred and
forty quarts of strawberries in a day. they became his
distinguishing feature, the source of his fame. also
they made more grotesque an already grotesque and
elusive individuality. winesburg was proud of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
hands
of wing biddlebaum in the same spirit in which it was
proud of banker white's new stone house and wesley
moyer's bay stallion, tony tip, that had won the
two-fifteen trot at the fall races in cleveland.

as for george willard, he had many times wanted to ask
about the hands. at times an almost overwhelming
curiosity had taken hold of him. he felt that there
must be a reason for their strange activity and their
inclination to keep hidden away and only a growing
respect for wing biddlebaum kept him from blurting out
the questions that were often in his mind.

once he had been on the point of asking. the two were
walking in the fields on a summer afternoon and had
stopped to sit upon a grassy bank. all afternoon wing
biddlebaum had talked as one inspired. by a fence he
had stopped and beating like a giant woodpecker upon
the top board had shouted at george willard, condemning
his tendency to be too much influenced by the people
about him, "you are destroying yourself," he cried.
"
 
 ___________________________
 
you have the inclination to be alone and to dream and
you are afraid of dreams. you want to be like others in
town here. you hear them talk and you try to imitate
them."

on the grassy bank wing biddlebaum had tried again to
drive his point home. his voice became soft and
reminiscent, and with a sigh of contentment he launched
into a long rambling talk, speaking as one lost in a
dream.

out of the dream wing biddlebaum made a picture for
george willard. in the picture men lived again in a
kind of pastoral golden age. across a green open
country came clean-limbed young men, some afoot, some
mounted upon horses. in crowds the young men came to
gather about the feet of an old man who sat beneath a
tree in a tiny garden and who talked to them.

wing biddlebaum became wholly inspired. for once he
forgot the hands. slowly they stole forth and lay upon
george willard's shoulders. something new and bold came
into the
 
 ___________________________
 
 voice that talked. "you must try to forget all
you have learned," said the old man. "you must begin to
dream. from this time on you must shut your ears to the
roaring of the voices."

pausing in his speech, wing biddlebaum looked long and
earnestly at george willard. his eyes glowed. again he
raised the hands to caress the boy and then a look of
horror swept over his face.

with a convulsive movement of his body, wing biddlebaum
sprang to his feet and thrust his hands deep into his
trousers pockets. tears came to his eyes. "i must be
getting along home. i can talk no more with you," he
said nervously.

without looking back, the old man had hurried down the
hillside and across a meadow, leaving george willard
perplexed and frightened upon the grassy slope. with a
shiver of dread the boy arose and went along the road
toward town. "i'll not ask him about his hands," he
thought, touched by the memory of the terror he had
s
 
 ___________________________
 
een in the man's eyes. "there's something wrong, but i
don't want to know what it is. his hands have something
to do with his fear of me and of everyone."

and george willard was right. let us look briefly into
the story of the hands. perhaps our talking of them
will arouse the poet who will tell the hidden wonder
story of the influence for which the hands were but
fluttering pennants of promise.

in his youth wing biddlebaum had been a school teacher
in a town in pennsylvania. he was not then known as
wing biddlebaum, but went by the less euphonic name of
adolph myers. as adolph myers he was much loved by the
boys of his school.

adolph myers was meant by nature to be a teacher of
youth. he was one of those rare, little-understood men
who rule by a power so gentle that it passes as a
lovable weakness. in their feeling for the boys under
their charge such men are not unlike the finer sort of
women in their love of m
 
 ___________________________
 
 spread honey upon them. when the rumble of
the evening train that took away the express cars
loaded with the day's harvest of berries had passed and
restored the silence of the summer night, he went again
to walk upon the veranda. in the darkness he could not
see the hands and they became quiet. although he still
hungered for the presence of the boy, who was the
medium through which he expressed his love of man, the
hunger became again a part of his loneliness and his
waiting. lighting a lamp, wing biddlebaum washed the
few dishes soiled by his simple meal and, setting up a
folding cot by the screen door that led to the porch,
prepared to undress for the night. a few stray white
bread crumbs lay on the cleanly washed floor by the
table; putting the lamp upon a low stool he began to
pick up the crumbs, carrying them to his mouth one by
one with unbelievable rapidity. in the dense blotch of
light beneath the table, the kneeling figure looked
like a priest engaged in some service of his church.
the ner