 winters disappeared in the dusk that
lay over the road that led to winesburg, he turned and
walked slowly back across the fields to where he had
left his torn overcoat. as he went some memory of
pleasant evenings spent with the thin-legged children
in the tumble-down house by the creek must have come
into his mind, for he muttered words. "it's just as
well. whatever i told him would have been a lie," he
said softly, and then his form also disappeared into
the darkness of the fields.




drink

tom foster came to winesburg from cincinnati when he
was still young and could get many new impressions. his
grandmother had been raised on a farm near the town and
as a young girl had gone to school there when winesburg
was a village of twelve or fifteen houses clustered
about a general store on the trunion pike.

what a life the old woman had led since she went away
from the frontier settlement and what a strong, capable
little old thing she was! she had been in kansas, in
canada, and in new york city, 
 
 ___________________________
 
traveling about with her
husband, a mechanic, before he died. later she went to
stay with her daughter, who had also married a mechanic
and lived in covington, kentucky, across the river from
cincinnati.

then began the hard years for tom foster's grandmother.
first her son-in-law was killed by a policeman during a
strike and then tom's mother became an invalid and died
also. the grandmother had saved a little money, but it
was swept away by the illness of the daughter and by
the cost of the two funerals. she became a half
worn-out old woman worker and lived with the grandson
above a junk shop on a side street in cincinnati. for
five years she scrubbed the floors in an office
building and then got a place as dish washer in a
restaurant
 
 ___________________________
 
enjoy his life working in the fields and shooting
wild things in the woods there. she could not believe
that the tiny village of fifty years before had grown
into a thriving town in her absence, and in the morning
when the train came to winesburg did not want to get
off. "it isn't what i thought. it may be hard for you
here," she said, and then the train went on its way and
the two stood confused, not knowing where to turn, in
the presence of albert longworth, the winesburg baggage
master.

but tom foster did get along all right. he was one to
get along anywhere. mrs. white, the banker's wife,
employed his grandmother to work in the kitchen and he
got a place as stable boy in the banker's new brick
barn.

in winesburg servants were hard to get. the woman who
wanted help in her housework employed a "hired girl"
who insisted on sitting at the table with the family.
mrs. white was sick of hired girls and snatched at the
chance to get hold of the old city woman. she furnished
a room for the boy tom 
 
 ___________________________
 
upstairs in the barn. "he can
mow the lawn and run errands when the horses do not
need attention," she explained to her husband.

tom foster was rather small for his age and had a large
head covered with stiff black hair that stood straight
up. the hair emphasized the bigness of his head. his
voice was the softest thing imaginable, and he was
himself so gentle and quiet that he slipped into the
life of the town without attracting the least bit of
attention.

one could not help wondering where tom foster got his
gentleness. in cincinnati he had lived in a
neighborhood where gangs of tough boys prowled through
the streets, and all through his early formative years
he ran about with tough boys. for a while he was a
messenger for a telegraph company and delivered
messages in a neighborhood sprinkled with houses of
prostitution. the women in the houses knew and loved
tom foster and the tough boys in the gangs loved him
also.

he never asserted himself. that was one thing that
helped him escape. in 
 
 ___________________________
 
o the street to talk
to a teamster tom opened the cash drawer and taking the
money walked away. later he was caught and his
grandmother settled the matter by offering to come
twice a week for a month and scrub the shop. the boy
was ashamed, but he was rather glad, too. "it is all
right to be ashamed and makes me understand new
things," he said to the grandmother, who didn't know
what the boy was talking about but loved him so much
that it didn't matter whether she understood or not.

for a year tom foster lived in the banker's stable and
then lost his place there. he didn't take very good
care of the horses and he was a constant source of
irritation to the banker's wife. she told him to mow
the lawn and he forgot. then she sent him to the store
or to the post office and he did not come back but
joined a group of men and boys and spent the whole
afternoon with them, standing about, listening and
occasionally, when addressed, saying a few words. as in
the city in the houses of prostitution and wit
 
 ___________________________
 
he always did in
the presence of everyone.

often the old woman talked with great vigor. sometimes
she was angry about some happening at the banker's
house and scolded away for hours. out of her own
earnings she bought a mop and regularly scrubbed the
lawyer's office. then when the place was spotlessly
clean and smelled clean she lighted her clay pipe and
she and tom had a smoke together. "when you get ready
to die then i will die also," she said to the boy lying
on the floor beside her chair.

tom foster enjoyed life in winesburg. he did odd jobs,
such as cutting wood for kitchen stoves and mowing the
grass before houses. in late may and early june he
picked strawberries in the fields. he had time to loaf
and he enjoyed loafing. banker white had given him a
cast-off coat which was too large for him, but his
grandmother cut it down, and he had also an overcoat,
got at the same place, that was lined with fur. the fur
was worn away in spots, but the coat was warm and in
the winter tom slept in it.
 
 ___________________________
 
 he thought his method of
getting along good enough and was happy and satisfied
with the way life in winesburg had turned out for him.

the most absurd little things made tom foster happy.
that, i suppose, was why people loved him. in hern's
grocery they would be roasting coffee on friday
afternoon, preparatory to the saturday rush of trade,
and the rich odor invaded lower main street. tom foster
appeared and sat on a box at the rear of the store. for
an hour he did not move but sat perfectly still,
filling his being with the spicy odor that made him
half drunk with happiness. "i like it," he said gently.
"it makes me think of things far away, places and
things like that."

one night tom foster got drunk. that came about in a
curious way. he never had been drunk before, and indeed
in all his life had never taken a drink of anything
intoxicating, but he felt he needed to be drunk that
on
 
 ___________________________
 
his head was rocking back
and forth and so he sat on the stone approach to the
bridge and sighed. his head seemed to be flying about
like a pinwheel and then projecting itself off into
space and his arms and legs flopped helplessly about.

at eleven o'clock tom got back into town. george
willard found him wandering about and took him into the
eagle printshop. then he became afraid that the drunken
boy would make a mess on the floor and helped him into
the alleyway.

the reporter was confused by tom foster. the drunken
boy talked of helen white and said he had been with her
on the shore of a sea and had made love to her. george
had seen helen white walking in the street with her
father during the evening and decided that tom was out
of his head. a sentiment concerning helen white that
lurked in his own heart flamed up and he became angry.
"now you quit that," he said. "i won't let helen
white's name be dragged into this. i won't let that
happen." he began shaking tom's shoulder, trying to
make hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m understand. "you quit it," he said again.

for three hours the two young men, thus strangely
thrown together, stayed in the printshop. when he had a
little recovered george took tom for a walk. they went
into the country and sat on a log near the edge of a
wood. something in the still night drew them together
and when the drunken boy's head began to clear they
talked.

"it was good to be drunk," tom foster said. "it taught
me something. i won't have to do it again. i will think
more dearly after this. you see how it is."

george willard did not see, but his anger concerning
helen white passed and he felt drawn toward the pale,
shaken boy as he had never before been drawn toward
anyone. with motherly solicitude, he insisted that tom
get to his feet and walk about. again they went back to
the printshop and sat in silence in the darkness.

the reporter could not get the purpose of tom foster's
actio
 
 ___________________________
 
t up to
go away. when george willard was insistent he put out
his hand, laying it on the older boy's arm, and tried
to explain.

"well," he said softly, "i don't know how it was. i was
happy. you see how that was. helen white made me happy
and the night did too. i wanted to suffer, to be hurt
somehow. i thought that was what i should do. i wanted
to suffer, you see, because everyone suffers and does
wrong. i thought of a lot of things to do, but they
wouldn't work. they all hurt someone else."

tom foster's voice arose, and for once in his life he
became almost excited. "it was like making love, that's
what i mean," he explained. "don't you see how it is?
it hurt me to do what i did and made everything
strange. that's why i did it. i'm glad, too. it taught
me something, that's it, that's what i wanted. don't
you understand? i wanted to learn things, you see.
that's why i did it."




death

the stairway leading up to doctor reefy's office, in
the heffner block above the paris dry goods store, wa