 read a
book. drivers of teams had to shout and swear to make
him realize where he was so that he would turn out of
the beaten track and let them pass.

when he was twenty-one years old enoch went to new york
city and was a city man for fifteen years. he studied
french and went to an art school, hoping to develop a
faculty he had for drawing. in his own mind he planned
to go to paris and to finish his art education among
the masters there, but that never turned out.

nothing ever turned out for enoch robinson. he could
draw well enough and he had many odd delicate thoughts
hidden away in his brain that might have expressed
themselves through the brush of a painter, but he was
always a child and that was a handicap to his worldly
development. he never grew up and of course he couldn't
understand people and he couldn't make people
understand him. the child in him kept bumping against
things, against actualities like money and sex and
opinions. once he was hit by a street car and thrown
against an iron
 
 ___________________________
 
 post. that made him lame. it was one of
the many things that kept things from turning out for
enoch robinson.

in new york city, when he first went there to live and
before he became confused and disconcerted by the facts
of life, enoch went about a good deal with young men.
he got into a group of other young artists, both men
and women, and in the evenings they sometimes came to
visit him in his room. once he got drunk and was taken
to a police station where a police magistrate
frightened him horribly, and once he tried to have an
affair with a woman of the town met on the sidewalk
before his lodging
 
 ___________________________
 
 of a man.

and so into the room in the evening came young enoch's
friends. there was nothing particularly striking about
them except that they were artists of the kind that
talk. everyone knows of the talking artists. throughout
all of the known history of the world they have
gathered in rooms and talked. they talk of art and are
passionately, almost feverishly, in earnest about it.
they think it matters much more than it does.

and so these people gathered and smoked cigarettes and
talked and enoch robinson, the boy from the farm near
winesburg, was there. he stayed in a corner and for the
most part said nothing. how his big blue childlike eyes
stared about! on the walls were pictures he had made,
crude things, half finished. his friends talked of
these. leaning back in their chairs, they talked and
talked with their heads rocking from side to side.
words were said about line and values and composition,
lots of words, such as are always being said.

enoch wanted to talk too but he didn't know how.
 
 ___________________________
 
 and is suffering
but she makes no sound. don't you see how it is? she
lies quite still, white and still, and the beauty comes
out from her and spreads over everything. it is in the
sky back there and all around everywhere. i didn't try
to paint the woman, of course. she is too beautiful to
be painted. how dull to talk of composition and such
things! why do you not look at the sky and then run
away as i used to do when i was a boy back there in
winesburg, ohio?"

that is the kind of thing young enoch robinson trembled
to say to the guests who came into his room when he was
a young fellow in new york city, but he always ended by
saying nothing. then he began to doubt his own mind. he
was afraid the things he felt were not getting
expressed in the pictures he painted. in a half
indignant mood he stopped inviting people into his room
and presently got into the habit of locking the door.
he began to think that enough people had visited him,
that he did not need people any more. with quick
imagination he
 
 ___________________________
 
 began to invent his own people to whom
he could really talk and to whom he explained the
things he had been unable to explain to living people.
his room began to be inhabited by the spirits of men
and women among whom he went, in his turn saying words.
it was as though everyone enoch robinson had ever seen
had left with him some essence of himself, something he
could mould and change to suit his own fancy, something
that understood all about such things as the wounded
woman behind the elders in the pictures.

the mild, blue-eyed young ohio boy was a complete
egotist, as all children are egotists. he did not want
friends for the quite simple reason that no child wants
friends. he wanted most of all the people of his own
mind, people with whom he could really talk, people he
could har
 
 ___________________________
 
angue and scold by the hour, servants, you
see, to his fancy. among these people he was always
self-confident and bold. they might talk, to be sure,
and even have opinions of their own, but always he
talked last and best. he was like a writer busy among
the figures of his brain, a kind of tiny blue-eyed king
he was, in a six-dollar room facing washington square in
the city of new york.

then enoch robinson got married. he began to get
lonely and to want to touch actual flesh-and-bone
people with his hands. days passed when his room seemed
empty. lust visited his body and desire grew in his
mind. at night strange fevers, burning within, kept him
awake. he married a girl who sat in a chair next to his
own in the art school and went to live in an apartment
house in brooklyn. two children were born to the woman
he married, and enoch got a job in a place where
illustrations are made for advertisements
 
 ___________________________
 
 wife and
told her he could not live in the apartment any more.
she cried and was angry and threatened, but he only
stared at her and went his own way. in reality the wife
did not care much. she thought enoch slightly insane
and was a little afraid of him. when it was quite sure
that he would never come back, she took the two
children and went to a village in connecticut where she
had lived as a girl. in the end she married a man who
bought and sold real estate and was contented enough.

and so enoch robinson stayed in the new york room among
the people of his fancy, playing with them, talking to
them, happy as a child is happy. they were an odd lot,
enoch's people. they were made, i suppose, out of real
people he had seen and who had for some obscure reason
made an appeal to him. there was a woman with a sword
in her hand, an old man with a long white beard who
went about followed by a dog, a young girl whose
stockings were always coming down and hanging over her
shoe tops. there must have been two
 
 ___________________________
 
 dozen of the shadow
people, invented by the child-mind of enoch robinson,
who lived in the room with him.

and enoch was happy. into the room he went and locked
the door. with an absurd air of importance he talked
aloud, giving instructions, making comments on life. he
was happy and satisfied to go on making his living in
the advertising place until something happened. of
course something did happen. that is why he went back
to live in winesburg and why we know about him. the
thing that happened was a woman. it would be that way.
he was too happy. something had to c
 
 ___________________________
 
yer's livery barn.

about the thing that happened. enoch told george
willard about it one night. he wanted to talk to
someone, and he chose the young newspaper reporter
because the two happened to be thrown together at a
time when the younger man was in a mood to understand.

youthful sadness, young man's sadness, the sadness of a
growing boy in a village at the year's end, opened the
lips of the old man. the sadness was in the heart of
george willard and was without meaning, but it appealed
to enoch robinson.

it rained on the evening when the two met and talked, a
drizzly wet october rain. the fruition of the year had
come and the night should have been fine with a moon in
the sky and the crisp sharp promise of frost in the
air, but it wasn't that way. it rained and little
puddles of water shone under the street lamps on main
street. in the woods in the darkness beyond the fair
ground water dripped from the black trees. beneath the
trees wet leaves were pasted against tree roots that
protruded fro
 
 ___________________________
 
m the ground. in gardens back of houses in
winesburg dry shriveled potato vines lay sprawling on
the ground. men who had finished the evening meal and
who had planned to go uptown to talk the evening away
with other men at the back of some store changed their
minds. george willard tramped about in the rain and was
glad that it rained. he felt that way. he was like
enoch robinson on the evenings when the old man came
down out of his room and wandered alone in the streets.
he was like that only that george willard had become a
tall young man and did not think it manly to weep and
carry on. for a month his mother had been very ill and
that had something to do with his sadness, but not
much. he thought about himself and to the young that
always brings sadness.

enoch robinson and george willard met beneath a wooden
awning that extended out over the sidewalk before
voight's
 
 ___________________________
 
 wagon shop on maumee street just off the main
street of winesburg. they went together from there
through the rain-washed streets to the older man's room
on the third floor of the heffner block. the young
reporter went willingly enough. enoch robinson asked
him to go after the two had talked for ten minutes. the
boy was a little afraid but had never been more curious
in his life. a hundred times he had heard the old man
spoken of as a little off his head and he thought
himself rather brave and manly to go at all. from the
very beginning, in the street in the rain, the old man
talked in a queer way, trying to tell the story of the
room in washington square and of his life in the room.
"you'll understand if you try hard enough," he said
conclu
 
 ___________________________
 
 in his hand and george
willard was in a chair by a table. a kerosene lamp sat
on the table and the room, although almost bare of
furniture, was scrupulously clean. as the man talked
george willard began to feel that he would like to get
out of the chair and sit on the cot also. he wanted to
put his arms about the little old man. in the half
darkness the man talked and the boy listened, filled
with sadness.

"she got to coming in there after there hadn't been
anyone in the room for years," said enoch robinson.
"she saw me in the hallway of the house and we got
acquainted. i don't know just what she did in her own
room. i never went there. i think she was a musician
and played a violin. every now and then she came and
knocked at the door and i opened it. in she came and
sat down beside me, just sat and looked about and said
nothing. anyway, she said nothing that mattered."

the old man arose from the cot and moved about the
room. the overcoat he wore was wet from the rain and
drops of water kept fall
 
 ___________________________
 
her hands
were so strong and her face was so good and she looked
at me all the time."

the trembling voice of the old man became silent and
his body shook as from a chill. "i was afraid," he
whispered. "i was terribly afraid. i didn't want to let
her come in when she knocked at the door but i couldn't
sit still. 'no, no,' i said to myself, but i got up and
opened the door just the same. she was so grown up, you
see. she was a woman. i thought she would be bigger
than i was there in that room."

enoch robinson stared at george willard, his childlike
blue eyes shining in the lamplight. again he shivered.
"i wanted her and all the time i didn't want her," he
explained. "then i began to tell her about my people,
about everything that meant anything to me. i tried to
keep quiet, to keep myself to myself, but i couldn't. i
felt just as i did about opening the door. sometimes i
ached to have her go away and never come back any
more."

the old man sprang to his feet and his voice shook with
excitement. "one
 
 ___________________________
 
, drowned out, you see. that's
how it is. i don't know why."

the old man dropped into a chair by the lamp and the
boy listened, filled with awe. "go away, boy," said the
man. "don't stay here with me any more. i thought it
might be a good thing to tell you but it isn't. i don't
want to talk any more. go away."

george willard shook his head and a note of command
came into his voice. "don't stop now. tell me the rest
of it," he commanded sharply. "what happened? tell me
the rest of the story."

enoch robinson sprang to his feet and ran to the window
that looked down into the deserted main street of
winesburg. george willard followed. by the window the
two stood, the tall awkward boy-man and the little
wrinkled man-boy. the childish, eager voice carried
forward the tale. "i swore at her," he explained. "i
said vile words. i ordered her to go away and not to
come back. oh, i said terrible things. at first she
pretended not to understand but i kept at it. i
screamed and stamped on the floor. i made the
 
 ___________________________
 
 house
ring with my curses. i didn't want ever to see her
again and i knew, after some of the things i said, that
i never would see her again."

the old man's voice broke and he shook his head.
"things went to smash," he said quietly and sadly. "out
she went through the door and all the life there had
been in the room followed her out. she took all of my
people away. they all went out through the door after
her. that's the way it was."

george willard turned and went out of enoch robinson's
room. in the darkness by the window, as he went through
the door, he could hear the thin old voice whimpering
and complaining. "i'm alone, all alone here," said the
voice. "it was warm and friendly in my room but now i'm
all alone."




an awakening

belle carpenter had a dark skin, grey eyes, and thick
lips. she was tall and strong. when black thoughts
visited her she grew angry and wished she were a man
and could fight someone with her fists. she worked in
the millinery shop kept by mrs. ka