scovered the sweetness of the
twisted apples, she could not get her mind fixed again
upon the round perfect fruit that is eaten in the city
apartments. in the fall after the beginning of her
acquaintanceship with him she married doctor reefy and
in the following spring she died. during the winter he
read to her all of the odds and ends of thoughts he had
scribbled on the bits of paper. after he had read them
he laughed and stuffed them away in his pockets to
become round hard balls.




mother

elizabeth willard, the mother of george willard, was
tall and gaunt and her face was marked with smallpox
scars. although she was but forty-five, some obscure
disease had taken the fire out of her figure.
listlessly she went about the disorderly old hotel
looking at the faded wall-paper and the ragged carpets
and, when she was able to be about, doing the work of a
chambermaid among beds soiled by the slumbers of fat
traveling men. her husband, tom willard, a slender,
graceful man with square shoulders, a quick m
 
 ___________________________
 
air and beard were
filled with flour dust. sometimes he was so angry that,
although the cat had disappeared, he hurled sticks,
bits of broken glass, and even some of the tools of his
trade about. once he broke a window at the back of
sinning's hardware store. in the alley the grey cat
crouched behind barrels filled with torn paper and
broken bottles above which flew a black swarm of flies.
once when she was alone, and after watching a prolonged
and ineffectual outburst on the part of the baker,
elizabeth willard put her head down on her long white
hands and wept. after that she did not look along the
alleyway any more, but tried to forget the contest
between the bearded man and the cat. it seemed like a
rehearsal of her own life, terrible in its vividness.

in the evening when the son sat in the room with his
mother, the silence made them both feel awkward.
darkness came on and the evening train came in at the
station. in the street below feet tramped up and down
upon a board sidewalk. in the station y
 
 ___________________________
 
 blown into a flame by her anxiety and she
crept out of bed, dressed and hurried along the hallway
toward her son's room, shaking with exaggerated fears.
as she went along she steadied herself with her hand,
slipped along the papered walls of the hall and
breathed with difficulty. the air whistled through her
teeth. as she hurried forward she thought how foolish
she was. "he is concerned with boyish affairs," she
told herself. "perhaps he has now begun to walk about
in the evening with girls."

elizabeth willard had a dread of being seen by guests
in the hotel that had once belonged to her father and
the ownership of which still stood recorded in her name
in the county courthouse. the hotel was continually
losing patronage because of its shabbiness and she
thought of herself as also shabby. her own room was in
an obscure corner and when she felt able to work she
voluntarily worked among the beds, preferring the labor
that could be done when the guests were abroad seeking
trade among the merchants of wi
 
 ___________________________
 
n and the boy come
upon her. when she had reached a safe distance and was
about to turn a corner into a second hallway she
stopped and bracing herself with her hands waited,
thinking to shake off a trembling fit of weakness that
had come upon her. the presence of the boy in the room
had made her happy. in her bed, during the long hours
alone, the little fears that had visited her had become
giants. now they were all gone. "when i get back to my
room i shall sleep," she murmured gratefully.

but elizabeth willard was not to return to her bed and
to sleep. as she stood trembling in the darkness the
door of her son's room opened and the boy's father, tom
willard, stepped out. in the light that steamed out at
the door he stood with the knob in his hand and talked.
what he said infuriated the woman.

tom willard was ambitious for his son. he had always
thought of himself as a successful man, although
nothing he had ever done had turned out successfully.
however, when he was out of sight of the new willard
h
 
 ___________________________
 
appy. she did not blame the men who
walked with her and later she did not blame tom
willard. it was always the same, beginning with kisses
and ending, after strange wild emotions, with peace and
then sobbing repentance. when she sobbed she put her
hand upon the face of the man and had always the same
thought. even though he were large and bearded she
thought he had become suddenly a little boy. she
wondered why he did not sob also.

in her room, tucked away in a corner of the old willard
house, elizabeth willard lighted a lamp and put it on a
dressing table that stood by the door. a thought had
come into her mind and she went to a closet and brought
out a small square box and set it on the table. the box
contained material for make-up and had been left with
other things by a theatrical company that had once been
stranded in winesburg. elizabeth willard had decided
that she would be beautiful. her hair was still black
and there was a great mass of it braided and coiled
about her head. the scene that was
 
 ___________________________
 
ryman who was doctor reefy's
friend, and who had slipped the apples out of his
pocket as he came in at the door.

at middle age doctor reefy was tall and awkward. the
grey beard he later wore had not yet appeared, but on
the upper lip grew a brown mustache. he was not a
graceful man, as when he grew older, and was much
occupied with the problem of disposing of his hands and
feet.

on summer afternoons, when she had been married many
years and when her son george was a boy of twelve or
fourteen, elizabeth willard sometimes went up the worn
steps to doctor reefy's office. already the woman's
naturally tall figure had begun to droop and to drag
itself listlessly about. ostensibly she went to see the
doctor because of her health, but on the half dozen
occasions when she had been to see him the outcome of
the visits did not primarily concern her health. she
and the doctor talked of that but they talked most of
her life, of their two lives and of the ideas that had
come to them as they lived their lives in w
 
 ___________________________
 
ace, rocked back and forth. the words of her
one friend, doctor reefy, rang in her ears. "love is
like a wind stirring the grass beneath trees on a black
night," he had said. "you must not try to make love
definite. it is the divine accident of life. if you try
to be definite and sure about it and to live beneath
the trees, where soft night winds blow, the long hot
day of disappointment comes swiftly and the gritty dust
from passing wagons gathers upon lips inflamed and made
tender by kisses."

elizabeth willard could not remember her mother who had
died when she was but five years old. her girlhood had
been lived in the most haphazard manner imaginable. her
father was a man who had wanted to be let alone and the
affairs of the hotel would not let him alone. he also
had lived and died a sick man. every day he arose with
a cheerful face, but by ten o'clock in the morning all
the joy had gone out of his heart. when a guest
complained of the fare in the hotel dining room or one
of the girls who made up th