t is all they ever got out of him. whenever
david's name was mentioned he looked vaguely at the sky
and said that a messenger from god had taken the boy.
"it happened because i was too greedy for glory," he
declared, and would have no more to say in the matter.




a man of ideas

he lived with his mother, a grey, silent woman with a
peculiar ashy complexion. the house in which they lived
stood in a little grove of trees beyond where the main
street of winesburg crossed wine creek. his name was
joe welling, and his father had been a man of some
dignity in the community, a lawyer, and a member of the
state legislature at columbus. joe himself was small of
body and in his character unlike anyone else in town.
he was like a tiny little volcano that lies silent for
days and then suddenly spouts fire. no, he wasn't like
that--he was like a man who is subject to fits, one
who walks among his fellow men inspiring fear because a
fit may come upon him suddenly and blow him away into a
strange uncanny phys
 
 ___________________________
 
ical state in which his eyes roll
and his legs and arms jerk. he was like that, only that
the visitation that descended upon joe welling was a
mental and not a physical thing. he was beset by ideas
and in the throes of one of his ideas was
uncontrollable. words rolled and tumbled from his
mouth. a peculiar smile came upon his lips. the edges
of his teeth that were tipped with gold glistened in
the light. pouncing upon a bystander he began to talk.
for the bystander there was no escape. the excited man
breathed into his face, peered into his eyes, pounded
upon his chest with a shaking forefinger, demanded,
compelled attention.

i
 
 ___________________________
 
alked,
swept him away, swept all away, all who stood within
sound of his voice.

in sylvester west's drug store stood four men who were
talking of horse racing. wesley moyer's stallion, tony
tip, was to race at the june meeting at tiffin, ohio,
and there was a rumor that he would meet the stiffest
competition of his career. it was said that pop geers,
the great racing driver, would himself be there. a
doubt of the success of tony tip hung heavy in the air
of winesburg.

into the drug store came joe welling, brushing the
screen door violently aside. with a strange absorbed
light in his eyes he pounced upon ed thomas, he who
knew pop geers and whose opinion of tony tip's chances
was worth considering.

"the water is up in wine creek," cried joe welling with
the air of pheidippides bringing news of the victory of
the greeks in the struggle at marathon. his finger beat
a tattoo upon ed thomas's broad chest. "by trunion
bridge it is within eleven and a half inches of the
flooring," he went on, the wor
 
 ___________________________
 
at i think that has anything to do with it.
there it is, you see. you understand how puzzled i was.

"then an idea came to me. i laughed. you'll laugh,
too. of course it rained over in medina county. that's
interesting, eh? if we had no trains, no mails, no
telegraph, we would know that it rained over in medina
county. that's where wine creek comes from. everyone
knows that. little old wine creek brought us the news.
that's interesting. i laughed. i thought i'd tell
you--it's interesting, eh?"

joe welling turned and went out at the door. taking a
book from his pocket, he stopped and ran a finger down
one of the pages. again he was absorbed in his duties
as agent of the standard oil company. "hern's grocery
will be getting low on coal oil. i'll see them," he
muttered, hurrying along the street, and bowing
politely to the right and left at the people walking
past.

when george willard went to work for the winesburg
eagle he was besieged by joe welling. joe envied the
boy. it seemed to him that he 
 
 ___________________________
 
ter on a newspaper. "it is what i should be
doing, there is no doubt of that," he declared,
stopping george willard on the sidewalk before
daugherty's feed store. his eyes began to glisten and
his forefinger to tremble. "of course i make more money
with the standard oil company and i'm only telling
you," he added. "i've got nothing against you but i
should have your place. i could do the work at odd
moments. here and there i would run finding out things
you'll never see."

becoming more excited joe welling crowded the young
reporter against the front of the feed store. he
appeared to be lost in thought, rolling his eyes about
and running a thin nervous hand through his hair. a
smile spread over his face and his gold teeth
glittered. "you get out your note book," he commanded.
"you carry a little pad of paper in your pocket, don't
you? i knew you did. well, you set this down. i thought
of it the other day. let's take decay. now what is
decay? it's fire. it burns up wood and other things.
you never
 
 ___________________________
 
ll on fire. they're burning up. decay
you see is always going on. it doesn't stop. water and
paint can't stop it. if a thing is iron, then what? it
rusts, you see. that's fire, too. the world is on fire.
start your pieces in the paper that way. just say in
big letters 'the world is on fire.' that will make 'em
look up. they'll say you're a smart one. i don't care.
i don't envy you. i just snatched that idea out of the
air. i would make a newspaper hum. you got to admit
that."'

turning quickly, joe welling walked rapidly away. when
he had taken several steps he stopped and looked back.
"i'm going to stick to you," he said. "i'm going to
make you a regular hummer. i should start a newspaper
myself, that's what i should do. i'd be a marvel.
everybody knows that."

when george willard had been for a year on the
winesburg eagle, four things happened to joe welling.
his mother died, he came to live at the new willard
house, he became involved in a love affair, and he
organized the winesburg baseball c
 
 ___________________________
 
lub.

joe organized the baseball club because he wanted to be
a coach and in that position he began to win the
respect of his townsmen. "he is a wonder," they
declared after joe's team had whipped the team from
medina county. "he gets everybody working together. you
just watch him."

upon the baseball field joe welling stood by first
base, his whole body quivering with excitement. in
spite of themselves all the players watched him
closely. the opposing pitcher became confused.

"now! now! now! now!" shouted the excited man. "watch
me! watch me! watch my fingers! watch my hands! watch
my feet! watch my eyes! let's work together here! watch
me! in me you see all the movements of the game! work
with me! work with me! watch me! watch me! watch me!"

with runners of the winesburg team on bases, joe
welling became 
 
 ___________________________
 
as one inspired. before they knew what
had come over them, the base runners were watching the
man, edging off the bases, advancing, retreating, held
as by an invisible cord. the players of the opposing
team also watched joe. they were fascinated. for a
moment they watched and then, as though to break a
spell that hung over them, they began hurling the ball
wildly about, and amid a series of fierce animal-like
cries from the coach, the runners of the winesburg team
scampered home.

joe welling's love affair set the town of winesburg on
edge. when it began everyone whispered and shook his
head. when people tried to laugh, the laughter was
forced and unnatural. joe fell in love with sarah king,
a lean, sad-looking woman who lived with her father and
brother in a brick house that stood opposite the gate
leading to the winesburg cemetery.

the two kings, edward the father, and tom the son, were
not popular in winesburg. they were called proud and
dangerous. they had come to winesburg fro
 
 ___________________________
 
 killed it with
one blow. he was arrested and paid a fine of ten
dollars.

old edward king was small of stature and when he passed
people in the street laughed a queer unmirthful laugh.
when he laughed he scratched his left elbow with his
right hand. the sleeve of his coat was almost worn
through from the habit. as he walked along the street,
looking nervously about and laughing, he seemed more
dangerous than his silent, fierce-looking son.

when sarah king began walking out in the evening with
joe welling, people shook their heads in alarm. she was
tall and pale and had dark rings under her eyes. the
couple looked ridiculous together. under the trees they
walked and joe talked. his passionate eager
protestations of love, heard coming out of the darkness
by the cemetery wall, or from the deep shadows of the
trees on the hill that ran up to the fair grounds from
waterworks pond, were repeated in the stores. men stood
by the bar in the new willard house laughing and
talking of joe's courtship. afte
 
 ___________________________
 
r the laughter came the
silence. the winesburg baseball team, under his
management, was winning game after game, and the town
had begun to respect him. sensing a tragedy, they
waited, laughing nervously.

late on a saturday afternoon the meeting between joe
welling and the two kings, the anticipation of which
had set the town on edge, took place in joe welling's
room in the new willard house. george willard was a
witness to the meeting. it came about in this way:

when the young reporter went to his room after the
evening meal he saw tom king and his father sitting in
the half darkness in joe's room. the son had the heavy
walking stick in his hand and sat near the door. old
edward king walked nervously about, scratching his left
elbow with his right hand. the hallways were empty and
silent.

george willard went to his own room and sat down at his
des
 
 ___________________________
 
g he was
perplexed and knew not what to do.

it was seven-thirty and fast growing dark when joe
welling came along the station platform toward the new
willard house. in his arms he held a bundle of weeds
and grasses. in spite of the terror that made his body
shake, george willard was amused at the sight of the
small spry figure holding the grasses and half running
along the platform.

shaking with fright and anxiety, the young reporter
lurked in the hallway outside the door of the room in
which joe welling talked to the two kings. there had
been an oath, the nervous giggle of old edward king,
and then silence. now the voice of joe welling, sharp
and clear, broke forth. george willard began to laugh.
he understood. as he had swept all men before him, so
now joe welling was carrying the two men in the room
off their feet with a tidal wave of words. the listener
in the hall walked up and down, lost in amazement.

inside the room joe welling had paid no attention to
the grumbled threat of tom king. a
 
 ___________________________
 
es. would we be done for? i ask you that. would we
be done for?" again tom king growled and for a moment
there was silence in the room. then again joe plunged
into the exposition of his idea. "things would go hard
for a time. i admit that. i've got to admit that. no
getting around it. we'd be hard put to it. more than
one fat stomach would cave in. but they couldn't down
us. i should say not."

tom king laughed good naturedly and the shivery,
nervous laugh of edward king rang through the house.
joe welling hurried on. "we'd begin, you see, to breed
up new vegetables and fruits. soon we'd regain all we
had lost. mind, i don't say the new things would be the
same as the old. they wouldn't. maybe they'd be better,
maybe not so good. that's interesting, eh? you can
think about that. it starts your mind working, now
don't it?"

in the room there was silence and then again old edward
king laughed nervously. "say, i wish sarah was here,"
cried joe welling. "let's go up to your house. i want
to tell her 
 
 ___________________________
 
of this."

there was a scraping of chairs in the room. it was
then that george willard retreated to his own room.
leaning out at the window he saw joe welling going
along the street with the two kings. tom king was
forced to take extraordinary long strides to keep pace
with the little man. as he strode along, he leaned
over, listening--absorbed, fascinated. joe welling
again talked excitedly. "take milkweed now," he cried.
"a lot might be done with milkweed, eh? it's almost
unbelievable. i want you to think about it. i want you
two to think about it. there would be a new vegetable
kingdom you see. it's interesting, eh? it's an idea.
wait till you see sarah, she'll get the idea. she'll be
interested. sarah is always interested in ideas. you
can't be too smart for sarah, now can you? of course
you can't. you know that."




adventure

alice hindman, a woman of 