 made his words seem the more
terrible. in the darkness the young reporter found
himself imagining that he sat on the railroad ties
beside a comely young man with black hair and black
shining eyes. there was something almost beautiful in
the voice of wash williams, the hideous, telling his
story of hate.

the telegraph operator of winesburg, sitting in the
darkness on the railroad ties, had become a poet.
hatred had raised him to that elevation. "it is because
i saw you kissing the lips of that belle carpenter that
i tell you my story," he said. "what happened to me may
next happen to you. i want to put you on your guard.
already you may be having dreams in your head. i want
to destroy them."

wash williams began telling the story of his married
life with the tall blonde girl with the blue eyes whom
he had met when he was a young operator at dayton,
ohio. here and there his story was touched with moments
of beauty intermingled with strings of vile curses. the
operator had married the daughter of a de
 
 ___________________________
 
ut
she went through the door and all the life there had
been in the room followed her out. she took all of my
people away. they all went out through the door after
her. that's the way it was."

george willard turned and went out of enoch robinson's
room. in the darkness by the window, as he went through
the door, he could hear the thin old voice whimpering
and complaining. "i'm alone, all alone here," said the
voice. "it was warm and friendly in my room but now i'm
all alone."




an awakening

belle carpenter had a dark skin, grey eyes, and thick
lips. she was tall and strong. when black thoughts
visited her she grew angry and wished she were a man
and could fight someone with her fists. she worked in
the millinery shop kept by mrs. kate mchugh and during
the day sat trimming hats by a window at the rear of
the store. she was the daughter of henry carpenter,
bookkeeper in the first national bank of winesburg, and
lived with him in a gloomy old house far out at the end
of buckeye street. the house wa
 
 ___________________________
 
d during the day
he was speechless with anger and did not recover his
equilibrium for a week.

the bank cashier was a little bully and was afraid of
his daughter. she, he realized, knew the story of his
brutal treatment of her mother and hated him for it.
one day she went home at noon and carried a handful of
soft mud, taken from the road, into the house. with the
mud she smeared the face of the boards used for the
pressing of trousers and then went back to her work
feeling relieved and happy.

belle carpenter occasionally walked out in the evening
with george willard. secretly she loved another man,
but her love affair, about which no one knew, caused
her much anxiety. she was in love with ed handby,
bartender in ed griffith's saloon, and went about with
the young reporter as a kind of relief to her feelings.
she did not think that her station in life would permit
her to be seen in the company of the bartender and
walked about under the trees with george willard and
let him kiss her to relieve a lon
 
 ___________________________
 
es whose wardrobes cost him hundreds of
dollars. one night at a resort called cedar point, he
got into a fight and ran amuck like a wild thing. with
his fist he broke a large mirror in the wash room of a
hotel and later went about smashing windows and
breaking chairs in dance halls for the joy of hearing
the glass rattle on the floor and seeing the terror in
the eyes of clerks who had come from sandusky to spend
the evening at the resort with their sweethearts.

the affair between ed handby and belle carpenter on the
surface amounted to nothing. he had succeeded in
spending but one evening in her company. on that
evening he hired a horse and buggy at wesley moyer's
livery barn and took her for a drive. the conviction
that she was the woman his nature demanded and that he
must get her settled upon him and he told her of his
desires. the bartender was ready to marry and to begin
trying to earn money for the support of his wife, but
so simple was his nature that he found it difficult to
explain his inte
 
 ___________________________
 
 the buggy. "when i get hold of you again i'll
not let you go. you can't play with me," he declared as
he turned to drive away. then, jumping out of the
buggy, he gripped her shoulders with his strong hands.
"i'll keep you for good the next time," he said. "you
might as well make up your mind to that. it's you and
me for it and i'm going to have you before i get
through."

one night in january when there was a new moon george
willard, who was in ed handby's mind the only obstacle
to his getting belle carpenter, went for a walk. early
that evening george went into ransom surbeck's pool
room with seth richmond and art wilson, son of the town
butcher. seth richmond stood with his back against the
wall and remained silent, but george willard talked.
the pool room was filled with winesburg boys and they
talked of women. the young reporter got into that vein.
he said that women should look out for themselves, that
the fellow who went out with a girl was not responsible
for what happened. as he talked he lo
 
 ___________________________
 
his mind he walked out
of the street and went toward the house where belle
carpenter lived. he thought she would understand his
mood and that he could achieve in her presence a
position he had long been wanting to achieve. in the
past when he had been with her and had kissed her lips
he had come away filled with anger at himself. he had
felt like one being used for some obscure purpose and
had not enjoyed the feeling. now he thought he had
suddenly become too big to be used.

when george got to belle carpenter's house there had
already been a visitor there before him. ed handby had
come to the door and calling belle out of the house had
tried to talk to her. he had wanted to ask the woman to
come away with him and to be his wife, but when she
came and stood by the door he lost his self-assurance
and became sullen. "you stay away from that kid," he
growled, thinking of george willard, and then, not
knowing what else to say, turned to go away. "if i
catch you together i will break your bones and his
to
 
 ___________________________
 
ly upstairs. from a window at the upper part of
the house she saw ed handby cross the street and sit
down on a horse block before the house of a neighbor.
in the dim light the man sat motionless holding his
head in his hands. she was made happy by the sight, and
when george willard came to the door she greeted him
effusively and hurriedly put on her hat. she thought
that, as she walked through the streets with young
willard, ed handby would follow and she wanted to make
him suffer.

for an hour belle carpenter and the young reporter
walked about under the trees in the sweet night air.
george willard was full of big words. the sense of
power that had come to him during the hour in the
darkness in the alleyway remained with him and he
talked boldly, swaggering along and swinging his arms
about. he wanted to make belle carpenter realize that
he was aware of his former weakness and that he had
changed. "you'll find me different," he declared,
thrusting his hands into his pockets and looking boldly
into h
 
 ___________________________
 
george had finished talking
they turned down a side street and went across a bridge
into a path that ran up the side of a hill. the hill
began at waterworks pond and climbed upward to the
winesburg fair grounds. on the hillside grew dense
bushes and small trees and among the bushes were little
open spaces carpeted with long grass, now stiff and
frozen.

as he walked behind the woman up the hill george
willard's heart began to beat rapidly and his shoulders
straightened. suddenly he decided that belle carpenter
was about to surrender herself to him. the new force
that had manifested itself in him had, he felt, been at
work upon her and had led to her conquest. the thought
made him half drunk with the sense of masculine power.
although he had been annoyed that as they walked about
she had not seemed to be listening to his words, the
fact that she had accompanied him to this place took
all his doubts away. "it is different. everything has
become different," he thought and taking hold of her
shoulder tur
 
 ___________________________
 
ned her about and stood looking at her, his
eyes shining with pride.

belle carpenter did not resist. when he kissed her
upon the lips she leaned heavily against him and looked
over his shoulder into the darkness. in her whole
attitude there was a suggestion of waiting. again, as
in the alleyway, george willard's mind ran off into
words and, holding the woman tightly he whispered the
words into the still night. "lust," he whispered, "lust
and night and women."

george willard did not understand what happened to him
that night on the hillside. later, when he got to his
own room, 
 
 ___________________________
 
he wanted to weep and then grew half insane
with anger and hate. he hated belle carpenter and was
sure that all his life he would continue to hate her.
on the hillside he had led the woman to one of the
little open spaces among the bushes and had dropped to
his knees beside her. as in the vacant lot, by the
laborers' houses, he had put up his hands in gratitude
for the new power in himself and was waiting for the
woman to speak when ed handby appeared.

the bartender did not want to beat the boy, who he
thought had tried to take his woman away. he knew that
beating was unnecessary, 
 
 ___________________________
 
that he had power within
himself to accomplish his purpose without using his
fists. gripping george by the shoulder and pulling him
to his feet, he held him with one hand while he looked
at belle carpenter seated on the grass. then with a
quick wide movement of his arm he sent the younger man
sprawling away into the bushes and began to bully the
woman, who had risen to her feet. "you're no good," he
said roughly. "i've half a mind not to bother with you.
i'd let you alone if i didn't want you so much."

on his hands and knees in the bushes george willard
stared at the scene before him and tried hard to think.
he prepared to spring at the man who had humiliated
him. to be beaten seemed to be infin
 
 ___________________________
 
itely better than
to be thus hurled ignominiously aside.

three times the young reporter sprang at ed handby and
each time the bartender, catching him by the shoulder,
hurled him back into the bushes. the older man seemed
prepared to keep the exercise going indefinitely but
george willard's head struck the root of a tree and he
lay still. then ed handby took belle carpenter by the
arm and marched her away.

george heard the man and woman making their way through
the bushes. as he crept down the hillside his heart was
sick within him. he hated himself and he hated the fate
that had brought about his humiliation. when his mind
went back to the hour alone in the alleyway he was
puzzled and stopping in the darkness listened, hoping
to hear again the voice outside himself that had so
short a time before put new courage into his heart.
when his way homeward led him agai