u wing biddlebaum, comb
your hair, it's falling into your eyes," commanded the
voice to the man, who was bald and whose nervous little
hands fiddled about the bare white forehead as though
arranging a mass of tangled locks.

wing biddlebaum, forever frightened and beset by a
ghostly band of doubts, did not think of himself as in
any way a part of the life of the town where he had
lived for twenty years. among all the people of
winesburg but one had come close to him. with george
willard, son of tom willard, the proprietor of the new
willard house, he had formed something like a
friendship. george willard was the reporter on the
winesburg eagle and sometimes in the evenings he walked
out along the highway to wing biddlebaum's house. now
as the old man walked up and down on the veranda, his
hands moving nervously about, he was hoping that george
willard would come and spend the evening with him.
after the wagon containing the berry pickers had
passed, he went across the field through the tall
musta
 
 ___________________________
 
his pockets to
become round hard balls.




mother

elizabeth willard, the mother of george willard, was
tall and gaunt and her face was marked with smallpox
scars. although she was but forty-five, some obscure
disease had taken the fire out of her figure.
listlessly she went about the disorderly old hotel
looking at the faded wall-paper and the ragged carpets
and, when she was able to be about, doing the work of a
chambermaid among beds soiled by the slumbers of fat
traveling men. her husband, tom willard, a slender,
graceful man with square shoulders, a quick military
step, and a black mustache trained to turn sharply up
at the ends, tried to put the wife out of his mind. the
presence of the tall ghostly figure, moving slowly
through the halls, he took as a reproach to himself.
when he thought of her he grew angry and swore. the
hotel was unprofitable and forever on the edge of
failure and he wished himself out of it. he thought of
the old house and the woman who lived there with him as
things 
 
 ___________________________
 
defeated and done for. the hotel in which he had
begun life so hopefully was now a mere ghost of what a
hotel should be. as he went spruce and business-like
through the streets of winesburg, he sometimes stopped
and turned quickly about as though fearing that the
spirit of the hotel and of the woman would follow him
even into the streets. "damn such a life, damn it!" he
sputtered aimlessly.

tom willard had a passion for village politics and for
years had been the leading democrat in a strongly
republican community. some day, he told himself, the
tide of things political will turn in my favor and the
years of ineffectual service count big in the bestowal
of rewards. he dreamed of going to congress and even of
becoming governor. once when a younger member of the
party arose at a political conference and began to
boast of his faithful service, tom willard grew white
with fury. "shut up, you," he
 
 ___________________________
 
her bed, during the long hours
alone, the little fears that had visited her had become
giants. now they were all gone. "when i get back to my
room i shall sleep," she murmured gratefully.

but elizabeth willard was not to return to her bed and
to sleep. as she stood trembling in the darkness the
door of her son's room opened and the boy's father, tom
willard, stepped out. in the light that steamed out at
the door he stood with the knob in his hand and talked.
what he said infuriated the woman.

tom willard was ambitious for his son. he had always
thought of himself as a successful man, although
nothing he had ever done had turned out successfully.
however, when he was out of sight of the new willard
house and had no fear of coming upon his wife, he
swaggered and began to dramatize himself as one of the
chief men of the town. he wanted his son to succeed. he
it was who had secured for the boy the position on the
winesburg eagle. now, with a ring of earnestness in his
voice, he was advising concern
 
 ___________________________
 
ing some course of
conduct. "i tell you what, george, you've got to wake
up," he said sharply. "will henderson has spoken to me
three times concerning the matter. he says you go along
for hours not hearing when you are spoken to and acting
like a gawky girl. what ails you?" tom willard laughed
good-naturedly. "well, i guess you'll get over it," he
said. "i told will that. you're not a fool and you're
not a woman. you're tom willard's son and you'll wake
up. i'm not afraid. what you say clears things up. if
being a newspaper man had put the notion of becoming a
writer into your mind that's all right. only i guess
you'll have to wake up to do that too, eh?"

tom willard went briskly along the hallway and down a
flight of stairs to the office. the woman in the
darkness could hear him laughing and talking with a
guest who was striving to wear away a dull evening by
dozing in a chair by the office door. she returned to
the doo
 
 ___________________________
 
 through her head. when
she heard the scraping of a chair and the sound of a
pen scratching upon paper, she again turned and went
back along the hallway to her own room.

a definite determination had come into the mind of the
defeated wife of the winesburg hotel keeper. the
determination was the result of long years of quiet and
rather ineffectual thinking. "now," she told herself,
"i will act. there is something threatening my boy and
i will ward it off." the fact that the conversation
between tom willard and his son had been rather quiet
and natural, as though an understanding existed between
them, maddened her. although for years she had hated
her husband, her hatred had always before been a quite
impersonal thing. he had been merely a part of
something else that she hated. now, and by the few
words at the door, he had become the thing personified.
in the darkness of her own room she clenched her fists
and glared about. going to a cloth bag that hung on a
nail by the wall she took out a long p
 
 ___________________________
 
night she was quite beside
herself with the thought, but when she tried to talk of
the matter to the members of the theatrical companies
that came to winesburg and stopped at her father's
hotel, she got nowhere. they did not seem to know what
she meant, or if she did get something of her passion
expressed, they only laughed. "it's not like that,"
they said. "it's as dull and uninteresting as this
here. nothing comes of it."

with the traveling men when she walked about with them,
and later with tom willard, it was quite different.
always they seemed to understand and sympathize with
her. on the side streets of the village, in the
darkness under the trees, they took hold of her hand
and she thought that something unexpressed in herself
came forth and became a part of an unexpressed
something in them.

and then there was the second expression of her
restlessness. when that came she felt for a time
released and happy. she did not blame the men who
walked with her and later she did not blame tom
will
 
 ___________________________
 
nd she went to a closet and brought
out a small square box and set it on the table. the box
contained material for make-up and had been left with
other things by a theatrical company that had once been
stranded in winesburg. elizabeth willard had decided
that she would be beautiful. her hair was still black
and there was a great mass of it braided and coiled
about her head. the scene that was to take place in the
office below began to grow in her mind. no ghostly
worn-out figure should confront tom willard, but
something quite unexpected and startling. tall and with
dusky cheeks and hair that fell in a mass from her
shoulders, a figure should come striding down the
stairway before the startled loungers in the hotel
office. the figure would be silent--it would be swift
and terrible. as a tigress whose cub had been
threatened would she appear, coming out of the shadows,
stealing noiselessly along and holding the long wicked
scissors in her hand.

with a little broken sob in her throat, elizabeth
wi
 
 ___________________________
 
riend, george willard. it
had rained during the afternoon, but as he walked
through main street, the sky had partially cleared and
a golden glow lit up the west. going around a corner,
he turned in at the door of the hotel and began to
climb the stairway leading up to his friend's room. in
the hotel office the proprietor and two traveling men
were engaged in a discussion of politics.

on the stairway seth stopped and listened to the voices
of the men below. they were excited and talked rapidly.
tom willard was berating the traveling men. "i am a
democrat but your talk makes me sick," he said. "you
don't understand mckinley. mckinley and mark hanna are
friends. it is impossible perhaps for your mind to
grasp that. if anyone tells you that a friendship can
be deeper and bigger and more worth while than dollars
and cents, or even more worth while than state
politics, you snicker and laugh."

the landlord was interrupted by one of the guests, a
tall, grey-mustached man who worked for a wholesale
groc
 
 ___________________________
 
atched the gesticulating lively figures
of his companions. he wasn't particularly interested in
what was going on, and sometimes wondered if he would
ever be particularly interested in anything. now, as he
stood in the half-darkness by the window watching the
baker, he wished that he himself might become
thoroughly stirred by something, even by the fits of
sullen anger for which baker groff was noted. "it would
be better for me if i could become excited and wrangle
about politics like windy old tom willard," he thought,
as he left the window and went again along the hallway
to the room occupied by his friend, george willard.

george willard was older than seth richmond, but in the
rather odd friendship between the two, it was he who
was forever courting and the younger boy who was being
courted. the paper on which george worked had one
policy. it strove to mention by name in each issue, as
many as possible of the inhabitants of the village.
like an excited dog, george willard ran here and there,

 
 ___________________________
 
ed in and out of
the hotel and was overcome with sadness. as the girl
grew older and began to walk out in the evening with
men he wanted to talk to her, but when he tried was not
successful. he always forgot what he wanted to say and
spent the time complaining of his own affairs.

in her girlhood and young womanhood elizabeth had tried
to be a real adventurer in life. at eighteen life had
so gripped her that she was no longer a virgin but,
although she had a half dozen lovers before she married
tom willard, she had never entered upon an adventure
prompted by desire alone. like all the women in the
world, she wanted a real lover. always there was
something she sought blindly, passionately, some hidden
wonder in life. the tall beautiful girl with the
swinging stride who had walked under the trees with men
was forever putting out her hand into the darkness and
trying to get hold of some other hand. in all the
babble of words that fell from the lips of the men with
whom she adventured she was trying 
 
 ___________________________
 
to find what would
be for her the true word.

elizabeth had married tom willard, a clerk in her
father's hotel, because he was at hand and wanted to
marry at the time when the determination to marry came
to her. for a while, like most young girls, she thought
marriage would change the face of life. if there was in
her mind a doubt of the outcome of the marriage with
tom she brushed it aside. her father was ill and near
death at the time and she was perplexed because of the
meaningless outcome of an affair in which she had just
been involved. other girls of her age in wines
 
 ___________________________
 
 happily. she began to think that the fact of
marriage might be full of some hidden significance.
young wives with whom she talked spoke softly and
shyly. "it changes things to have a man of your own,"
they said.

on the evening before her marriage the perplexed girl
had a talk with her father. later she wondered if the
hours alone with the sick man had not led to her
decision to marry. the father talked of his life and
advised the daughter to avoid being led into another
such muddle. he abused tom willard, and that led
elizabeth to come to the clerk's defense. the sick man
became excited and tried to get out of bed. when she
would not let him walk about he began to complain.
"i've never been let alone," he said. "although i've
worked hard i've not made the hotel pay. even now i owe
money at the bank. you'll find that out when i'm gone."

the voice of the sick man became tense with
earnestness. being unable to arise, he put out his hand
and pulled the girl's head down beside his own.
"there's a w
 
 ___________________________
 
elizabeth died on a friday afternoon at three o'clock.
it had been cold and rainy in the morning but in the
afternoon the sun came out. before she died she lay
paralyzed for six days unable to speak or move and with
only her mind and her eyes alive. for three of the six
days she struggled, thinking of her boy, trying to say
some few words in regard to his future, and in her eyes
there was an appeal so touching that all who saw it
kept the memory of the dying woman in their minds for
years. even tom willard, who had always half resented
his wife, forgot his resentment and the tears ran out
of his eyes and lodged in his mustache. the mustache
had begun to turn grey and tom colored it with dye.
there was oil in the preparation he used for the
purpose and the tears, catching in the mustache and
being brushed away by his hand, formed a fine mist-like
vapor. in his grief tom willard's face looked like the
face of a little dog that has been out a long time in
bitter weather.

george came home along main
 
 ___________________________
 
nnects with a
great trunk line railroad with terminals in chicago and
new york. tom has what in railroad circles is called an
"easy run." every evening he returns to his family. in
the fall and spring he spends his sundays fishing in
lake erie. he has a round red face and small blue eyes.
he knows the people in the towns along his railroad
better than a city man knows the people who live in his
apartment building.

george came down the little incline from the new
willard house at seven o'clock. tom willard carried his
bag. the son had become taller than the father.

on the station platform everyone shook the young man's
hand. more than a dozen people waited about. then they
talked of their own affairs. even will henderson, who
was lazy and often slept until nine, had got out of
bed. george was embarrassed. gertrude wilmot, a tall
thin woman of fifty who worked in the winesburg post
office, came along the station platform. she had never
before paid any attention to george. now she stopped
and put 
 
 ___________________________
 
monplace enough
incident with him. in the smoking car there was a man
who had just invited tom to go on a fishing trip to
sandusky bay. he wanted to accept the invitation and
talk over details.

george glanced up and down the car to be sure no one
was looking, then took out his pocket-book and counted
his money. his mind was occupied with a desire not to
appear green. almost the last words his father had said
to him concerned the matter of his behavior when he got
to the city. "be a sharp one," tom willard had said.
"keep your eyes on your money. be awake. that's the
ticket. don't let anyone think you're a greenhorn."

after george counted his money he looked out of the
window and was surprised to see that the train was
still in winesburg.

the young man, going out of his town to meet the
adventure of life, began to think but he did not think
of anything very big or dramatic. things like his
mother's death, his departure from winesburg, the
uncertainty of his future life in the city, the serious
