mes the place was like a beehive. at
one moment all was quiet, then doors began to open,
feet clattered on stairs, a murmur of soft voices arose
and people appeared from a dozen obscure corners.

besides the old people, already mentioned, many others
lived in the bentley house. there were four hired men,
a woman named aunt callie beebe, who was in charge of
the housekeeping, a dull-witted girl named eliza
stoughton, who made beds and helped with the milking, a
boy who worked in the stables, and jesse bentley
himself, the owner and overlord of it all.

by the time the american civil war had been over for
twenty years, that part of northern ohio where the
bentley farms lay had begun to emerge from pioneer
life. jesse then owned machinery for harvesting grain.
he had built modern barns and most of his land was
drained with carefully laid tile drain, but in order to
understand the man we will have to go back to an
earlier day.

the bentley family had been in northern ohio for
several generations before
 
 ___________________________
 
d be had at a low price. for a long
time they, in common with all the other middle western
people, were very poor. the land they had settled upon
was heavily wooded and covered with fallen logs and
underbrush. after the long hard labor of clearing these
away and cutting the timber, there were still the
stumps to be reckoned with. plows run through the
fields caught on hidden roots, stones lay all about, on
the low places water gathered, and the young corn
turned yellow, sickened and died.

when jesse bentley's father and brothers had come into
their ownership of the place, much of the harder part
of the work of clearing had been done, but they clung
to old traditions and worked like driven animals. they
lived as practically all of the farming people of the
time lived. in the spring and through most of the
winter the highways leading into the town of winesburg
were a sea of mud. the four young men of the family
worked hard all day in the fields, they ate heavily of
coarse, greasy food, and at night 
 
 ___________________________
 
, died
suddenly, and the father became altogether discouraged.
he talked of selling the farm and moving into town. all
day he went about shaking his head and muttering. the
work in the fields was neglected and weeds grew high in
the corn. old tom hired men but he did not use them
intelligently. when they had gone away to the fields in
the morning he wandered into the woods and sat down on
a log. sometimes he forgot to come home at night and
one of the daughters had to go in search of him.

when jesse bentley came home to the farm and began to
take charge of things he was a slight,
sensitive-looking man of twenty-two. at eighteen he
had left home to go to school to become a scholar and
eventually to become a minister of the presbyterian
church. all through his boyhood he had been what in our
country was called an "odd sheep" and had not got on
with his brothers. of all the family only his mother
had understood him and she was now dead. when he came
home to take charge of the farm, that had at that t
 
 ___________________________
 
ivil war was no place for
a delicate woman, and katherine bentley was delicate.
jesse was hard with her as he was with everybody about
him in those days. she tried to do such work as all the
neighbor women about her did and he let her go on
without interference. she helped to do the milking and
did part of the housework; she made the beds for the
men and prepared their food. for a year she worked
every day from sunrise until late at night and then
after giving birth to a child she died.

as for jesse bentley--although he was a delicately
built man there was something within him that could not
easily be killed. he had brown curly hair and grey eyes
that were at times hard and direct, at times wavering
and uncertain. not only was he slender but he was also
short of stature. his mouth was like the mouth of a
sensitive and very determined child. jesse bentley was
a fanatic. he was a man born out of his time and place
and for this he suffered and made others suffer. never
did he succeed in getting what 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the land and thought
out his new place in life. the passionate burning thing
in his nature flamed up and his eyes became hard. he
wanted to make the farm produce as no farm in his state
had ever produced before and then he wanted something
else. it was the indefinable hunger within that made
his eyes waver and that kept him always more and more
silent before people. he would have given much to
achieve peace and in him was a fear that peace was the
thing he could not achieve.

all over his body jesse bentley was alive. in his
small frame was gathered the force of a long line of
strong men. he had always been extraordinarily alive
when he was a small boy on the farm and later when he
was a young man in school. in the school he had studied
and thought of god and the bible with his whole mind
and heart. as time passed and he grew to know people
better, he began to think of himself as an
extraordinary man, one set apart from his fellows. he
wanted terribly to make his life a thing of great
importance, 
 
 ___________________________
 
y
as in those other and older days, kingdoms might be
created and new impulses given to the lives of men by
the power of god speaking through a chosen servant. he
longed to be such a servant. "it is god's work i have
come to the land to do," he declared in a loud voice
and his short figure straightened and he thought that
something like a halo of godly approval hung over him.

            *       *       *

it will perhaps be somewhat difficult for the men and
women of a later day to understand jesse bentley. in
the last fifty years a vast change has taken place in
the lives of our people. a revolution has in fact taken
place. the coming of industrialism, attended by all the
roar and rattle of affairs, the shrill cries of
millions of new voices that have come among us from
overseas, the going and coming of trains, the growth of
cities, the building of the inter-urban car lines that
weave in and out of towns and past farmhouses, and now
in these later days the coming of the automobiles has
worked a 
 
 ___________________________
 
es, newspapers are
everywhere. in our day a farmer standing by the stove
in the store in his village has his mind filled to
overflowing with the words of other men. the newspapers
and the magazines have pumped him full. much of the old
brutal ignorance that had in it also a kind of
beautiful childlike innocence is gone forever. the
farmer by the stove is brother to the men of the
cities, and if you listen you will find him talking as
glibly and as senselessly as the best city man of us
all.

in jesse bentley's time and in the country districts of
the whole middle west in the years after the civil war
it was not so. men labored too hard and were too tired
to read. in them was no desire for words printed upon
paper. as they worked in the fields, vague, half-formed
thoughts took possession of them. they believed in god
and in god's power to control their lives. in the
little protestant churches they gathered on sunday to
hear of god and his works. the churches were the center
of the social and intelle
 
 ___________________________
 
low hill, he sat down to think.

jesse thought that as the true servant of god the
entire stretch of country through which he had walked
should have come into his possession. he thought of his
dead brothers and blamed them that they had not worked
harder and achieved more. before him in the moonlight
the tiny stream ran down over stones, and he began to
think of the men of old times who like himself had
owned flocks and lands.

a fantastic impulse, half fear, half greediness, took
possession of jesse bentley. he remembered how in the
old bible story the lord had appeared to that other
jesse and told him to send his son david to where saul
and the men of israel were fighting the philistines in
the valley of elah. into jesse's mind came the
conviction that all of the ohio farmers who owned land
in the valley of wine creek were philistines and
enemies of god. "suppose," he whispered to himself,
"there should come from among them one who, like
goliath the philistine of gath, could defeat me and
take fr
 
 ___________________________
 
ping
to his feet, he began to run through the night. as he
ran he called to god. his voice carried far over the
low hills. "jehovah of hosts," he cried, "send to me
this night out of the womb of katherine, a son. let thy
grace alight upon me. send me a son to be called david
who shall help me to pluck at last all of these lands
out of the hands of the philistines and turn them to
thy service and to the building of thy kingdom on
earth."



ii

david hardy of winesburg, ohio, was the grandson of
jesse bentley, the owner of bentley farms. when he was
twelve years old he went to the old bentley place to
live. his mother, louise bentley, the girl who came
into the world on that night when jesse ran through the
fields crying to god that he be given a son, had grown
to womanhood on the farm and had married young john
hardy of winesburg, who became a banker. louise and her
husband did not live happily together and everyone
agreed that she was to blame. she was a small woman
with sharp grey eyes and black 
 
 ___________________________
 
e became drowsy she became bold
and whispered things that he later thought he must have
dreamed.

her soft low voice called him endearing names and he
dreamed that his mother had come to him and that she
had changed so that she was always as she had been that
time after he ran away. he also grew bold and reaching
out his hand stroked the face of the woman on the floor
so that she was ecstatically happy. everyone in the old
house became happy after the boy went there. the hard
insistent thing in jesse bentley that had kept the
people in the house silent and timid and that had never
been dispelled by the presence of the girl louise was
apparently swept away by the coming of the boy. it was
as though god had relented and sent a son to the man.

the man who had proclaimed himself the only true
servant of god in all the valley of wine creek, and who
had wanted god to send him a sign of approval by way of
a son out of the womb of katherine, began to think that
at last his prayers had been answered. altho
 
 ___________________________
 
ugh he was
at that time only fifty-five years old he looked
seventy and was worn out with much thinking and
scheming. the effort he had made to extend his land
holdings had been successful and there were few farms
in the valley that did not belong to him, but until
david came he was a bitterly disappointed man.

there were two influences at work in jesse bentley and
all his life his mind had been a battleground for these
influences. first there was the old thing in him. he
wanted to be a man of god and a leader among men of
god. his walking in the fields and through the forests
at night had brought him close to nature and there were
forces in the passionately religious man that ran out
to the forces in nature. the disappointment that had
come to him when a daughter and not a son had been born
to katherine had fallen upon him like a blow struck by
some 
 
 ___________________________
 
to the men about him. the greedy thing in
him wanted to make money faster than it could be made
by tilling the land. more than once he went into
winesburg to talk with his son-in-law john hardy about
it. "you are a banker and you will have chances i never
had," he said and his eyes shone. "i am thinking about
it all the time. big things are going to be done in the
country and there will be more money to be made than i
ever dreamed of. you get into it. i wish i were younger
and had your chance." jesse bentley walked up and down
in the bank office and grew more and more excited as he
talked. at one time in his life he had been threatened
with paralysis and his left side remained somewhat
weakened. as he talked his left eyelid twitched. later
when he drove back home and when night came on and the
stars came out it was harder to get back the old
feeling of a close and personal god who lived in the
sky overhead and who might at any moment reach out his
hand, touch him on the shoulder, and appoint for hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s things
might have happened during the night. the farm hands
looked at him and laughed. henry strader, an old man
who had been on the farm since jesse came into
possession and who before david's time had never been
known to make a joke, made the same joke every morning.
it amused david so that he laughed and clapped his
hands. "see, come here and look," cried the old man.
"grandfather jesse's white mare has torn the black
stocking she wears on her foot."

day after day through the long summer, jesse bentley
drove from farm to farm up and down the valley of wine
creek, and his grandson went with him. they rode in a
comfortable old phaeton drawn by the white horse. the
old man scratched his thin white beard and talked to
himself of his plans for increasing the productiveness
of the fields they visited and of god's part in the
plans all men made. sometimes he looked at david and
smiled happily and then for a long time he appeared to
forget the boy's existence. more and more every day now
his mind tur
 
 ___________________________
 
ather,
but ran along beside him and wondered what was going to
happen. when a rabbit jumped up and ran away through
the woods, he clapped his hands and danced with
delight. he looked at the tall trees and was sorry that
he was not a little animal to climb high in the air
without being frightened. stooping, he picked up a
small stone and threw it over the head of his
grandfather into a clump of bushes. "wake up, little
animal. go and climb to the top of the trees," he
shouted in a shrill voice.

jesse bentley went along under the trees with his head
bowed and with his mind in a ferment. his earnestness
affected the boy, who presently became silent and a
little alarmed. into the old man's mind had come the
notion that now he could bring from god a word or a
sign out of the sky, that the presence of the boy and
man on their knees in some lonely spot in the forest
would make the miracle he had been waiting for almost
inevitable. "it was in just such a place as this that
other david tended the sheep whe
 
 ___________________________
 
nees
and began to pray in a loud voice.

a kind of terror he had never known before took
possession of david. crouching beneath a tree he
watched the man on the ground before him and his own
knees began to tremble. it seemed to him that he was in
the presence not only of his grandfather but of someone
else, someone who might hurt him, someone who was not
kindly but dangerous and brutal. he began to cry and
reaching down picked up a small stick, which he held
tightly gripped in his fingers. when jesse bentley,
absorbed in his own idea, suddenly arose and advanced
toward him, his terror grew until his whole body shook.
in the woods an intense silence seemed to lie over
everything and suddenly out of the silence came the old
man's harsh and insistent voice. gripping the boy's
shoulders, jesse turned his face to the sky and
shouted. the whole left side of his face twitched and
his hand on the boy's shoulder twitched also. "make a
sign to me, god," he cried. "here i stand with the boy
david. come down t
 
 ___________________________
 
s without carrying the sling in his
pocket and he spent hours shooting at imaginary animals
concealed among the brown leaves in the trees. thoughts
of his coming manhood passed and he was content to be a
boy with a boy's impulses.

one saturday morning when he was about to set off for
the woods with the sling in his pocket and a bag for
nuts on his shoulder, his grandfather stopped him. in
the eyes of the old man was the strained serious look
that always a little frightened david. at such times
jesse bentley's eyes did not look straight ahead but
wavered and seemed to be looking at nothing. something
like an invisible curtain appeared to have come between
the man and all the rest of the world. "i want you to
come with me," he said briefly, and his eyes looked
over the boy's head into the sky. "we have something
important to do today. you may bring the bag for nuts
if you wish. it does not matter and anyway we will be
going into the woods."

jesse and david set out from the bentley farmhouse in
the 
 
 ___________________________
 
f through the woods
weeping convulsively. "i don't care--i killed him, but
i don't care," he sobbed. as he ran on and on he
decided suddenly that he would never go back again to
the bentley farms or to the town of winesburg. "i have
killed the man of god and now i will myself be a man
and go into the world," he said stoutly as he stopped
running and walked rapidly down a road that followed
the windings of wine creek as it ran through fields and
forests into the west.

on the ground by the creek jesse bentley moved uneasily
about. he groaned and opened his eyes. for a long time
he lay perfectly still and looked at the sky. when at
last he got to his feet, his mind was confused and he
was not surprised by the boy's disappearance. by the
roadside he sat down on a log and began to talk about
god. that is all they ever got out of him. whenever
david's name was mentioned he looked vaguely at the sky
and said that a messenger from god had taken the boy.
"it happened because i was too greedy for glory," he