and stopping in the darkness listened, hoping
to hear again the voice outside himself that had so
short a time before put new courage into his heart.
when his way homeward led him again into the street of
frame houses he could not bear the sight and began to
run, wanting to get quickly out of the neighborhood
that now seemed to him utterly squalid and commonplace.




"queer"

from his seat on a box in the rough board shed that
stuck like a burr on the rear of cowley & son's store
in winesburg, elmer cowley, the junior member of the
firm, could see through a dirty window into the
printshop of the winesburg eagle. elmer was putting new
shoelaces in his shoes. they did not go in readily and
he had to take the shoes off. with the shoes in his
hand he sat looking at a large hole in the heel of one
of his stockings. then looking quickly up he saw george
willard, the only newspaper reporter in winesburg,
standing at the back door of the eagle printshop and
staring absentmindedly about. "well, well, what
 
 ___________________________
 
 next!"
exclaimed the young man with the shoes in his hand,
jumping to his feet and creeping away from the window.

a flush crept into elmer cowley's face and his hands
began to tremble. in cowley & son's store a jewish
traveling salesman stood by the counter talking to his
father. he imagined the reporter could hear what was
being said and the thought made him furious. with one
of the shoes still held in his hand he stood in a
corner of the shed and stamped with a stockinged foot
upon the board floor.

cowley & son's store did not face the main street of
winesburg. the front was on maumee street and beyond it
was voight's wagon shop and a
 
 ___________________________
 
e and it did not cost them much to live. his
troubles were not financial. his unhappiness as a
merchant lay in the fact that when a traveling man with
wares to be sold came in at the front door he was
afraid. behind the counter he stood shaking his head.
he was afraid, first that he would stubbornly refuse to
buy and thus lose the opportunity to sell again; second
that he would not be stubborn enough and would in a
moment of weakness buy what could not be sold.

in the store on the morning when elmer cowley saw
george willard standing and apparently listening at the
back door of the eagle printshop, a situation had
arisen that always stirred the son's wrath. the
traveling man talked and ebenezer listened, his whole
figure expressing uncertainty. "you see how quickly it
is done," said the traveling man, who had for sale a
small flat metal substitute for collar buttons. with
one hand he quickly unfastened a collar from his shirt
and then fastened it on again. he assumed a flattering
wheedling tone. 
 
 ___________________________
 
agency for this town.
take twenty dozen of these fasteners and i'll not visit
any other store. i'll leave the field to you."

the traveling man leaned over the counter and tapped
with his finger on ebenezer's breast. "it's an
opportunity and i want you to take it," he urged. "a
friend of mine told me about you. 'see that man
cowley,' he said. 'he's a live one.'"

the traveling man paused and waited. taking a book
from his pocket he began writing out the order. still
holding the shoe in his hand elmer cowley went through
the store, past the two absorbed men, to a glass
showcase near the front door. he took a cheap revolver
from the case and began to wave it about. "you get out
of here!" he shrieked. "we don't want any collar
fasteners here." an idea came to him. "mind, i'm not
making any threat," he added. "i don't say i'll shoot.
maybe i just took this gun out of the case to look at
it. but you better get out. yes sir, i'll say that. you
better grab up your things and get out."

the young storekee
 
 ___________________________
 
 going to buy any more stuff until we begin to
sell. we ain't going to keep on being queer and have
folks staring and listening. you get out of here!"

the traveling man left. raking the samples of collar
fasteners off the counter into a black leather bag, he
ran. he was a small man and very bow-legged and he ran
awkwardly. the black bag caught against the door and he
stumbled and fell. "crazy, that's what he is--crazy!"
he sputtered as he arose from the sidewalk and hurried
away.

in the store elmer cowley and his father stared at each
other. now that the immediate object of his wrath had
fled, the younger man was embarrassed. "well, i meant
it. i think we've been queer long enough," he declared,
going to the showcase and replacing the revolver.
sitting on a barrel he pulled on and fastened the shoe
he had been holding in his hand. he was waiting for
some word of understanding from his father but when
ebenezer spoke his words only served to reawaken the
wrath in the son and the young man ran out 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the store
without replying. scratching his grey beard with his
long dirty fingers, the merchant looked at his son with
the same wavering uncertain stare with which he had
confronted the traveling man. "i'll be starched," he
said softly. "well, well, i'll be washed and ironed and
starched!"

elmer cowley went out of winesburg and along a country
road that paralleled the railroad track. he did not
know where he was going or what he was going to do. in
the shelter of a deep cut where the road, after turning
sharply to the right, dipped under the tracks he
stopped and the passion that had been the cause of his
outburst in the store began to again find expression.
"i will not be queer--one to be looked at and listened
to," he declared aloud. "i'll be like other people.
i'll show that george willard
 
 ___________________________
 
ing the tall boy who ran about town gathering
the town news. the reporter had merely come, by his
presence in the office and in the printshop of the
winesburg eagle, to stand for something in the young
merchant's mind. he thought the boy who passed and
repassed cowley & son's store and who stopped to talk
to people in the street must be thinking of him and
perhaps laughing at him. george willard, he felt,
belonged to the town, typified the town, represented in
his person the spirit of the town. elmer cowley could
not have believed that george willard had also his days
of unhappiness, that vague hungers and secret unnamable
desires visited also his mind. did he not represent
public opinion and had not the public opinion of
winesburg condemned the cowleys to queerness? did he
not walk whistling and laughing through main street?
might not one by striking his person strike also the
greater enemy--the thing that smiled and went its own
way--the judgment of winesburg?

elmer cowley was extraordinarily t
 
 ___________________________
 
t
lived in the sheds with him, and when he was lonely
held long conversations with the cows, the pigs, and
even with the chickens that ran about the barnyard. he
it was who had put the expression regarding being
"laundered" into the mouth of his former employer. when
excited or surprised by anything he smiled vaguely and
muttered: "i'll be washed and ironed. well, well, i'll
be washed and ironed and starched."

when the half-witted old man left his husking of corn
and came into the wood to meet elmer cowley, he was
neither surprised nor especially interested in the
sudden appearance of the young man. his feet also were
cold and he sat on the log by the fire, grateful for
the warmth and apparently indifferent to what elmer had
to say.

elmer talked earnestly and with great freedom, walking
up and down and waving his arms about. "you don't
understand what's the matter with me so of course you
don't care," he declared. "with me it's different. look
how it has always been with me. father is queer and

 
 ___________________________
 
im and his voice
dropped. "i'm a coward too, eh?" he muttered. "do you
know why i came clear out here afoot? i had to tell
someone and you were the only one i could tell. i
hunted out another queer one, you see. i ran away,
that's what i did. i couldn't stand up to someone like
that george willard. i had to come to you. i ought to
tell him and i will."

again his voice arose to a shout and his arms flew
about. "i will tell him. i won't be queer. i don't care
what they think. i won't stand it."

elmer cowley ran out of the woods leaving the half-wit
sitting on the log before the fire. presently the old
man arose and climbing over the fence went back to his
work in the corn. "i'll be washed and ironed and
starched," he declared. "well, well, i'll be washed and
ironed." mook was interested. he went along a lane to a
field where two cows stood nibbling at a straw stack.
"elmer was here," he said to the cows. "elmer is crazy.
you better get behind the stack where he don't see you.
he'll hurt someone ye
 
 ___________________________
 
t, elmer will."

at eight o'clock that evening elmer cowley put his head
in at the front door of the office of the winesburg
eagle where george willard sat writing. his cap was
pulled down over his eyes and a sullen determined look
was on his face. "you come on outside with me," he
said, stepping in and closing the door. he kept his
hand on the knob as though prepared to resist anyone
else coming in. "you just come along outside. i want to
see you."

george willard and elmer cowley walked through the main
street of winesburg. the night was cold and george
willard had on a new overcoat and looked very spruce
and dressed up. he thrust his hands into the overcoat
pockets and looked inquiringly at his companion. he had
long been wanting to make friends with the young
merchant and find out what was in his mind. now he
thought he saw a chance and was delighted. "i wonder
what he's up to? perhaps he thinks he has a piece of
news for the paper. it can't be a fire because i
haven'
 
 ___________________________
 
st. george
willard, rubbing his eyes and again wearing the new
overcoat, ran down to the station platform afire with
curiosity. "well, here i am. what do you want? you've
got something to tell me, eh?" he said.

elmer tried to explain. he wet his lips with his
tongue and looked at the train that had begun to groan
and get under way. "well, you see," he began, and then
lost control of his tongue. "i'll be washed and ironed.
i'll be washed and ironed and starched," he muttered
half incoherently.

elmer cowley danced with fury beside the groaning train
in the darkness on the station platform. lights leaped
into the air and bobbed up and down before his eyes.
taking the two ten-dollar bills from his pocket he
thrust them into george willard's hand. "take them," he
cried. "i don't want them. give them to father. i stole
them." with a snarl of rage he turned and his long arms
began to flay the air. like one struggling for release
from hands that held him he struck out, hitting george
willard blow after 