on
the heart of saul before the coming of david. jumping
to his feet, he began to run through the night. as he
ran he called to god. his voice carried far over the
low hills. "jehovah of hosts," he cried, "send to me
this night out of the womb of katherine, a son. let thy
grace alight upon me. send me a son to be called david
who shall help me to pluck at last all of these lands
out of the hands of the philistines and turn them to
thy service and to the building of thy kingdom on
earth."



ii

david hardy of winesburg, ohio, was the grandson of
jesse bentley, the owner of bentley farms. when he was
twelve years old he went to the old bentley place to
live. his mother, louise bentley, the girl who came
into the world on that night when jesse ran through the
fields crying to god that he be given a son, had grown
to womanhood on the farm and had married young john
hardy of winesburg, who became a banker. louise and her
husband did not live happily together and everyone
agreed that she was to blame.
 
 ___________________________
 
she drove off into the country. on the country
roads after she had gotten out of sight of the houses
she let the horses slow down to a walk and her wild,
reckless mood passed. she became thoughtful and
muttered words. sometimes tears came into her eyes. and
then when she came back into town she again drove
furiously through the quiet streets. but for the
influence of her husband and the respect he inspired in
people's minds she would have been arrested more than
once by the town marshal.

young david hardy grew up in the house with this woman
and as can well be imagined there was not much joy in
his childhood. he was too young then to have opinions
of his own about people, but at times it was difficult
for him not to have very definite opinions about the
woman who was his mother. david was always a quiet,
orderly boy and for a long time was thought by the
people of winesburg to be something of a dullard. his
eyes were brown and as a child he had a habit of
looking at things and people a long time
 
 ___________________________
 
t. sometimes she stayed in the room with him
all day, walking about and occasionally creeping close
to touch him tenderly with her hands, and then other
days came when she did not want to see or be near the
tiny bit of humanity that had come into the house. when
john hardy reproached her for her cruelty, she laughed.
"it is a man child and will get what it wants anyway,"
she said sharply. "had it been a woman child there is
nothing in the world i would not have done for it."



iv

terror

when david hardy was a tall boy of fifteen, he, like
his mother, had an adventure that changed the whole
current of his life and sent him out of his quiet
corner into the world. the shell of the circumstances
of his life was broken and he was compelled to start
forth. he left winesburg and no one there ever saw him
again. after his disappearance, his mother and
grandfather both died and his father became very rich.
he spent much money in trying to locate his son, but
that is no part of this story.

it was in th