hovah of hosts," he cried, "send to me
this night out of the womb of katherine, a son. let thy
grace alight upon me. send me a son to be called david
who shall help me to pluck at last all of these lands
out of the hands of the philistines and turn them to
thy service and to the building of thy kingdom on
earth."



ii

david hardy of winesburg, ohio, was the grandson of
jesse bentley, the owner of bentley farms. when he was
twelve years old he went to the old bentley place to
live. his mother, louise bentley, the girl who came
into the world on that night when jesse ran through the
fields crying to god that he be given a son, had grown
to womanhood on the farm and had married young john
hardy of winesburg, who became a banker. louise and her
husband did not live happily together and everyone
agreed that she was to blame. she was a small woman
with sharp grey eyes and black hair. from childhood she
had been inclined to fits of temper and when not angry
she was often morose and silent. in winesburg i
 
 ___________________________
 
ke
to find the old man's hand stroking his head tenderly
that the terror left him. "take me away. there is a
terrible man back there in the woods," he declared
firmly, while jesse looked away over the tops of the
trees and again his lips cried out to god. "what have i
done that thou dost not approve of me," he whispered
softly, saying the words over and over as he drove
rapidly along the road with the boy's cut and bleeding
head held tenderly against his shoulder.


iii

surrender

the story of louise bentley, who became mrs. john hardy
and lived with her husband in a brick house on elm
street in winesburg, is a story of misunderstanding.

before such women as louise can be understood and their
lives made livable, much will have to be done.
thoughtful books will have to be written and thoughtful
lives lived by people about them.

born of a delicate and overworked mother, and an
impulsive, hard, imaginative father, who did not look
with favor upon her coming into the world, louise was
from childhood 
 
 ___________________________
 
shoulder. vaguely
she hoped that he like that young man who had stood in
the darkness with mary would put his arms about her and
kiss her, but the country boy was only alarmed. he
struck the horse with the whip and began to whistle.
"the road is rough, eh?" he said loudly. louise was so
angry that reaching up she snatched his hat from his
head and threw it into the road. when he jumped out of
the buggy and went to get it, she drove off and left
him to walk the rest of the way back to the farm.

louise bentley took john hardy to be her lover. that
was not what she wanted but it was so the young man had
interpreted her approach to him, and so anxious was she
to achieve something else that she made no resistance.
when after a few months they were both afraid that she
was about to become a mother, they went one evening to
the county seat and were married. for a few months they
lived in the hardy house and then took a house of their
own. all during the first year louise tried to make her
husband understa