 past will henderson who was reading proof
in the printshop and started to run along the alleyway.

through street after street went george willard,
avoiding the people who passed. he crossed and
recrossed the road. when he passed a street lamp he
pulled his hat down over his face. he did not dare
think. in his mind there was a fear but it was a new
kind of fear. he was afraid the adventure on which he
had set out would be spoiled, that he would lose
courage and turn back.

george willard found louise trunnion in the kitchen of
her father's house. she was washing dishes by the light
of a kerosene lamp. there she stood behind the screen
door in the little shedlike kitchen at the back of the
house. george willard stopped by a picket fence and
tried to control the shaking of his body. only a narrow
potato patch separated him from the adventure. five
minutes passed before he felt sure enough of himself to
call to her. "louise! oh, louise!" he called. the cry
stuck in his throat. his voice became a hoarse
 
 ___________________________
 
 whisper.

louise trunnion came out across the potato patch
holding the dish cloth in her hand. "how do you know i
want to go out with you," she said sulkily. "what makes
you so sure?"

george willard did not answer. in silence the two
stood in the darkness with the fence between them. "you
go on along," she said. "pa's in there. i'll come
along. you wait by williams' barn."

the young newspaper reporter had received a letter from
louise trunnion. it had come that morning to the office
of the winesburg eagle. the letter was brief. "i'm
yours if you want me," it said. he thought it annoying
that in the darkness by the fence she had pretended
there was nothing between them. "she has a nerve! well,
gracious sakes, she has a nerve," he muttered as he
went along the street and passed a row of vacant lots
where corn grew. the corn was shoulder high and had
been planted right down to the sidewalk.

when louise trunnion came out of the front do