lard blow after blow on the breast, the neck, the
mouth. the young reporter rolled over on the platform
half unconscious, stunned by the terrific force of the
blows. springing aboard the passing train and running
over the tops of cars, elmer sprang down to a flat car
and lying on his face looked back, trying to see the
fallen man in the darkness. pride surged up in him. "i
showed him," he cried. "i guess i showed him. i ain't
so queer. i guess i showed him i ain't so queer."




the untold lie

ray pearson and hal winters were farm hands employed on
a farm three miles north of winesburg. on saturday
afternoons they came into town and wandered about
through the streets with other fellows from the
country.

ray was a quiet, rather nervous man of perhaps fifty
with a brown beard and shoulders rounded by too much
and too hard labor. in his nature he was as unlike hal
winters as two men can be unlike.

ray was an altogether serious man and had a little
sharp-featured wife who had also a sharp voice. t
 
 ___________________________
 
e too was
in an earnest mood. he began to talk earnestly. "has a
fellow got to do it?" he asked. "has he got to be
harnessed up and driven through life like a horse?"

hal didn't wait for an answer but sprang to his feet
and began to walk back and forth between the corn
shocks. he was getting more and more excited. bending
down suddenly he picked up an ear of the yellow corn
and threw it at the fence. "i've got nell gunther in
trouble," he said. "i'm telling you, but you keep your
mouth shut."

ray pearson arose and stood staring. he was almost a
foot shorter than hal, and when the younger man came
and put his two hands on the older man's shoulders they
made a picture. there they stood in the big empty field
with the quiet corn shocks standing in rows behind them
and the red and yellow hills in the distance, and from
being just two indifferent workmen they had become all
alive to each other. hal sensed it and because that was
his way he laughed. "well, old daddy," he said
awkwardly, "come on, adv
 
 ___________________________
 
somewhere in the house a child wept bitterly and a dog
that had been sleeping by the stove arose and yawned.
again the wife scolded. "the children will cry and cry.
why are you always puttering?" she asked.

ray went out of the house and climbed the fence into a
field. it was just growing dark and the scene that lay
before him was lovely. all the low hills were washed
with color and even the little clusters of bushes in
the corners of the fences were alive with beauty. the
whole world seemed to ray pearson to have become alive
with something just as he and hal had suddenly become
alive when they stood in the corn field staring into
each other's eyes.

the beauty of the country about winesburg was too much
for ray on that fall evening. that is all there was to
it. he could not stand it. of a sudden he forgot all
about being a quiet old farm hand and throwing off the
torn overcoat began to run across the field. as he ran
he shouted a protest against his life, against all
life, against everything th
 
 ___________________________
 
 and ride
a horse into western towns, shouting and laughing and
waking the people in the houses with his wild cries.
then as he ran he remembered his children and in fancy
felt their hands clutching at him. all of his thoughts
of himself were involved with the thoughts of hal and
he thought the children were clutching at the younger
man also. "they are the accidents of life, hal," he
cried. "they are not mine or yours. i had nothing to do
with them."

darkness began to spread over the fields as ray pearson
ran on and on. his breath came in little sobs. when he
came to the fence at the edge of the road and
confronted hal winters, all dressed up and smoking a
pipe as he walked jauntily along, he could not have
told what he thought or what he wanted.

ray pearson lost his nerve and this is really the end
of the story of what happened to him. it was almost
dark when he got to the fence and he put his hands on
the top bar and stood staring. hal winters jumped a
ditch and coming up close to ray put his
 
 ___________________________
 
s own
sense of what had happened in the corn field and when
he put up a strong hand and took hold of the lapel of
ray's coat he shook the old man as he might have shaken
a dog that had misbehaved.

"you came to tell me, eh?" he said. "well, never mind
telling me anything. i'm not a coward and i've already
made up my mind." he laughed again and jumped back
across the ditch. "nell ain't no fool," he said. "she
didn't ask me to marry her. i want to marry her. i want
to settle down and have kids."

ray pearson also laughed. he felt like laughing at
himself and all the world.

as the form of hal winters disappeared in the dusk that
lay over the road that led to winesburg, he turned and
walked slowly back across the fields to where he had
left his torn overcoat. as he went some memory of
pleasant evenings spent with the thin-legged children
in the tumble-down house by the creek must have come
into his mind, for he muttered words. "it's just as
well. whatever i told him would have been a lie," he
said s