ever, added, “that if it had
not been for the present situation of things at court, perhaps i might
not have obtained it so soon.  for,” said he, “as flourishing a condition
as we may appear to be in to foreigners, we labour under two mighty
evils: a violent faction at home, and the danger of an invasion, by a
most potent enemy, from abroad.  as to the first, you are to understand,
that for about seventy moons past there have been two struggling parties
in this empire, under the names of _tramecksan_ and _slamecksan_, from
the high and low heels of their shoes, by which they distinguish
themselves.  it is alleged, indeed, that the high heels are most
agreeable to our ancient constitution; but, however this be, his majesty
has determined to make use only of low heels in the administration of the
government, and all offices in the gift of the crown, as you cannot but
observe; and particularly that his majesty’s imperial heels are lower at
least by a _drurr_ than any of his court (_drurr_ i
 
 ___________________________
 
s a measure about the
fourteenth part of an inch).  the animosities between these two parties
run so high, that they will neither eat, nor drink, nor talk with each
other.  we compute the _tramecksan_, or high heels, to exceed us in
number; but the power is wholly on our side.  we apprehend his imperial
highness, the heir to the crown, to have some tendency towards the high
heels; at least we can plainly discover that one of his heels is higher
than the other, which gives him a hobble in his gait.  now, in the midst
of these intestine disquiets, we are threatened with an invasion from the
island of blefuscu, which is the other great empire of the universe,
almost as large and powerful as th