ery loose and uncorrect account of my travels, with directions
to hire some young gentleman of either university to put them in order,
and correct the style, as my cousin dampier did, by my advice, in his
book called “a voyage round the world.”  but i do not remember i gave you
power to consent that any thing should be omitted, and much less that any
thing should be inserted; therefore, as to the latter, i do here renounce
every thing of that kind; particularly a paragraph about her majesty
queen anne, of most pious and glorious memory; although i did reverence
and esteem her more than any of human species.  but you, or your
interpolator, ought to have considered, that it was not my inclination,
so was it not decent to praise any animal of our composition before my
master _houyhnhnm_: and besides, the fact was altogether false; for to my
knowledge, being in england during some part of her majesty’s reign, she
did govern by a chief minister; nay even by two successively, the first
wher
 
 ___________________________
 
besides, i had learnt their alphabet, and could
make a shift to explain a sentence here and there; for glumdalclitch had
been my instructor while we were at home, and at leisure hours during our
journey.  she carried a little book in her pocket, not much larger than a
sanson’s atlas; it was a common treatise for the use of young girls,
giving a short account of their religion: out of this she taught me my
letters, and interpreted the words.



chapter iii.


the author sent for to court.  the queen buys him of his master the
farmer, and presents him to the king.  he disputes with his majesty’s
great scholars.  an apartment at court provided for the author.  he is in
high favour with the queen.  he stands up for the honour of his own
country.  his quarrels with the queen’s dwarf.

the frequent labours i underwent every day, made, in a few weeks, a very
considerable change in my health: the more my master got by me, the more
insatiable he grew.  i had quite lost my stomach, and was almo
 
 ___________________________
 
st reduced
to a skeleton.  the farmer observed it, and concluding i must soon die,
resolved to make as good a hand of me as he could.  while he was thus
reasoning and resolving with himself, a _sardral_, or gentleman-usher,
came from court, commanding my master to carry me immediately thither for
the diversion of the queen and her ladies.  some of the latter had
already been to see me, and reported strange things of my beauty,
behaviour, and good sense.  her majesty, and those who attended her, were
beyond measure delighted with my demeanour.  i fell on my knees, and
begged the honour of kissing her imperial foot; but this gracious
princess held out her little finger towards me, after i was set on the
table, which i embraced in both my arms, and put the tip of it with the
utmost respect to my lip.  she made me so
 
 ___________________________
 

asked my master, “whether he was willing to sell me at a good price?”
he, who apprehended i could not live a month, was ready enough to part
with me, and demanded a thousand pieces of gold, which were ordered him
on the spot, each piece being about the bigness of eight hundred
moidores; but allowing for the proportion of all things between that
country and europe, and the high price of gold among them, was hardly so
great a sum as a thousand guineas would be in england.  i then said to
the queen, “since i was now her majesty’s most humble creature and
vassal, i must beg the favour, that glumdalclitch, who had always tended
me with so much care and kindness, and understood to do it so well, might
be admitted into her service, and continue to be my nurse and
instructor.”

her majesty agreed to my petition, and easily got the farmer’s consent,
who was glad enough to have his daughter preferred at court, and the poor
girl herself was not able to hide her joy.  my late master withdr
 
 ___________________________
 
ew,
bidding me farewell, and saying he had left me in a good service; to
which i replied not a word, only making him a slight bow.

the queen observed my coldness; and, when the farmer was gone out of the
apartment, asked me the reason.  i made bold to tell her majesty, “that i
owed no other obligation to my late master, than his not dashing out the
brains of a poor harmless creature, found by chance in his fields: which
obligation was amply recompensed, by the gain he had made in showing me
through half the kingdom, and the price he had now sold me for.  that the
life i had since led was laborious enough to kill an animal of ten t
 
 ___________________________
 

the darling of the world, the delight of her subjects, the phoenix of the
creation, so i hoped my late master’s apprehensions would appear to be
groundless; for i already found my spirits revive, by the influence of
her most august presence.”

this was the sum of my speech, delivered with great improprieties and
hesitation.  the latter part was altogether framed in the style peculiar
to that people, whereof i learned some phrases from glumdalclitch, while
she was carrying me to court.

the queen, giving great allowance for my defectiveness in speaking, was,
however, surprised at so much wit and good sense in so diminutive an
animal.  she took me in her own hand, and carried me to the king, who was
then retired to his cabinet.  his majesty, a prince of much gravity and
austere countenance, not well observing my shape at first view, asked the
queen after a cold manner “how long it was since she grew fond of a
_splacnuck_?” for such it seems he took me to be, as i lay upon my breast
i
 
 ___________________________
 
by many learned arguments, to evince that i could not possibly
do.  one of these virtuosi seemed to think that i might be an embryo, or
abortive birth.  but this opinion was rejected by the other two, who
observed my limbs to be perfect and finished; and that i had lived
several years, as it was manifest from my beard, the stumps whereof they
plainly discovered through a magnifying glass.  they would not allow me
to be a dwarf, because my littleness was beyond all degrees of
comparison; for the queen’s favourite dwarf, the smallest ever known in
that kingdom, was near thirty feet high.  after much debate, they
concluded unanimously, that i was only _relplum scalcath_, which is
interpreted literally _lusus naturæ_; a determination exactly agreeable
to the modern philosophy of europe, whose professors, disdaining the old
evasion of occult causes, whereby the followers of aristotle endeavoured
in vain to disguise their ignorance, have invented this wonderful
solution of all difficulties, to
 
 ___________________________
 
er to those gentlemen’s arguments.”  to this they
only replied with a smile of contempt, saying, “that the farmer had
instructed me very well in my lesson.”  the king, who had a much better
understanding, dismissing his learned men, sent for the farmer, who by
good fortune was not yet gone out of town.  having therefore first
examined him privately, and then confronted him with me and the young
girl, his majesty began to think that what we told him might possibly be
true. he desired the queen to order that a particular care should be
taken of me; and was of opinion that glumdalclitch should still continue
in her office of tending me, because he observed we had a great affection
for each other.  a convenient apartment was provided for her at court:
she had a sort of governess appointed to take care of her education, a
maid to dress her, and two other servants for menial offices; but the
care of me was wholly appropriated to herself.  the queen commanded her
own cabinet-maker to contr
 
 ___________________________
 
es, as well as the floor and the ceiling, to prevent any
accident from the carelessness of those who carried me, and to break the
force of a jolt, when i went in a coach.  i desired a lock for my door,
to prevent rats and mice from coming in.  the smith, after several
attempts, made the smallest that ever was seen among them, for i have
known a larger at the gate of a gentleman’s house in england.  i made a
shift to keep the key in a pocket of my own, fearing glumdalclitch might
lose it.  the queen likewise ordered the thinnest silks that could be
gotten, to make me clothes, not much thicker than an english blanket,
very cumbersome till i was accustomed to them.  they were after the
fashion of the kingdom, partly resembling the persian, and partly the
chinese, and are a very grave and decent habit.

the queen became so fond of my company, that she could not dine without
me.  i had a table placed upon the same at which her majesty ate, just at
her left elbow, and a chair to sit on.  glumda
 
 ___________________________
 
lclitch stood on a stool on
the floor near my table, to assist and take care of me.  i had an entire
set of silver dishes and plates, and other necessaries, which, in
proportion to those of the queen, were not much bigger than what i have
seen in a london toy-shop for the furniture of a baby-house: these my
little nurse kept in her pocket in a silver box, and gave me at meals as
i wanted them, always cleaning them herself.  no person dined with the
queen but the two princesses royal, the eldest sixteen years old, and the
younger at that time thirteen and a month.  her majesty used to put a bit
of meat upon one of my dishes, out of which i carved for myself, and her
diversion was to see me eat in miniature: for the queen (who had indeed
but a weak stomach) took up, at one mouthful, as much as a dozen english
farmers could eat at a meal, which to me was for some time a very
nauseous sight.  she would craunch the wing of a lark, bones and all,
bet
 
 ___________________________
 
t
a draught.  her knives were twice as long as a scythe, set straight upon
the handle.  the spoons, forks, and other instruments, were all in the
same proportion.  i remember when glumdalclitch carried me, out of
curiosity, to see some of the tables at court, where ten or a dozen of
those enormous knives and forks were lifted up together, i thought i had
never till then beheld so terrible a sight.

it is the custom, that every wednesday (which, as i have observed, is
their sabbath) the king and queen, with the royal issue of both sexes,
dine together in the apartment of his majesty, to whom i was now become a
great favourite; and at these times, my little chair and table were
placed at his left hand, before one of the salt-cellars.  this prince
took a pleasure in conversing with me, inquiring into the manners,
religion, laws, government, and learning of europe; wherein i gave him
the best account i was able.  his apprehension was so clear, and his
judgment so exact, that he made very wise r
 
 ___________________________
 
yes to be of
proportionable magnitude, the horror i had at first conceived from their
bulk and aspect was so far worn off, that if i had then beheld a company
of english lords and ladies in their finery and birth-day clothes, acting
their several parts in the most courtly manner of strutting, and bowing,
and prating, to say the truth, i should have been strongly tempted to
laugh as much at them as the king and his grandees did at me.  neither,
indeed, could i forbear smiling at myself, when the queen used to place
me upon her hand towards a looking-glass, by which both our persons
appeared before me in full view together; and there could be nothing more
ridiculous than the comparison; so that i really began to imagine myself
dwindled many degrees below my usual size.

nothing angered and mortified me so much as the queen’s dwarf; who being
of the lowest stature that was ever in that country (for i verily think
he was not full thirty feet high), became so insolent at seeing a
creature so m
 
 ___________________________
 
uch beneath him, that he would always affect to swagger and
look big as he passed by me in the queen’s antechamber, while i was
standing on some table talking with the lords or ladies of the court, and
he seldom failed of a smart word or two upon my littleness; against which
i could only revenge myself by calling him brother, challenging him to
wrestle, and such repartees as are usually in the mouths of court pages.
one day, at dinner, this malicious little cub was so nettled with
something i had said to him, that, raising himself upon the frame of her
majesty’s chair, he took me up by the
 
 ___________________________
 
 middle, as i was sitting down, not
thinking any harm, and let me drop into a large silver bowl of cream, and
then ran away as fast as he could.  i fell over head and ears, and, if i
had not been a good swimmer, it might have gone very hard with me; for
glumdalclitch in that instant happened to be at the other end of the
room, and the queen was in such a fright, that she wanted presence of
mind to assist me.  but my little nurse ran to my relief, and took me
out, after i had swallowed above a quart of cream.  i was put to bed:
however, i received no other damage than the loss of a suit of clothes,
which was utterly spoiled.  the dwarf was soundly whipt, and as a farther
punishment, forced to drink up the bowl of cream into which he had thrown
me: neither was he ever restored to favour; for soon after the queen
bestowed him on a la
 
 ___________________________
 
dy of high quality, so that i saw him no more, to my
very great satisfaction; for i could not tell to what extremities such a
malicious urchin might have carried his resentment.

he had before served me a scurvy trick, which set the queen a-laughing,
although at the same time she was heartily vexed, and would have
immediately cashiered him, if i had not been so generous as to intercede.
her majesty had taken a marrow-bone upon her plate, and, after knocking
out the marrow, placed the bone again in the dish erect, as it stood
before; the dwarf, watching his opportunity, while glumdalclitch was gone
to the side-board, mounted the stool that she stood on to take care of me
at meals, took me up in both hands, and squeezing my legs t
 
 ___________________________
 
ogether,
wedged them into the marrow bone above my waist, where i stuck for some
time, and made a very ridiculous figure.  i believe it was near a minute
before any one knew what was become of me; for i thought it below me to
cry out.  but, as princes seldom get their meat hot, my legs were not
scalded, only my stockings and breeches in a sad condition.  the dwarf,
at my entreaty, had no other punishment than a sound whipping.

i was frequently rallied by the queen upon account of my fearfulness; and
she used to ask me whether the people of my country were as great cowards
as myself?  the occasion was this: the kingdom is much pestered with
flies in summer; and these odious insects, each of them as big as a
dunstable lark, hardly gave me any rest while i sat at dinner, with their
continual humming and buzzing about mine ears.  they would sometimes
alight upon my victuals, and leave their loathsome excrement, or spawn
behind, which to me was very visible, 
 
 ___________________________
 
elling very offensively; and i could easily
trace that viscous matter, which, our naturalists tell us, enables those
creatures to walk with their feet upwards upon a ceiling.  i had much ado
to defend myself against these detestable animals, and could not forbear
starting when they came on my face.  it was the common practice of the
dwarf, to catch a number of these insects in his hand, as schoolboys do
among us, and let them out suddenly under my nose, on purpose to frighten
me, and divert the queen.  my remedy was to cut them in pieces with my
knife, as they flew in the air, wherein my dexterity was much admired.

i remember, one morning, when glumdalclitch had set me in a box upon a
window, as she usually did in fair days to give me air (for i durst not
venture to let the box be hung on a nail out of the window, as we do with
cages in england), after i had lifted up one of my sashes, and sat down
at my table to eat a piece of sweet cake for my breakfast, above twenty
wasps, allured by th
 
 ___________________________
 
parts of
europe, upon my return to england i gave three of them to gresham
college, and kept the fourth for myself.



chapter iv.


the country described.  a proposal for correcting modern maps.  the
king’s palace; and some account of the metropolis.  the author’s way of
travelling.  the chief temple described.

i now intend to give the reader a short description of this country, as
far as i travelled in it, which was not above two thousand miles round
lorbrulgrud, the metropolis.  for the queen, whom i always attended,
never went farther when she accompanied the king in his progresses, and
there staid till his majesty returned from viewing his frontiers.  the
whole extent of this prince’s dominions reaches about six thousand miles
in length, and from three to five in breadth: whence i cannot but
conclude, that our geographers of europe are in a great error, by
supposing nothing but sea between japan and california; for it was ever
my opinion, that there must be a balance of earth to
 
 ___________________________
 
 see distinctly the limbs of these vermin with my
naked eye, much better than those of a european louse through a
microscope, and their snouts with which they rooted like swine.  they
were the first i had ever beheld, and i should have been curious enough
to dissect one of them, if i had had proper instruments, which i
unluckily left behind me in the ship, although, indeed, the sight was so
nauseous, that it perfectly turned my stomach.

besides the large box in which i was usually carried, the queen ordered a
smaller one to be made for me, of about twelve feet square, and ten high,
for the convenience of travelling; because the other was somewhat too
large for glumdalclitch’s lap, and cumbersome in the coach; it was made
by the same artist, whom i directed in the whole contrivance.  this
travelling-closet was an exact square, with a window in the middle of
three of the squares, and each window was latticed with iron wire on the
outside, to prevent accidents in long journeys.  on the four
 
 ___________________________
 
th side,
which had no window, two strong staples were fixed, through which the
person that carried me, when i had a mind to be on horseback, put a
leathern belt, and buckled it about his waist.  this was always the
office of some grave trusty servant, in whom i could confide, whether i
attended the king and queen in their progresses, or were disposed to see
the gardens, or pay a visit to some great lady or minister of state in
the court, when glumdalclitch happened to be out of order; for i soon
began to be known and esteemed among the greatest officers, i suppose
more upon account of their majesties’ favour, than any merit of my own.
in journeys, when i was weary of the coach, a servant on horseback would
buckle on my box, and place it upon a cushion before him; and there i had
a full prospect of the
 
 ___________________________
 
ck, hung from the ceiling,
two chairs and a table, neatly screwed to the floor, to prevent being
tossed about by the agitation of the horse or the coach.  and having been
long used to sea-voyages, those motions, although sometimes very violent,
did not much discompose me.

whenever i had a mind to see the town, it was always in my
travelling-closet; which glumdalclitch held in her lap in a kind of open
sedan, after the fashion of the country, borne by four men, and attended
by two others in the queen’s livery.  the people, who had often heard of
me, were very curious to crowd about the sedan, and the girl was
complaisant enough to make the bearers stop, and to take me in her hand,
that i might be more conveniently seen.

i was very desirous to see the chief temple, and particularly the tower
belonging to it, which is reckoned the highest in the kingdom.
accordingly one day my nurse carried me thither, but i may truly say i
came back disappointed; for the height is not above three thousand
 
 ___________________________
 
 adventurers that happened to the author.  the execution of a
criminal.  the author shows his skill in navigation.

i should have lived happy enough in that country, if my littleness had
not exposed me to several ridiculous and troublesome accidents; some of
which i shall venture to relate.  glumdalclitch often carried me into the
gardens of the court in my smaller box, and would sometimes take me out
of it, and hold me in her hand, or set me down to walk.  i remember,
before the dwarf left the queen, he followed us one day into those
gardens, and my nurse having set me down, he and i being close together,
near some dwarf apple trees, i must needs show my wit, by a silly
allusion between him and the trees, which happens to hold in their
language as it does in ours.  whereupon, the malicious rogue, watching
his opportunity, when i was walking under one of them, shook it directly
over my head, by which a dozen apples, each of them near as large as a
bristol barrel, came tumbling about my ears
 
 ___________________________
 
e gently took me up in both his hands, and asked me how
i did? but i was so amazed and out of breath, that i could not speak a
word.  in a few minutes i came to myself, and he carried me safe to my
little nurse, who, by this time, had returned to the place where she left
me, and was in cruel agonies when i did not appear, nor answer when she
called.  she severely reprimanded the gardener on account of his dog.
but the thing was hushed up, and never known at court, for the girl was
afraid of the queen’s anger; and truly, as to myself, i thought it would
not be for my reputation, that such a story should go about.

this accident absolutely determined glumdalclitch never to trust me
abroad for the future out of her sight.  i had been long afraid of this
resolution, and therefore concealed from her some little unlucky
adventures, that happened in those times when i was left by myself.  once
a kite, hovering over the garden, made a stoop at me, and if i had not
resolutely drawn my hanger, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
et, that i knocked him down, and seizing
him by the neck with both my hands, ran with him in triumph to my nurse.
however, the bird, who had only been stunned, recovering himself gave me
so many boxes with his wings, on both sides of my head and body, though i
held him at arm’s-length, and was out of the reach of his claws, that i
was twenty times thinking to let him go.  but i was soon relieved by one
of our servants, who wrung off the bird’s neck, and i had him next day
for dinner, by the queen’s command.  this linnet, as near as i can
remember, seemed to be somewhat larger than an english swan.

the maids of honour often invited glumdalclitch to their apartments, and
desired she would bring me along with her, on purpose to have the
pleasure of seeing and touching me.  they would often strip me naked from
top to toe, and lay me at full length in their bosoms; wherewith i was
much disgusted because, to say the truth, a very offensive smell came
from their skins; which i do not mentio
 
 ___________________________
 
smell was much more supportable,
than when they used perfumes, under which i immediately swooned away.  i
cannot forget, that an intimate friend of mine in lilliput, took the
freedom in a warm day, when i had used a good deal of exercise, to
complain of a strong smell about me, although i am as little faulty that
way, as most of my sex: but i suppose his faculty of smelling was as nice
with regard to me, as mine was to that of this people.  upon this point,
i cannot forbear doing justice to the queen my mistress, and
glumdalclitch my nurse, whose persons were as sweet as those of any lady
in england.

that which gave me most uneasiness among these maids of honour (when my
nurse carried me to visit then) was, to see them use me without any
manner of ceremony, like a creature who had no sort of consequence: for
they would strip themselves to the skin, and put on their smocks in my
presence, while i was placed on their toilet, directly before their naked
bodies, which i am sure to me was very 
 
 ___________________________
 
 be extraordinary.  the malefactor was fixed
in a chair upon a scaffold erected for that purpose, and his head cut off
at one blow, with a sword of about forty feet long.  the veins and
arteries spouted up such a prodigious quantity of blood, and so high in
the air, that the great _jet d’eau_ at versailles was not equal to it for
the time it lasted: and the head, when it fell on the scaffold floor,
gave such a bounce as made me start, although i was at least half an
english mile distant.

the queen, who often used to hear me talk of my sea-voyages, and took all
occasions to divert me when i was melancholy, asked me whether i
understood how to handle a sail or an oar, and whether a little exercise
of rowing might not be convenient for my health?  i answered, that i
understood both very well: for although my proper employment had been to
be surgeon or doctor to the ship, yet often, upon a pinch, i was forced
to work like a common mariner.  but i could not see how this could be
done in their
 
 ___________________________
 
 country, where the smallest wherry was equal to a
first-rate man of war among us; and such a boat as i could manage would
never live in any of their rivers.  her majesty said, if i would contrive
a boat, her own joiner should make it, and she would provide a place for
me to sail in.  the fellow was an ingenious workman, and by my
instructions, in ten days, finished a pleasure-boat with all its
tackling, able conveniently to hold eight europeans.  when it was
finished, the queen was so delighted, that she ran with it in her lap to
the king, who ordered it to be put into a cistern full of water, with me
in it, by way of trial, where i could not manage my two sculls, or little
oars, for want of room.  but the queen had before contrived another
project.  she ordered the joiner to make a wooden trough of three hundred
feet long, fifty broad, and eight deep; which, being well pitched, to
prevent leaking, was placed on the floor, along the wall, in an outer
room of the palac
 
 ___________________________
 
e.  it had a cock near the bottom to let out the water,
when it began to grow stale; and two servants could easily fill it in
half an hour.  here i often used to row for my own diversion, as well as
that of the queen and her ladies, who thought themselves well entertained
with my skill and agility.  sometimes i would put up my sail, and then my
business was only to steer, while the ladies gave me a gale with their
fans; and, when they were weary, some of their pages would blow my sail
forward with their breath, while i showed my art by steering starboard or
larboard as i pleased.  when i had done, glumdalclitch always carried
back my boat into her closet, and hung it on a nail to dry.

in this exercise i on
 
 ___________________________
 
e
to the eaves; but an honest lad, one of my nurse’s footmen, climbed up,
and putting me into his breeches pocket, brought me down safe.

i was almost choked with the filthy stuff the monkey had crammed down my
throat: but my dear little nurse picked it out of my mouth with a small
needle, and then i fell a-vomiting, which gave me great relief.  yet i
was so weak and bruised in the sides with the squeezes given me by this
odious animal, that i was forced to keep my bed a fortnight.  the king,
queen, and all the court, sent every day to inquire after my health; and
her majesty made me several visits during my sickness.  the monkey was
killed, and an order made, that no such animal should be kept about the
palace.

when i attended the king after my recovery, to return him thanks for his
favours, he was pleased to rally me a good deal upon this adventure.  he
asked me, “what my thoughts and speculations were, while i lay in the
monkey’s paw; how i liked the victuals he gave me; his manne
 
 ___________________________
 
ll degree of equality or comparison with him.  and
yet i have seen the moral of my own behaviour very frequent in england
since my return; where a little contemptible varlet, without the least
title to birth, person, wit, or common sense, shall presume to look with
importance, and put himself upon a foot with the greatest persons of the
kingdom.

i was every day furnishing the court with some ridiculous story: and
glumdalclitch, although she loved me to excess, yet was arch enough to
inform the queen, whenever i committed any folly that she thought would
be diverting to her majesty.  the girl, who had been out of order, was
carried by her governess to take the air about an hour’s distance, or
thirty miles from town.  they alighted out of the coach near a small
foot-path in a field, and glumdalclitch setting down my travelling box, i
went out of it to walk.  there was a cow-dung in the path, and i must
need try my activity by attempting to leap over it.  i took a run, but
unfortunately jum
 
 ___________________________
 
ped short, and found myself just in the middle up to my
knees.  i waded through with some difficulty, and one of the footmen
wiped me as clean as he could with his handkerchief, for i was filthily
bemired; and my nurse confined me to my box, till we returned home; where
the queen was soon informed of what had passed, and the footmen spread it
about the court: so that all the mirth for some days was at my expense.



chapter vi.


several contrivances of the author to please the king and queen.  he
shows his skill in music.  the king inquires into the state of england,
which the author relates to him.  the king’s observations thereon.

i used to attend the king’s levee once or twice a week, and had often
seen him under the barber’s hand, which indeed was at first very terrible
to behold; for the razor was almost twice as long as an ordinary scythe.
his majesty, according to the custom of the country, was only shaved
twice a-week.  i once prevailed on the barber to give me some 
 
 ___________________________
 
es with as small a
needle as i could get from glumdalclitch.  i fixed in the stumps so
artificially, scraping and sloping them with my knife toward the points,
that i made a very tolerable comb; which was a seasonable supply, my own
being so much broken in the teeth, that it was almost useless: neither
did i know any artist in that country so nice and exact, as would
undertake to make me another.

and this puts me in mind of an amusement, wherein i spent many of my
leisure hours.  i desired the queen’s woman to save for me the combings
of her majesty’s hair, whereof in time i got a good quantity; and
consulting with my friend the cabinet-maker, who had received general
orders to do little jobs for me, i directed him to make two chair-frames,
no larger than those i had in my box, and to bore little holes with a
fine awl, round those parts where i designed the backs and seats; through
these holes i wove the strongest hairs i could pick out, just after the
manner of cane chairs in england.
 
 ___________________________
 
  when they were finished, i made a
present of them to her majesty; who kept them in her cabinet, and used to
show them for curiosities, as indeed they were the wonder of every one
that beheld them.  the queen would have me sit upon one of these chairs,
but i absolutely refused to obey her, protesting i would rather die than
place a dishonourable part of my body on those precious hairs, that once
adorned her majesty’s head.  of these hairs (as i had always a mechanical
genius) i likewise made a neat little purse, about five feet long, with
her majesty’s name deciphered in gold letters, which i gave to
glumdalclitch, by the queen’s consent.  to say the truth, it was more for
show than use, being
 
 ___________________________
 
 the place where the performers sat, as far as
i could, then to shut the doors and windows of it, and draw the window
curtains; after which i found their music not disagreeable.

i had learned in my youth to play a little upon the spinet.
glumdalclitch kept one in her chamber, and a master attended twice a-week
to teach her: i called it a spinet, because it somewhat resembled that
instrument, and was played upon in the same manner.  a fancy came into my
head, that i would entertain the king and queen with an english tune upon
this instrument.  but this appeared extremely difficult: for the spinet
was near sixty feet long, each key being almost a foot wide, so that with
my arms extended i could not reach to above five keys, and to press them
down required a good smart stroke with my fist, which would be too great
a labour, and to no purpose.  the method i contrived was this: i prepared
two round sticks, about the bigness of common cudgels; they were thicker
at one end than the other, and i c
 
 ___________________________
 
  as to the decision of civil causes, or proceedings
against criminals, their precedents are so few, that they have little
reason to boast of any extraordinary skill in either.

they have had the art of printing, as well as the chinese, time out of
mind: but their libraries are not very large; for that of the king, which
is reckoned the largest, does not amount to above a thousand volumes,
placed in a gallery of twelve hundred feet long, whence i had liberty to
borrow what books i pleased.  the queen’s joiner had contrived in one of
glumdalclitch’s rooms, a kind of wooden machine five-and-twenty feet
high, formed like a standing ladder; the steps were each fifty feet long.
it was indeed a moveable pair of stairs, the lowest end placed at ten
feet distance from the wall of the chamber.  the book i had a mind to
read, was put up leaning against the wall: i first mounted to the upper
step of the ladder, and turning my face towards the book, began at the
top of the page, and so walking to t
 
 ___________________________
 
bility often contending for
power, the people for liberty, and the king for absolute dominion.  all
which, however happily tempered by the laws of that kingdom, have been
sometimes violated by each of the three parties, and have more than once
occasioned civil wars; the last whereof was happily put an end to by this
prince’s grand-father, in a general composition; and the militia, then
settled with common consent, has been ever since kept in the strictest
duty.



chapter viii.


the king and queen make a progress to the frontiers.  the author attends
them.  the manner in which he leaves the country very particularly
related.  he returns to england.

i had always a strong impulse that i should some time recover my liberty,
though it was impossible to conjecture by what means, or to form any
project with the least hope of succeeding.  the ship in which i sailed,
was the first ever known to be driven within sight of that coast, and the
king had given strict orders, that if at any time anoth
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, it
should be taken ashore, and with all its crew and passengers brought in a
tumbril to lorbrulgrud.  he was strongly bent to get me a woman of my own
size, by whom i might propagate the breed: but i think i should rather
have died than undergone the disgrace of leaving a posterity to be kept
in cages, like tame canary-birds, and perhaps, in time, sold about the
kingdom, to persons of quality, for curiosities.  i was indeed treated
with much kindness: i was the favourite of a great king and queen, and
the delight of the whole court; but it was upon such a foot as ill became
the dignity of humankind.  i could never forget those domestic pledges i
had left behind me.  i wanted to be among people, with whom i could
converse upon even terms, and walk about the streets and fields without
being afraid of being trod to death like a frog or a young puppy.  but my
deliverance came sooner than i expected, and in a manner not very common;
the whole story and circumstances of which i shall faithful
 
 ___________________________
 
ly relate.

i had now been two years in this country; and about the beginning of the
third, glumdalclitch and i attended the king and queen, in a progress to
the south coast of the kingdom.  i was carried, as usual, in my
travelling-box, which as i have already described, was a very convenient
closet, of twelve feet wide.  and i had ordered a hammock to be fixed, by
silken ropes from the four corners at the top, to break the jolts, when a
servant carried me before him on horseback, as i sometimes desired; and
would often sleep in my hammock, while we were upon the road.  on the
roof of my closet, not directly over the middle of the
 
 ___________________________
 
  i got with much difficulty out of my hammock, having first ventured
to draw back the slip-board on the roof already mentioned, contrived on
purpose to let in air, for want of which i found myself almost stifled.

how often did i then wish myself with my dear glumdalclitch, from whom
one single hour had so far divided me!  and i may say with truth, that in
the midst of my own misfortunes i could not forbear lamenting my poor
nurse, the grief she would suffer for my loss, the displeasure of the
queen, and the ruin of her fortune.  perhaps many travellers have not
been under greater difficulties and distress than i was at this juncture,
expecting every moment to see my box dashed to pieces, or at least
overset by the first violent blast, or rising wave.  a breach in one
single pane of glass would have been immediate death: nor could any thing
have preserved the windows, but the strong lattice wires placed on the
outside, against accidents in travelling.  i saw the water ooze in at
several cr
 
 ___________________________
 
d of my closet.  i opened it in
his own presence, and showed him the small collection of rarities i made
in the country from which i had been so strangely delivered.  there was
the comb i had contrived out of the stumps of the king’s beard, and
another of the same materials, but fixed into a paring of her majesty’s
thumb-nail, which served for the back.  there was a collection of needles
and pins, from a foot to half a yard long; four wasp stings, like
joiner’s tacks; some combings of the queen’s hair; a gold ring, which one
day she made me a present of, in a most obliging manner, taking it from
her little finger, and throwing it over my head like a collar.  i desired
the captain would please to accept this ring in return for his
civilities; which he absolutely refused.  i showed him a corn that i had
cut off with my own hand, from a maid of honour’s toe; it was about the
bigness of kentish pippin, and grown so hard, that when i returned
england, i got it hollowed into a cup, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
st, or the diversion of
ignorant readers; that my story could contain little beside common
events, without those ornamental descriptions of strange plants, trees,
birds, and other animals; or of the barbarous customs and idolatry of
savage people, with which most writers abound.  however, i thanked him
for his good opinion, and promised to take the matter into my thoughts.”

he said “he wondered at one thing very much, which was, to hear me speak
so loud;” asking me “whether the king or queen of that country were thick
of hearing?”  i told him, “it was what i had been used to for above two
years past, and that i admired as much at the voices of him and his men,
who seemed to me only to whisper, and yet i could hear them well enough.
but, when i spoke in that country, it was like a man talking in the
streets, to another looking out from the top of a steeple, unless when i
was placed on a table, or held in any person’s hand.”  i told him, “i had
likewise observed another thi
 
 ___________________________
 
k at every thing with
a sort of wonder, and that i often seemed hardly able to contain my
laughter, which he knew not well how to take, but imputed it to some
disorder in my brain.”  i answered, “it was very true; and i wondered how
i could forbear, when i saw his dishes of the size of a silver
three-pence, a leg of pork hardly a mouthful, a cup not so big as a
nut-shell;” and so i went on, describing the rest of his household-stuff
and provisions, after the same manner.  for, although he queen had
ordered a little equipage of all things necessary for me, while i was in
her service, yet my ideas were wholly taken up with what i saw on every
side of me, and i winked at my own littleness, as people do at their own
faults.  the captain understood my raillery very well, and merrily
replied with the old english proverb, “that he doubted mine eyes were
bigger than my belly, for he did not observe my stomach so good, although
i had fasted all day;” and, continuing in his mirth, protested
 
 ___________________________
 
 provoked, and most determined to press a city to
rubbish, orders the island to descend with great gentleness, out of a
pretence of tenderness to his people, but, indeed, for fear of breaking
the adamantine bottom; in which case, it is the opinion of all their
philosophers, that the loadstone could no longer hold it up, and the
whole mass would fall to the ground.

by a fundamental law of this realm, neither the king, nor either of his
two eldest sons, are permitted to leave the island; nor the queen, till
she is past child-bearing.



chapter iv.


the author leaves laputa; is conveyed to balnibarbi; arrives at the
metropolis.  a description of the metropolis, and the country adjoining.
the author hospitably received by a great lord.  his conversation with
that lord.

although i cannot say that i was ill treated in this island, yet i must
confess i thought myself too much neglected, not without some degree of
contempt; for neither prince nor people appeared to be curious in any
part of kno
 
 ___________________________
 
es, humbly desiring his assistance when i wanted
proper words;” which he was pleased to promise me.

i said, “my birth was of honest parents, in an island called england;
which was remote from his country, as many days’ journey as the strongest
of his honour’s servants could travel in the annual course of the sun;
that i was bred a surgeon, whose trade it is to cure wounds and hurts in
the body, gotten by accident or violence; that my country was governed by
a female man, whom we called queen; that i left it to get riches, whereby
i might maintain myself and family, when i should return; that, in my
last voyage, i was commander of the ship, and had about fifty _yahoos_
under me, many of which died at sea, and i was forced to supply them by
others picked out from several nations; that our ship was twice in danger
of being sunk, the first time by a great storm, and the second by
striking against a rock.”  here my master interposed, by asking me, “how
i could persuade strangers, ou
 
 ___________________________
 
 regard to time or other circumstances, while i
strictly adhere to truth.  my only concern is, that i shall hardly be
able to do justice to my master’s arguments and expressions, which must
needs suffer by my want of capacity, as well as by a translation into our
barbarous english.

in obedience, therefore, to his honour’s commands, i related to him the
revolution under the prince of orange; the long war with france, entered
into by the said prince, and renewed by his successor, the present queen,
wherein the greatest powers of christendom were engaged, and which still
continued: i computed, at his request, “that about a million of _yahoos_
might have been killed in the whole progress of it; and perhaps a hundred
or more cities taken, and five times as many ships burnt or sunk.”

he asked me, “what were the usual causes or motives that made one country
go to war with another?”  i answered “they were innumerable; but i should
only mention a few of the chief.  sometimes the ambi
 
 ___________________________
 
o be instructors of others in wisdom and knowledge.”  in answer to which
i assured his honour, “that in all points out of their own trade, they
were usually the most ignorant and stupid generation among us, the most
despicable in common conversation, avowed enemies to all knowledge and
learning, and equally disposed to pervert the general reason of mankind
in every other subject of discourse as in that of their own profession.”



chapter vi.


a continuation of the state of england under queen anne.  the character
of a first minister of state in european courts.

my master was yet wholly at a loss to understand what motives could
incite this race of lawyers to perplex, disquiet, and weary themselves,
and engage in a confederacy of injustice, merely for the sake of injuring
their fellow-animals; neither could he comprehend what i meant in saying,
they did it for hire.  whereupon i was at much pains to describe to him
the use of money, the materials it was made of, and the value of the