 jumps the highest, without falling, succeeds in the office.
very often the chief ministers themselves are commanded to show their
skill, and to convince the emperor that they have not lost their faculty.
flimnap, the treasurer, is allowed to cut a caper on the straight rope,
at least an inch higher than any other lord in the whole empire.  i have
seen him do the summerset several times together, upon a trencher fixed
on a rope which is no thicker than a common packthread in england.  my
friend reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs, is, in my
opinion, if i am not partial, the second after the treasurer; the rest of
the great officers are much upon a par.

these diversions are often attended with fatal accidents, whereof great
numbers are on record.  i myself have seen two or three candidates break
a limb.  but the danger is much greater, when the ministers themselves
are commanded to show their dexterity; for, by contending to excel
themselves and their fellows, they strain so far 
 
 ___________________________
 
f this empire,
from its first erection, through along series of princes; with a
particular account of their wars and politics, laws, learning, and
religion; their plants and animals; their peculiar manners and customs,
with other matters very curious and useful; my chief design at present
being only to relate such events and transactions as happened to the
public or to myself during a residence of about nine months in that
empire.

one morning, about a fortnight after i had obtained my liberty,
reldresal, principal secretary (as they style him) for private affairs,
came to my house attended only by one servant.  he ordered his coach to
wait at a distance, and desired i would give him an hours audience; which
i readily consented to, on account of his quality and personal merits, as
well as of the many good offices he had done me during my solicitations
at court.  i offered to lie down that he might the more conveniently
reach my ear, but he chose rather to let me hold him in my hand during
our c
 
 ___________________________
 
 i have often had four coaches and horses at
once on my table, full of company, while i sat in my chair, leaning my
face towards them; and when i was engaged with one set, the coachmen
would gently drive the others round my table.  i have passed many an
afternoon very agreeably in these conversations.  but i defy the
treasurer, or his two informers (i will name them, and let them make the
best of it) clustril and drunlo, to prove that any person ever came to me
_incognito_, except the secretary reldresal, who was sent by express
command of his imperial majesty, as i have before related.  i should not
have dwelt so long upon this particular, if it had not been a point
wherein the reputation of a great lady is so nearly concerned, to say
nothing of my own; though i then had the honour to be a _nardac_, which
the treasurer himself is not; for all the world knows, that he is only a
_glumglum_, a title inferior by one degree, as that of a marquis is to a
duke in england; yet i allow he preceded me i
 
 ___________________________
 
attend with twenty thousand men, armed with
poisoned arrows, to shoot you on the face and hands.  some of your
servants were to have private orders to strew a poisonous juice on your
shirts and sheets, which would soon make you tear your own flesh, and die
in the utmost torture.  the general came into the same opinion; so that
for a long time there was a majority against you; but his majesty
resolving, if possible, to spare your life, at last brought off the
chamberlain.

â€œupon this incident, reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs,
who always approved himself your true friend, was commanded by the
emperor to deliver his opinion, which he accordingly did; and therein
justified the good thoughts you have of him.  he allowed your crimes to
be great, but that still there was room for mercy, the most commendable
virtue in a prince, and for which his majesty was so justly celebrated.
he said, the friendship between you and him was so well known to the
world, that perhaps the most honour