his
art from their youth, and are not always of noble birth, or liberal
education.  when a great office is vacant, either by death or disgrace
(which often happens,) five or six of those candidates petition the
emperor to entertain his majesty and the court with a dance on the rope;
and whoever jumps the highest, without falling, succeeds in the office.
very often the chief ministers themselves are commanded to show their
skill, and to convince the emperor that they have not lost their faculty.
flimnap, the treasurer, is allowed to cut a caper on the straight rope,
at least an inch higher than any other lord in the whole empire.  i have
seen him do the summerset several times together, upon a trencher fixed
on a rope which is no thicker than a common packthread in england.  my
friend reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs, is, in my
opinion, if i am not partial, the second after the treasurer; the rest of
the great officers are much upon a par.

these diversions are often attended
 
 ___________________________
 
 with fatal accidents, whereof great
numbers are on record.  i myself have seen two or three candidates break
a limb.  but the danger is much greater, when the ministers themselves
are commanded to show their dexterity; for, by contending to excel
themselves and their fellows, they strain so far that there is hardly one
of them who has not received a fall, and some of them two or three.  i
was assured that, a year or two before my arrival, flimnap would
infallibly have broke his neck, if one of the king‚Äôs cushions, that
accidentally lay on the ground, had not weakened the force of his fall.

there is likewise another diversion, which is only shown before the
emperor and empress, and first minister, upon particular occasions.  the
emperor lays on the table three fine silken threads of six inches long;
one is blue, the other red, and the third green.  these threads are
proposed as prizes for those persons whom the emperor has a mind to
d
 
 ___________________________
 
ble respects to the emperor their master, the
renown of whose virtues had so justly filled the whole world with
admiration, and whose royal person i resolved to attend, before i
returned to my own country.  accordingly, the next time i had the honour
to see our emperor, i desired his general license to wait on the
blefuscudian monarch, which he was pleased to grant me, as i could
perceive, in a very cold manner; but could not guess the reason, till i
had a whisper from a certain person, ‚Äúthat flimnap and bolgolam had
represented my intercourse with those ambassadors as a mark of
disaffection;‚Äù from which i am sure my heart was wholly free.  and this
was the first time i began to conceive some imperfect idea of courts and
ministers.

it is to be observed, that these ambassadors spoke to me, by an
interpreter, the languages of both empires differing as much from each
other as any two in europe, and each nation priding itself upon the
antiquity, beauty, and energy of their own tongue, with a
 
 ___________________________
 
ful, and
i confess they far exceed ours.  of their smaller fowl i could take up
twenty or thirty at the end of my knife.

one day his imperial majesty, being informed of my way of living, desired
‚Äúthat himself and his royal consort, with the young princes of the blood
of both sexes, might have the happiness,‚Äù as he was pleased to call it,
‚Äúof dining with me.‚Äù  they came accordingly, and i placed them in chairs
of state, upon my table, just over against me, with their guards about
them.  flimnap, the lord high treasurer, attended there likewise with his
white staff; and i observed he often looked on me with a sour
countenance, which i would not seem to regard, but ate more than usual,
in honour to my dear country, as well as to fill the court with
admiration.  i have some private reasons to believe, that this visit from
his majesty gave flimnap an opportunity of doing me ill offices to his
master.  that minister had always been my secret enemy, though he
outwardly caressed me more than
 
 ___________________________
 
úthat several committees of council have been
lately called, in the most private manner, on your account; and it is but
two days since his majesty came to a full resolution.

‚Äúyou are very sensible that skyresh bolgolam‚Äù (_galbet_, or high-admiral)
‚Äúhas been your mortal enemy, almost ever since your arrival.  his
original reasons i know not; but his hatred is increased since your great
success against blefuscu, by which his glory as admiral is much obscured.
this lord, in conjunction with flimnap the high-treasurer, whose enmity
against you is notorious on account of his lady, limtoc the general,
lalcon the chamberlain, and balmuff the grand justiciary, have prepared
articles of impeachment against you, for treason and other capital
crimes.‚Äù

this preface made me so impatient, being conscious of my own merits and
innocence, that i was going to interrupt him; when he entreated me to be
silent, and thus proceeded:‚Äî

‚Äúout of gratitude for the favours you have done me, i procured
info