world forget that ever i
was an author.  this indeed would be too great a mortification, if i
wrote for fame: but as my sole intention was the public good, i cannot be
altogether disappointed.  for who can read of the virtues i have
mentioned in the glorious _houyhnhnms_, without being ashamed of his own
vices, when he considers himself as the reasoning, governing animal of
his country?  i shall say nothing of those remote nations where _yahoos_
preside; among which the least corrupted are the _brobdingnagians_; whose
wise maxims in morality and government it would be our happiness to
observe.  but i forbear descanting further, and rather leave the
judicious reader to his own remarks and application.

i am not a little pleased that this work of mine can possibly meet with
no censurers: for what objections can be made against a writer, who
relates only plain facts, that happened in such distant countries, where
we have not the least interest, with respect either to trade or
negotiations?  i have caref
 
 ___________________________
 
hat i was bound in duty, as a
subject of england, to have given in a memorial to a secretary of state
at my first coming over; because, whatever lands are discovered by a
subject belong to the crown.‚Äù  but i doubt whether our conquests in the
countries i treat of would be as easy as those of ferdinando cortez over
the naked americans.  the _lilliputians_, i think, are hardly worth the
charge of a fleet and army to reduce them; and i question whether it
might be prudent or safe to attempt the _brobdingnagians_; or whether an
english army would be much at their ease with the flying island over
their heads.  the _houyhnhnms_ indeed appear not to be so well prepared
for war, a science to which they are perfect strangers, and especially
against missive weapons.  however, supposing myself to be a minister of
state, i could never give my advice for invading them.  their prudence,
unanimity, unacquaintedness with fear, and their love of their country,
would amply supply all defects in the military art.  im