side, to avoid the torrent, which fell with
such noise and violence from me.  but before this, they had daubed my
face and both my hands with a sort of ointment, very pleasant to the
smell, which, in a few minutes, removed all the smart of their arrows.
these circumstances, added to the refreshment i had received by their
victuals and drink, which were very nourishing, disposed me to sleep.  i
slept about eight hours, as i was afterwards assured; and it was no
wonder, for the physicians, by the emperor’s order, had mingled a sleepy
potion in the hogsheads of wine.

it seems, that upon the first moment i was discovered sleeping on the
ground, after my landing, the emperor had early notice of it by an
express; and determined in council, that i should be tied in the manner i
have related, (which was done in the night while i slept;) that plenty of
meat and drink should be sent to me, and a machine prepared to carry me
to the capital city.

this resolution perhaps may appear very bold and dange
 
 ___________________________
 
ng these people had endeavoured to kill me with
their spears and arrows, while i was asleep, i should certainly have
awaked with the first sense of smart, which might so far have roused my
rage and strength, as to have enabled me to break the strings wherewith i
was tied; after which, as they were not able to make resistance, so they
could expect no mercy.

these people are most excellent mathematicians, and arrived to a great
perfection in mechanics, by the countenance and encouragement of the
emperor, who is a renowned patron of learning.  this prince has several
machines fixed on wheels, for the carriage of trees and other great
weights.  he often builds his largest men of war, whereof some are nine
feet long, in the woods where the timber grows, and has them carried on
these engines three or four hundred yards to the sea.  five hundred
carpenters and engineers were immediately set at work to prepare the
greatest engine they had.  it was a frame of wood raised three inches
from the ground,
 
 ___________________________
 
fastened by hooks to many bandages, which the workmen
had girt round my neck, my hands, my body, and my legs.  nine hundred of
the strongest men were employed to draw up these cords, by many pulleys
fastened on the poles; and thus, in less than three hours, i was raised
and slung into the engine, and there tied fast.  all this i was told;
for, while the operation was performing, i lay in a profound sleep, by
the force of that soporiferous medicine infused into my liquor.  fifteen
hundred of the emperor’s largest horses, each about four inches and a
half high, were employed to draw me towards the metropolis, which, as i
said, was half a mile distant.

about four hours after we began our journey, i awaked by a very
ridiculous accident; for the carriage being stopped a while, to adjust
something that was out of order, two or three of the young natives had
the curiosity to see how i looked when i was asleep; they climbed up into
the engine, and advancing very softly to my face, one of them, an 
 
 ___________________________
 
nose like a straw, and made me sneeze
violently; whereupon they stole off unperceived, and it was three weeks
before i knew the cause of my waking so suddenly.  we made a long march
the remaining part of the day, and, rested at night with five hundred
guards on each side of me, half with torches, and half with bows and
arrows, ready to shoot me if i should offer to stir.  the next morning at
sun-rise we continued our march, and arrived within two hundred yards of
the city gates about noon.  the emperor, and all his court, came out to
meet us; but his great officers would by no means suffer his majesty to
endanger his person by mounting on my body.

at the place where the carriage stopped there stood an ancient temple,
esteemed to be the largest in the whole kingdom; which, having been
polluted some years before by an unnatural murder, was, according to the
zeal of those people, looked upon as profane, and therefore had been
applied to common use, and all the ornaments and furniture carried aw
 
 ___________________________
 
o feet wide,
through which i could easily creep.  on each side of the gate was a small
window, not above six inches from the ground: into that on the left side,
the king’s smith conveyed fourscore and eleven chains, like those that
hang to a lady’s watch in europe, and almost as large, which were locked
to my left leg with six-and-thirty padlocks.  over against this temple,
on the other side of the great highway, at twenty feet distance, there
was a turret at least five feet high.  here the emperor ascended, with
many principal lords of his court, to have an opportunity of viewing me,
as i was told, for i could not see them.  it was reckoned that above a
hundred thousand inhabitants came out of the town upon the same errand;
and, in spite of my guards, i believe there could not be fewer than ten
thousand at several times, who mounted my body by the help of ladders.
but a proclamation was soon issued, to forbid it upon pain of death.
when the workmen found it was impossible for me to break
 
 ___________________________
 
they cut
all the strings that bound me; whereupon i rose up, with as melancholy a
disposition as ever i had in my life.  but the noise and astonishment of
the people, at seeing me rise and walk, are not to be expressed.  the
chains that held my left leg were about two yards long, and gave me not
only the liberty of walking backwards and forwards in a semicircle, but,
being fixed within four inches of the gate, allowed me to creep in, and
lie at my full length in the temple.



chapter ii.


the emperor of lilliput, attended by several of the nobility, comes to
see the author in his confinement.  the emperor’s person and habit
described.  learned men appointed to teach the author their language.  he
gains favour by his mild disposition.  his pockets are searched, and his
sword and pistols taken from him.

when i found myself on my feet, i looked about me, and must confess i
never beheld a more entertaining prospect.  the country around appeared
like a continued garden, and the enclosed field
 
 ___________________________
 
be carried off in wheel-barrows,
by two servants appointed for that purpose.  i would not have dwelt so
long upon a circumstance that, perhaps, at first sight, may appear not
very momentous, if i had not thought it necessary to justify my
character, in point of cleanliness, to the world; which, i am told, some
of my maligners have been pleased, upon this and other occasions, to call
in question.

when this adventure was at an end, i came back out of my house, having
occasion for fresh air.  the emperor was already descended from the
tower, and advancing on horseback towards me, which had like to have cost
him dear; for the beast, though very well trained, yet wholly unused to
such a sight, which appeared as if a mountain moved before him, reared up
on its hinder feet: but that prince, who is an excellent horseman, kept
his seat, till his attendants ran in, and held the bridle, while his
majesty had time to dismount.  when he alighted, he surveyed me round
with great admiration; but kept beyon
 
 ___________________________
 
ach them.  i took these vehicles and soon emptied
them all; twenty of them were filled with meat, and ten with liquor; each
of the former afforded me two or three good mouthfuls; and i emptied the
liquor of ten vessels, which was contained in earthen vials, into one
vehicle, drinking it off at a draught; and so i did with the rest.  the
empress, and young princes of the blood of both sexes, attended by many
ladies, sat at some distance in their chairs; but upon the accident that
happened to the emperor’s horse, they alighted, and came near his person,
which i am now going to describe.  he is taller by almost the breadth of
my nail, than any of his court; which alone is enough to strike an awe
into the beholders.  his features are strong and masculine, with an
austrian lip and arched nose, his complexion olive, his countenance
erect, his body and limbs well proportioned, all his motions graceful,
and his deportment majestic.  he was then past his prime, being
twenty-eight years and three qua
 
 ___________________________
 
king
mildly, and immediately cutting the strings he was bound with, i set him
gently on the ground, and away he ran.  i treated the rest in the same
manner, taking them one by one out of my pocket; and i observed both the
soldiers and people were highly delighted at this mark of my clemency,
which was represented very much to my advantage at court.

towards night i got with some difficulty into my house, where i lay on
the ground, and continued to do so about a fortnight; during which time,
the emperor gave orders to have a bed prepared for me.  six hundred beds
of the common measure were brought in carriages, and worked up in my
house; a hundred and fifty of their beds, sewn together, made up the
breadth and length; and these were four double: which, however, kept me
but very indifferently from the hardness of the floor, that was of smooth
stone.  by the same computation, they provided me with sheets, blankets,
and coverlets, tolerable enough for one who had been so long inured to
hardships.
 
 ___________________________
 
 idle, and curious people to see me; so that
the villages were almost emptied; and great neglect of tillage and
household affairs must have ensued, if his imperial majesty had not
provided, by several proclamations and orders of state, against this
inconveniency.  he directed that those who had already beheld me should
return home, and not presume to come within fifty yards of my house,
without license from the court; whereby the secretaries of state got
considerable fees.

in the mean time the emperor held frequent councils, to debate what
course should be taken with me; and i was afterwards assured by a
particular friend, a person of great quality, who was as much in the
secret as any, that the court was under many difficulties concerning me.
they apprehended my breaking loose; that my diet would be very expensive,
and might cause a famine.  sometimes they determined to starve me; or at
least to shoot me in the face and hands with poisoned arrows, which would
soon despatch me; but again the
 
 ___________________________
 
s, who are bound to attend him in his wars at
their own expense.  an establishment was also made of six hundred persons
to be my domestics, who had board-wages allowed for their maintenance,
and tents built for them very conveniently on each side of my door.  it
was likewise ordered, that three hundred tailors should make me a suit of
clothes, after the fashion of the country; that six of his majesty’s
greatest scholars should be employed to instruct me in their language;
and lastly, that the emperor’s horses, and those of the nobility and
troops of guards, should be frequently exercised in my sight, to accustom
themselves to me.  all these orders were duly put in execution; and in
about three weeks i made a great progress in learning their language;
during which time the emperor frequently honoured me with his visits, and
was pleased to assist my masters in teaching me.  we began already to
converse together in some sort; and the first words i learnt, were to
express my desire “that he
 
 ___________________________
 
nto every other pocket about me,
except my two fobs, and another secret pocket, which i had no mind should
be searched, wherein i had some little necessaries that were of no
consequence to any but myself.  in one of my fobs there was a silver
watch, and in the other a small quantity of gold in a purse.  these
gentlemen, having pen, ink, and paper, about them, made an exact
inventory of every thing they saw; and when they had done, desired i
would set them down, that they might deliver it to the emperor.  this
inventory i afterwards translated into english, and is, word for word, as
follows:

    “_imprimis_: in the right coat-pocket of the great man-mountain” (for
    so i interpret the words _quinbus flestrin_,) “after the strictest
    search, we found only one great piece of coarse-cloth, large enough
    to be a foot-cloth for your majesty’s chief room of state.  in the
    left pocket we saw a huge silver chest, with a cover of the same
    metal, which we, the searchers, were no
 
 ___________________________
 
t of no great bulk or weight, for we
    could hold above fifty of them in the palms of our hands.

    “this is an exact inventory of what we found about the body of the
    man-mountain, who used us with great civility, and due respect to
    your majesty’s commission.  signed and sealed on the fourth day of
    the eighty-ninth moon of your majesty’s auspicious reign.

                                          clefrin frelock, marsi frelock.”

when this inventory was read over to the emperor, he directed me,
although in very gentle terms, to deliver up the several particulars.  he
first called for my scimitar, which i took out, scabbard and all.  in the
mean time he ordered three thousand of his choicest troops (who then
attended him) to surround me at a distance, with their bows and arrows
just ready to discharge; but i did not observe it, for mine eyes were
wholly fixed upon his majesty.  he then desired me to draw my scimitar,
which, although it had got some rust by the sea wate
 
 ___________________________
 
abbard, and
cast it on the ground as gently as i could, about six feet from the end
of my chain.  the next thing he demanded was one of the hollow iron
pillars; by which he meant my pocket pistols.  i drew it out, and at his
desire, as well as i could, expressed to him the use of it; and charging
it only with powder, which, by the closeness of my pouch, happened to
escape wetting in the sea (an inconvenience against which all prudent
mariners take special care to provide,) i first cautioned the emperor not
to be afraid, and then i let it off in the air.  the astonishment here
was much greater than at the sight of my scimitar.  hundreds fell down as
if they had been struck dead; and even the emperor, although he stood his
ground, could not recover himself for some time.  i delivered up both my
pistols in the same manner as i had done my scimitar, and then my pouch
of powder and bullets; begging him that the former might be kept from
fire, for it would kindle with the smallest spark, and blow u
 
 ___________________________
 
p his
imperial palace into the air.  i likewise delivered up my watch, which
the emperor was very curious to see, and commanded two of his tallest
yeomen of the guards to bear it on a pole upon their shoulders, as
draymen in england do a barrel of ale.  he was amazed at the continual
noise it made, and the motion of the minute-hand, which he could easily
discern; for their sight is much more acute than ours: he asked the
opinions of his learned men about it, which were various and remote, as
the reader may well imagine without my repeating; although indeed i could
not very perfectl
 
 ___________________________
 
ome smaller ones;
my knife and razor, my comb and silver snuff-box, my handkerchief and
journal-book.  my scimitar, pistols, and pouch, were conveyed in
carriages to his majesty’s stores; but the rest of my goods were returned
me.

i had as i before observed, one private pocket, which escaped their
search, wherein there was a pair of spectacles (which i sometimes use for
the weakness of mine eyes,) a pocket perspective, and some other little
conveniences; which, being of no consequence to the emperor, i did not
think myself bound in honour to discover, and i apprehended they might be
lost or spoiled if i ventured them out of my possession.



chapter iii.


the author diverts the emperor, and his nobility of both sexes, in a very
uncommon manner.  the diversions of the court of lilliput described.  the
author has his liberty granted him upon certain conditions.

my gentleness and good behaviour had gained so far on the emperor and his
court, and indeed upon the army and people in general, t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat i began to
conceive hopes of getting my liberty in a short time.  i took all
possible methods to cultivate this favourable disposition.  the natives
came, by degrees, to be less apprehensive of any danger from me.  i would
sometimes lie down, and let five or six of them dance on my hand; and at
last the boys and girls would venture to come and play at hide-and-seek
in my hair.  i had now made a good progress in understanding and speaking
the language.  the emperor had a mind one day to entertain me with
several of the country shows, wherein they exceed all nations i have
known, both for dexterity and magnificence.  i was diverted with none so
much as that of the rope-dancers, performed upon a slender white thread,
extended about two feet, and twelve inches from the ground.  upon which i
shall desire liberty, with the reader’s patience, to enlarge a little.

this diversion is only practised by those persons who are candidates for
great employments, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
high favour at court.  they are trained in this
art from their youth, and are not always of noble birth, or liberal
education.  when a great office is vacant, either by death or disgrace
(which often happens,) five or six of those candidates petition the
emperor to entertain his majesty and the court with a dance on the rope;
and whoever jumps the highest, without falling, succeeds in the office.
very often the chief ministers themselves are commanded to show their
skill, and to convince the emperor that they have not lost their faculty.
flimnap, the treasurer, is allowed to cut a caper on the straight rope,
at least an inch higher than any other lord in the whole empire.  i have
seen him do the summerset several times together, upon a trencher fixed
on a rope which is no thicker than a common packthread in england.  my
friend reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs, is, in my
opinion, if i am not partial, the second after the treasurer; the rest of
the great officers are much u
 
 ___________________________
 
 themselves
are commanded to show their dexterity; for, by contending to excel
themselves and their fellows, they strain so far that there is hardly one
of them who has not received a fall, and some of them two or three.  i
was assured that, a year or two before my arrival, flimnap would
infallibly have broke his neck, if one of the king’s cushions, that
accidentally lay on the ground, had not weakened the force of his fall.

there is likewise another diversion, which is only shown before the
emperor and empress, and first minister, upon particular occasions.  the
emperor lays on the table three fine silken threads of six inches long;
one is blue, the other red, and the third green.  these threads are
proposed as prizes for those persons whom the emperor has a mind to
distinguish by a peculiar mark of his favour.  the ceremony is performed
in his majesty’s great chamber of state, where the candidates are to
undergo a trial of dexterity very different from the former, and such as
i have no
 
 ___________________________
 
t observed the least resemblance of in any other country of the
new or old world.  the emperor holds a stick in his hands, both ends
parallel to the horizon, while the candidates advancing, one by one,
sometimes leap over the stick, sometimes creep under it, backward and
forward, several times, according as the stick is advanced or depressed.
sometimes the emperor holds one end of the stick, and his first minister
the other; sometimes the minister has it entirely to himself.  whoever
performs his part with most agility, and holds out the longest in leaping
and creeping, is rewarded with the blue-coloured silk; the red is given
to the next, and the green to the third, which they all wear girt twice
round about the middle; and you see few great persons about this court
who are not adorned with one of these girdles.

the horses of the army, and those of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 royal stables, having been daily
led before me, were no longer shy, but would come up to my very feet
without starting.  the riders would leap them over my hand, as i held it
on the ground; and one of the emperor’s huntsmen, upon a large courser,
took my foot, shoe and all; which was indeed a prodigious leap.  i had
the good fortune to divert the emperor one day after a very extraordinary
manner.  i desired he would order several sticks of two feet high, and
the thickness of an ordinary cane, to be brought me; whereupon his
majesty commanded the master of his woods to give directions accordingly;
and the next morning six woodmen arrived with as many carriages, drawn by
eight horses to each.  i took nine of these sticks, and fixing them
firmly in the ground in a quadrangular figure, two feet and a half
square, i took four other sticks, and tied 
 
 ___________________________
 
them parallel at each corner,
about two feet from the ground; then i fastened my handkerchief to the
nine sticks that stood erect; and extended it on all sides, till it was
tight as the top of a drum; and the four parallel sticks, rising about
five inches higher than the handkerchief, served as ledges on each side.
when i had finished my work, i desired the emperor to let a troop of his
best horses twenty-four in number, come and exercise upon this plain.
his majesty approved of the proposal, and i took them up, one by one, in
my hands, ready mounted and armed, with the proper officers to exercise
them.  as soon as they got into order they divided into two parties,
performed mock skirmishes, discharged blunt arrows, drew their swords,
fled and pursued, attacked and retired, and in short discovered the best
military discipline i ever beheld.  the parallel 
 
 ___________________________
 
sticks secured them and
their horses from falling over the stage; and the emperor was so much
delighted, that he ordered this entertainment to be repeated several
days, and once was pleased to be lifted up and give the word of command;
and with great difficulty persuaded even the empress herself to let me
hold her in her close chair within two yards of the stage, when she was
able to take a full view of the whole performance.  it was my good
fortune, that no ill accident happened in these entertainments; only once
a fiery horse, that belonged to one of the captains, pawing w
 
 ___________________________
 
ribing to him the use and the nature of it: and the next
day the waggoners arrived with it, but not in a very good condition; they
had bored two holes in the brim, within an inch and half of the edge, and
fastened two hooks in the holes; these hooks were tied by a long cord to
the harness, and thus my hat was dragged along for above half an english
mile; but, the ground in that country being extremely smooth and level,
it received less damage than i expected.

two days after this adventure, the emperor, having ordered that part of
his army which quarters in and about his metropolis, to be in readiness,
took a fancy of diverting himself in a very singular manner.  he desired
i would stand like a colossus, with my legs as far asunder as i
conveniently could.  he then commanded his general (who was an old
experienced leader, and a great patron of mine) to draw up the troops in
close order, and march them under me; the foot by twenty-four abreast,
and the horse by sixteen, with drums beating, col
 
 ___________________________
 
 and, to confess the truth,
my breeches were at that time in so ill a condition, that they afforded
some opportunities for laughter and admiration.

i had sent so many memorials and petitions for my liberty, that his
majesty at length mentioned the matter, first in the cabinet, and then in
a full council; where it was opposed by none, except skyresh bolgolam,
who was pleased, without any provocation, to be my mortal enemy.  but it
was carried against him by the whole board, and confirmed by the emperor.
that minister was _galbet_, or admiral of the realm, very much in his
master’s confidence, and a person well versed in affairs, but of a morose
and sour complexion.  however, he was at length persuaded to comply; but
prevailed that the articles and conditions upon which i should be set
free, and to which i must swear, should be drawn up by himself.  these
articles were brought to me by skyresh bolgolam in person attended by two
under-secretaries, and several persons of distinction.  after th
 
 ___________________________
 
hand, and to
place the middle finger of my right hand on the crown of my head, and my
thumb on the tip of my right ear.  but because the reader may be curious
to have some idea of the style and manner of expression peculiar to that
people, as well as to know the article upon which i recovered my liberty,
i have made a translation of the whole instrument, word for word, as near
as i was able, which i here offer to the public.

“golbasto momarem evlame gurdilo shefin mully ully gue, most mighty
emperor of lilliput, delight and terror of the universe, whose dominions
extend five thousand _blustrugs_ (about twelve miles in circumference) to
the extremities of the globe; monarch of all monarchs, taller than the
sons of men; whose feet press down to the centre, and whose head strikes
against the sun; at whose nod the princes of the earth shake their knees;
pleasant as the spring, comfortable as the summer, fruitful as autumn,
dreadful as winter: his most sublime majesty proposes to the
man-mounta
 
 ___________________________
 
upport of 1724 of our subjects, with free access to
our royal person, and other marks of our favour.  given at our palace at
belfaborac, the twelfth day of the ninety-first moon of our reign.”

i swore and subscribed to these articles with great cheerfulness and
content, although some of them were not so honourable as i could have
wished; which proceeded wholly from the malice of skyresh bolgolam, the
high-admiral: whereupon my chains were immediately unlocked, and i was at
full liberty.  the emperor himself, in person, did me the honour to be by
at the whole ceremony.  i made my acknowledgements by prostrating myself
at his majesty’s feet: but he commanded me to rise; and after many
gracious expressions, which, to avoid the censure of vanity, i shall not
repeat, he added, “that he hoped i should prove a useful servant, and
well deserve all the favours he had already conferred upon me, or might
do for the future.”

the reader may please to observe, that, in the last article of the
rec
 
 ___________________________
 
overy of my liberty, the emperor stipulates to allow me a quantity of
meat and drink sufficient for the support of 1724 lilliputians.  some
time after, asking a friend at court how they came to fix on that
determinate number, he told me that his majesty’s mathematicians, having
taken the height of my body by the help of a quadrant, and finding it to
exceed theirs in the proportion of twelve to one, they concluded from the
similarity of their bodies, that mine must contain at least 1724 of
theirs, and consequently would requi
 
 ___________________________
 
re as much food as was necessary to
support that number of lilliputians.  by which the reader may conceive an
idea of the ingenuity of that people, as well as the prudent and exact
economy of so great a prince.



chapter iv.


mildendo, the metropolis of lilliput, described, together with the
emperor’s palace.  a conversation between the author and a principal
secretary, concerning the affairs of that empire.  the author’s offers to
serve the emperor in his wars.

the first request i made, after i had obtained my liberty, was, that i
might have license to see mildendo, the metropolis; which the emperor
easily granted me, but with a special charge to do no hurt either to the
inhabitants or their houses.  the people had notice, by proclamation, of
my design to visit the town.  the wall which encompassed it is two feet
and a half high, and at least eleven inches broad, so that a coach and
horses may be driven very safely round it; and it is fl
 
 ___________________________
 
ought in all my travels
i had not seen a more populous place.  the city is an exact square, each
side of the wall being five hundred feet long.  the two great streets,
which run across and divide it into four quarters, are five feet wide.
the lanes and alleys, which i could not enter, but only view them as i
passed, are from twelve to eighteen inches.  the town is capable of
holding five hundred thousand souls: the houses are from three to five
stories: the shops and markets well provided.

the emperor’s palace is in the centre of the city where the two great
streets meet.  it is enclosed by a wall of two feet high, and twenty feet
distance from the buildings.  i had his majesty’s permission to step over
this wall; and, the space being so wide between that and the palace, i
could easily view it on every side.  the outward court is a square of
forty feet, and includes two other courts: in the inmost are the royal
apartments, which i was very desirous to see, but found it extremely
difficul
 
 ___________________________
 
t; for the great gates, from one square into another, were but
eighteen inches high, and seven inches wide.  now the buildings of the
outer court were at least five feet high, and it was impossible for me to
stride over them without infinite damage to the pile, though the walls
were strongly built of hewn stone, and four inches thick.  at the same
time the emperor had a great desire that i should see the magnificence of
his palace; but this i was not able to do till three days after, which i
spent in cutting down with my knife some of the largest trees in the
royal park, about a hundred yards distant from the city.  of these trees
i made two stools, each about three feet high, and strong enough to bear
my weight.  the people having received notice a second time, i went again
through the city to the palace with my two stools in my hands.  when i
came to t
 
 ___________________________
 
 empires of
lilliput and blefuscu.  which two mighty powers have, as i was going to
tell you, been engaged in a most obstinate war for six-and-thirty moons
past.  it began upon the following occasion.  it is allowed on all hands,
that the primitive way of breaking eggs, before we eat them, was upon the
larger end; but his present majesty’s grandfather, while he was a boy,
going to eat an egg, and breaking it according to the ancient practice,
happened to cut one of his fingers.  whereupon the emperor his father
published an edict, commanding all his subjects, upon great penalties, to
break the smaller end of their eggs.  the people so highly resented this
law, that our histories tell us, there have been six rebellions raised on
that account; wherein one emperor lost his life, and another his crown.
these civil commotions were constantly fomented by the monarchs of
blefuscu; and when they were quelled, the exiles always fled for refuge
to that empire.  it is computed that eleven thousand per
 
 ___________________________
 
sons have at
several times suffered death, rather than submit to break their eggs at
the smaller end.  many hundred large volumes have been published upon
this controversy: but the books of the big-endians have been long
forbidden, and the whole party rendered incapable by law of holding
employments.  during the course of these troubles, the emperors of
blefusca did frequently expostulate by their ambassadors, accusing us of
making a schism in religion, by offending against a fundamental doctrine
of our great prophet lustrog, in the fifty-fourth chapter of the
blundecral (which is their alcoran).  this, however, is thought to be a
mere strain upon the text; for the words are these: ‘that all true
believers break their eggs at the convenient end.’  and which is the
convenient end, seems, in my humble opinion to be left to every man’s

 
 ___________________________
 
conscience, or at least in the power of the chief magistrate to
determine.  now, the big-endian exiles have found so much credit in the
emperor of blefuscu’s court, and so much private assistance and
encouragement from their party here at home, that a bloody war has been
carried on between the two empires for six-and-thirty moons, with various
success; during which time we have lost forty capital ships, and a much a
greater number of smaller vessels, together with thirty thousand of our
best seamen and soldiers; and the damage received by the enemy is
reckoned to be somewhat greater than ours.  however, they have now
equipped a numer
 
 ___________________________
 
ous fleet, and are just preparing to make a descent upon
us; and his imperial majesty, placing great confidence in your valour and
strength, has commanded me to lay this account of his affairs before
you.”

i desired the secretary to present my humble duty to the emperor; and to
let him know, “that i thought it would not become me, who was a
foreigner, to interfere with parties; but i was ready, with the hazard of
my life, to defend his person and state against all invaders.”



chapter v.


the author, by an extraordinary stratagem, prevents an invasion.  a high
title of honour is conferred upon him.  ambassadors arrive from the
emperor of blefuscu, and sue for peace.  the empress’s apartment on fire
by an accident; the author instrumental in saving the 
 
 ___________________________
 
the empire of blefuscu is an island situated to the north-east of
lilliput, from which it is parted only by a channel of eight hundred
yards wide.  i had not yet seen it, and upon this notice of an intended
invasion, i avoided appearing on that side of the coast, for fear of
being discovered, by some of the enemy’s ships, who had received no
intelligence of me; all intercourse between the two empires having been
strictly forbidden during the war, upon pain of death, and an embargo
laid by our emperor upon all vessels whatsoever.  i communicated to his
majesty a project i had formed of seizing the enemy’s whole fleet; which,
as our scouts assured us, lay at anchor in the harbour, ready to sail
with the first fair wind.  i consulted the most experienced seamen upon
the depth of the channel, which they had often plumbed; who told me, that
in the middle, at high-water, it was seventy _glumgluffs_ deep, which is
about six feet of european measure; and the rest of it fifty _glumgluffs_
at most.
 
 ___________________________
 
 prow of each, i tied all the cords
together at the end.  while i was thus employed, the enemy discharged
several thousand arrows, many of which stuck in my hands and face, and,
beside the excessive smart, gave me much disturbance in my work.  my
greatest apprehension was for mine eyes, which i should have infallibly
lost, if i had not suddenly thought of an expedient.  i kept, among other
little necessaries, a pair of spectacles in a private pocket, which, as i
observed before, had escaped the emperor’s searchers.  these i took out
and fastened as strongly as i could upon my nose, and thus armed, went on
boldly with my work, in spite of the enemy’s arrows, many of which struck
against the glasses of my spectacles, but without any other effect,
further than a little to discompose them.  i had now fastened all the
hooks, and, taking the knot in my hand, began to pull; but not a ship
would stir, for they were all too fast held by their anchors, so that the
boldest part of my enterprise rema
 
 ___________________________
 
they set up such a scream of
grief and despair as it is almost impossible to describe or conceive.
when i had got out of danger, i stopped awhile to pick out the arrows
that stuck in my hands and face; and rubbed on some of the same ointment
that was given me at my first arrival, as i have formerly mentioned.  i
then took off my spectacles, and waiting about an hour, till the tide was
a little fallen, i waded through the middle with my cargo, and arrived
safe at the royal port of lilliput.

the emperor and his whole court stood on the shore, expecting the issue
of this great adventure.  they saw the ships move forward in a large
half-moon, but could not discern me, who was up to my breast in water.
when i advanced to the middle of the channel, they were yet more in pain,
because i was under water to my neck.  the emperor concluded me to be
drowned, and that the enemy’s fleet was approaching in a hostile manner:
but he was soon eased of his fears; for the channel growing shallower
every step
 
 ___________________________
 
ime
began an intrigue between his majesty and a junto of ministers,
maliciously bent against me, which broke out in less than two months, and
had like to have ended in my utter destruction.  of so little weight are
the greatest services to princes, when put into the balance with a
refusal to gratify their passions.

about three weeks after this exploit, there arrived a solemn embassy from
blefuscu, with humble offers of a peace, which was soon concluded, upon
conditions very advantageous to our emperor, wherewith i shall not
trouble the reader.  there were six ambassadors, with a train of about
five hundred persons, and their entry was very magnificent, suitable to
the grandeur of their master, and the importance of their business.  when
their treaty was finished, wherein i did them several good offices by the
credit i now had, or at least appeared to have, at court, their
excellencies, who were privately told how much i had been their friend,
made me a visit in form.  they began with many co
 
 ___________________________
 
mpliments upon my valour
and generosity, invited me to that kingdom in the emperor their master’s
name, and desired me to show them some proofs of my prodigious strength,
of which they had heard so many wonders; wherein i readily obliged them,
but shall not trouble the reader with the particulars.

when i had for some time entertained their excellencies, to their
infinite satisfaction and surprise, i desired they would do me the honour
to present my most humble respects to the emperor their master, the
renown of whose virtues had so justly filled the whole world with
admiration, and whose royal person i resolved to attend, before i
returned to my own country.  accordingly, the next time i had the honour
to see our emperor, i desired his general license to wait on the
blefuscudian monarch, which he was pleased to grant me, as i could
perceive, in a very cold manner; but could not guess the reason, till i
had a whisper from a certain person, “that flimnap and bolgolam had
re
 
 ___________________________
 
 ambassadors as a mark of
disaffection;” from which i am sure my heart was wholly free.  and this
was the first time i began to conceive some imperfect idea of courts and
ministers.

it is to be observed, that these ambassadors spoke to me, by an
interpreter, the languages of both empires differing as much from each
other as any two in europe, and each nation priding itself upon the
antiquity, beauty, and energy of their own tongue, with an avowed
contempt for that of their neighbour; yet our emperor, standing upon the
advantage he had got by the seizure of their fleet, obliged them to
deliver their credentials, and make their speech, in the lilliputian
tongue.  and it must be confessed, that from the great intercourse of
trade and commerce between both realms, from the continual reception of
exiles which is mutual among them, and from the custom, in each empire,
to send their young nobility and richer gentry to the other, in order to
polish themselves by seeing the world, and understanding
 
 ___________________________
 
 men and manners;
there are few persons of distinction, or merchants, or seamen, who dwell
in the maritime parts, but what can hold conversation in both tongues; as
i found some weeks after, when i went to pay my respects to the emperor
of blefuscu, which, in the midst of great misfortunes, through the malice
of my enemies, proved a very happy adventure to me, as i shall relate in
its proper place.

the reader may remember, that when i signed those articles upon which i
recovered my liberty, there were some which i disliked, upon account of
their being too servile; neither could anything but an extreme necessity
have forced me to submit.  but being now a _nardac_ of the highest rank
in that empire, such offices were looked upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n as below my dignity, and
the emperor (to do him justice), never once mentioned them to me.
however, it was not long before i had an opportunity of doing his
majesty, at least as i then thought, a most signal service.  i was
alarmed at midnight with the cries of many hundred people at my door; by
which, being suddenly awaked, i was in some kind of terror.  i heard the
word _burglum_ repeated incessantly: several of the emperor’s court,
making their way through the crowd, entreated me to come immediately to
the palace, where her imperial majesty’s apartment was on fire, by the
carelessness of a maid of honour, who fell asleep while she was reading a
romance.  i got up in an instant; and orders being given to clear the way
before me, and it being likewise a moonshine night, i made a shift to get
to the palace without trampling on any of the people.  i found they had
already applied ladders to the walls of the apart
 
 ___________________________
 
not discharged myself of any part of
it.  the heat i had contracted by coming very near the flames, and by
labouring to quench them, made the wine begin to operate by urine; which
i voided in such a quantity, and applied so well to the proper places,
that in three minutes the fire was wholly extinguished, and the rest of
that noble pile, which had cost so many ages in erecting, preserved from
destruction.

it was now day-light, and i returned to my house without waiting to
congratulate with the emperor: because, although i had done a very
eminent piece of service, yet i could not tell how his majesty might
resent the manner by which i had performed it: for, by the fundamental
laws of the realm, it is capital in any person, of what quality soever,
to make water within the precincts of the palace.  but i was a little
comforted by a message from his majesty, “that he would give orders to
the grand justiciary for passing my pardon in form:” which, however, i
could not obtain; and i was privat
 
 ___________________________
 
inst the state, are punished here with the
utmost severity; but, if the person accused makes his innocence plainly
to appear upon his trial, the accuser is immediately put to an
ignominious death; and out of his goods or lands the innocent person is
quadruply recompensed for the loss of his time, for the danger he
underwent, for the hardship of his imprisonment, and for all the charges
he has been at in making his defence; or, if that fund be deficient, it
is largely supplied by the crown.  the emperor also confers on him some
public mark of his favour, and proclamation is made of his innocence
through the whole city.

they look upon fraud as a greater crime than theft, and therefore seldom
fail to punish it with death; for they allege, that care and vigilance,
with a very common understanding, may preserve a man’s goods from
thieves, but honesty has no defence against superior cunning; and, since
it is necessary that there should be a perpetual intercourse of buying
and selling, and dealin
 
 ___________________________
 
g upon credit, where fraud is permitted and
connived at, or has no law to punish it, the honest dealer is always
undone, and the knave gets the advantage.  i remember, when i was once
interceding with the emperor for a criminal who had wronged his master of
a great sum of money, which he had received by order and ran away with;
and happening to tell his majesty, by way of extenuation, that it was
only a breach of trust, the emperor thought it monstrous in me to offer
as a defence the greatest aggravation of the crime; and truly i had
little to say in return, farther than the common answer, that different
nations had different customs; for, i confess, i was heartily ashamed.
{330}

although we usually call reward and punishment the two hinges upon which
all government turns, yet i could never observe this maxim to be put in
practice by any nation except that of lilliput.  whoever can there bring
sufficient proof, that he h
 
 ___________________________
 
ority
under which he acts.

in relating these and the following laws, i would only be understood to
mean the original institutions, and not the most scandalous corruptions,
into which these people are fallen by the degenerate nature of man.  for,
as to that infamous practice of acquiring great employments by dancing on
the ropes, or badges of favour and distinction by leaping over sticks and
creeping under them, the reader is to observe, that they were first
introduced by the grandfather of the emperor now reigning, and grew to
the present height by the gradual increase of party and faction.

ingratitude is among them a capital crime, as we read it to have been in
some other countries: for they reason thus; that whoever makes ill
returns to his benefactor, must needs be a common enemy to the rest of
mankind, from whom he has received no obligation, and therefore such a
man is not fit to live.

their notions relating to the duties of parents and children differ
extremely from ours.  for, since
 
 ___________________________
 
d vice, to which our
children are subject.  their parents are suffered to see them only twice
a year; the visit is to last but an hour; they are allowed to kiss the
child at meeting and parting; but a professor, who always stands by on
those occasions, will not suffer them to whisper, or use any fondling
expressions, or bring any presents of toys, sweetmeats, and the like.

the pension from each family for the education and entertainment of a
child, upon failure of due payment, is levied by the emperor’s officers.

the nurseries for children of ordinary gentlemen, merchants, traders, and
handicrafts, are managed proportionably after the same manner; only those
designed for trades are put out apprentices at eleven years old, whereas
those of persons of quality continue in their exercises till fifteen,
which answers to twenty-one with us: but the confinement is gradually
lessened for the last three years.

in the female nurseries, the young girls of quality are educated much
like the males, o
 
 ___________________________
 
taff; and i observed he often looked on me with a sour
countenance, which i would not seem to regard, but ate more than usual,
in honour to my dear country, as well as to fill the court with
admiration.  i have some private reasons to believe, that this visit from
his majesty gave flimnap an opportunity of doing me ill offices to his
master.  that minister had always been my secret enemy, though he
outwardly caressed me more than was usual to the moroseness of his
nature.  he represented to the emperor “the low condition of his
treasury; that he was forced to take up money at a great discount; that
exchequer bills would not circulate under nine per cent. below par; that
i had cost his majesty above a million and a half of _sprugs_” (their
greatest gold coin, about the bigness of a spangle) “and, upon the whole,
that it would be advisable in the emperor to take the first fair occasion
of dismissing me.”

i am here obliged to vindicate the reputation of an excellent lady, who
was an inn
 
 ___________________________
 
 knows, that he is only a
_glumglum_, a title inferior by one degree, as that of a marquis is to a
duke in england; yet i allow he preceded me in right of his post.  these
false informations, which i afterwards came to the knowledge of by an
accident not proper to mention, made the treasurer show his lady for some
time an ill countenance, and me a worse; and although he was at last
undeceived and reconciled to her, yet i lost all credit with him, and
found my interest decline very fast with the emperor himself, who was,
indeed, too much governed by that favourite.



chapter vii.


the author, being informed of a design to accuse him of high-treason,
makes his escape to blefuscu.  his reception there.

before i proceed to give an account of my leaving this kingdom, it may be
proper to inform the reader of a private intrigue which had been for two
months forming against me.

i had been hitherto, all my life, a stranger to courts, for which i was
unqualified by the meanness of my condition.  i 
 
 ___________________________
 
had indeed heard and read
enough of the dispositions of great princes and ministers, but never
expected to have found such terrible effects of them, in so remote a
country, governed, as i thought, by very different maxims from those in
europe.

when i was just preparing to pay my attendance on the emperor of
blefuscu, a considerable person at court (to whom i had been very
serviceable, at a time when he lay under the highest displeasure of his
imperial majesty) came to my house very privately at night, in a close
chair, and, without sending his name, desired admittance.  the chairmen
were dismissed; i put the chair, with his lordship in it, into my
coat-pocket: and, giving orders to a trusty servant, to say i was
indisposed and gone to sleep, i fastened the door of my house, placed the
chair on 
 
 ___________________________
 
 an open enemy to his imperial majesty, and in
    an open war against his said majesty.

    article iv.

    “‘that the said quinbus flestrin, contrary to the duty of a faithful
    subject, is now preparing to make a voyage to the court and empire of
    blefuscu, for which he has received only verbal license from his
    imperial majesty; and, under colour of the said license, does falsely
    and traitorously intend to take the said voyage, and thereby to aid,
    comfort, and abet the emperor of blefuscu, so lately an enemy, and in
    open war with his imperial majesty aforesaid.’

“there are some other articles; but these are the most important, of
which i have read you an abstract.

“in the several debates upon this impeachment, it must be confessed that
his majesty gave many marks of his great lenity; often urging the
services you had done him, and endeavouring to extenuate your crimes.
the treasurer and admiral insisted that you should be put to the most
painful and ignom
 
 ___________________________
 
 were to have private orders to strew a poisonous juice on your
shirts and sheets, which would soon make you tear your own flesh, and die
in the utmost torture.  the general came into the same opinion; so that
for a long time there was a majority against you; but his majesty
resolving, if possible, to spare your life, at last brought off the
chamberlain.

“upon this incident, reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs,
who always approved himself your true friend, was commanded by the
emperor to deliver his opinion, which he accordingly did; and therein
justified the good thoughts you have of him.  he allowed your crimes to
be great, but that still there was room for mercy, the most commendable
virtue in a prince, and for which his majesty was so justly celebrated.
he said, the friendship between you and him was so well known to the
world, that perhaps the most honourable board might think him partial;
however, in obedience to the command he had received, he would freely
offer his s
 
 ___________________________
 
entiments.  that if his majesty, in consideration of your
services, and pursuant to his own merciful disposition, would please to
spare your life, and only give orders to put out both your eyes, he
humbly conceived, that by this expedient justice might in some measure be
satisfied, and all the world would applaud the lenity of the emperor, as
well as the fair and generous proceedings of those who have the honour to
be his counsellors.  that the loss of your eyes would be no impediment to
your bodily strength, by which you might still be useful to his majesty;
that blindness is an addition to courage, by concealing dangers from us;
that the fear you had for your eyes, was the greatest difficulty in
bringing over the enemy’s fleet, and it would be sufficient for you to
see by the eyes of the ministers, since the greatest princes
 
 ___________________________
 
uired by the strict letter of the law.

“but his imperial majesty, fully determined against capital punishment,
was graciously pleased to say, that since the council thought the loss of
your eyes too easy a censure, some other way may be inflicted hereafter.
and your friend the secretary, humbly desiring to be heard again, in
answer to what the treasurer had objected, concerning the great charge
his majesty was at in maintaining you, said, that his excellency, who had
the sole disposal of the emperor’s revenue, might easily provide against
that evil, by gradually lessening your establishment; by which, for want
of sufficient for you would grow weak and faint, and lose your appetite,
and consequently, decay, and consume in a few months; neither would the
stench of your carcass be then so dangerous, when it should become more
than half diminished; and immediately upon your death five or six
thousand of his majesty’s subjects might, in two or three days, cut your
flesh from your bones, tak
 
 ___________________________
 
i leave to your prudence what measures you will take; and to avoid
suspicion, i must immediately return in as private a manner as i came.”

his lordship did so; and i remained alone, under many doubts and
perplexities of mind.

it was a custom introduced by this prince and his ministry (very
different, as i have been assured, from the practice of former times,)
that after the court had decreed any cruel execution, either to gratify
the monarch’s resentment, or the malice of a favourite, the emperor
always made a speech to his whole council, expressing his great lenity
and tenderness, as qualities known and confessed by all the world.  this
speech was immediately published throughout the kingdom; nor did any
thing terrify the people so much as those encomiums on his majesty’s
mercy; because it was observed, that the more these praises were enlarged
and insisted on, the more inhuman was the punishment, and the sufferer
more innocent.  yet, as to myself, i must confess, having never been
d
 
 ___________________________
 
having in my life perused many
state-trials, which i ever observed to terminate as the judges thought
fit to direct, i durst not rely on so dangerous a decision, in so
critical a juncture, and against such powerful enemies.  once i was
strongly bent upon resistance, for, while i had liberty the whole
strength of that empire could hardly subdue me, and i might easily with
stones pelt the metropolis to pieces; but i soon rejected that project
with horror, by remembering the oath i had made to the emperor, the
favours i received from him, and the high title of _nardac_ he conferred
upon me.  neither had i so soon learned the gratitude of courtiers, to
persuade myself, that his majesty’s present seventies acquitted me of all
past obligations.

at last, i fixed upon a resolution, for which it is probable i may incur
some censure, and not unjustly; for i confess i owe the preserving of
mine eyes, and consequently my liberty, to my own great rashness and want
of experience; because, if i had then 
 
 ___________________________
 
known the nature of princes and
ministers, which i have since observed in many other courts, and their
methods of treating criminals less obnoxious than myself, i should, with
great alacrity and readiness, have submitted to so easy a punishment.
but hurried on by the precipitancy of youth, and having his imperial
majesty’s license to pay my attendance upon the emperor of blefuscu, i
took this opportunity, before the three days were elapsed, to send a
letter to my friend the secretary, signifying my resolution of setting
out that morning for blefuscu, pursuant to the leave i had got; and,
without waiting for an answer, i went to that side of the island where
our fleet lay.  i seized a large man of war, tied a cable to the prow,
and, lifting up the anchors, i stripped myself, put my clothes (together
with my coverlet, which i carried under my arm) into the ves
 
 ___________________________
 
 had long expected me: they lent me two
guides to direct me to the capital city, which is of the same name.  i
held them in my hands, till i came within two hundred yards of the gate,
and desired them “to signify my arrival to one of the secretaries, and
let him know, i there waited his majesty’s command.”  i had an answer in
about an hour, “that his majesty, attended by the royal family, and great
officers of the court, was coming out to receive me.”  i advanced a
hundred yards.  the emperor and his train alighted from their horses, the
empress and ladies from their coaches, and i did not perceive they were
in any fright or concern.  i lay on the ground to kiss his majesty’s and
the empress’s hands.  i told his majesty, “that i was come according to
my promise, and with the license of the emperor my master, to have the
honour of seeing so mighty a monarch, and to offer him any service in my
power, consistent with my duty to my own prince;” not mentioning a word
of my disgra
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, because i had hitherto no regular information of it, and
might suppose myself wholly ignorant of any such design; neither could i
reasonably conceive that the emperor would discover the secret, while i
was out of his power; wherein, however, it soon appeared i was deceived.

i shall not trouble the reader with the particular account of my
reception at this court, which was suitable to the generosity of so great
a prince; nor of the difficulties i was in for want of a house and bed,
being forced to lie on the ground, wrapped up in my coverlet.



chapter viii.


the author, by a lucky accident, finds means to leave blefuscu; and,
after some difficulties, retu
 
 ___________________________
 
iting till the tide was out, i
got dry to the boat, and by the assistance of two thousand men, with
ropes and engines, i made a shift to turn it on its bottom, and found it
was but little damaged.

i shall not trouble the reader with the difficulties i was under, by the
help of certain paddles, which cost me ten days making, to get my boat to
the royal port of blefuscu, where a mighty concourse of people appeared
upon my arrival, full of wonder at the sight of so prodigious a vessel.
i told the emperor “that my good fortune had thrown this boat in my way,
to carry me to some place whence i might return into my native country;
and begged his majesty’s orders for getting materials to fit it up,
together with his license to depart;” which, after some kind
expostulations, he was pleased to grant.

i did very much wonder, in all this time, not to have heard of any
express relating to me from our emperor to the court of blefuscu.  but i
was afterward given privately to understand, that his im
 
 ___________________________
 
e great lenity of his master, who was content to
punish me no farther than with the loss of mine eyes; that i had fled
from justice; and if i did not return in two hours, i should be deprived
of my title of _nardac_, and declared a traitor.”  the envoy further
added, “that in order to maintain the peace and amity between both
empires, his master expected that his brother of blefuscu would give
orders to have me sent back to lilliput, bound hand and foot, to be
punished as a traitor.”

the emperor of blefuscu, having taken three days to consult, returned an
answer consisting of many civilities and excuses.  he said, “that as for
sending me bound, his brother knew it was impossible; that, although i
had deprived him of his fleet, yet he owed great obligations to me for
many good offices i had done him in making the peace.  that, however,
both their majesties would soon be made easy; for i had found a
prodigious vessel on the shore, able to carry me on the sea, which he had
given orders 
 
 ___________________________
 
ervice; wherein, although i believed him sincere, yet i
resolved never more to put any confidence in princes or ministers, where
i could possibly avoid it; and therefore, with all due acknowledgments
for his favourable intentions, i humbly begged to be excused.  i told
him, “that since fortune, whether good or evil, had thrown a vessel in my
way, i was resolved to venture myself on the ocean, rather than be an
occasion of difference between two such mighty monarchs.”  neither did i
find the emperor at all displeased; and i discovered, by a certain
accident, that he was very glad of my resolution, and so were most of his
ministers.

these considerations moved me to hasten my departure somewhat sooner than
i intended; to which the court, impatient to have me gone, very readily
contributed.  five hundred workmen were employed to make two sails to my
boat, according to my directions, by quilting thirteen folds of their
strongest linen together.  i was at the pains of making ropes and cables,

 
 ___________________________
 
 find, after a long search, by
the sea-shore, served me for an anchor.  i had the tallow of three
hundred cows, for greasing my boat, and other uses.  i was at incredible
pains in cutting down some of the largest timber-trees, for oars and
masts, wherein i was, however, much assisted by his majesty’s
ship-carpenters, who helped me in smoothing them, after i had done the
rough work.

in about a month, when all was prepared, i sent to receive his majesty’s
commands, and to take my leave.  the emperor and royal family came out of
the palace; i lay down on my face to kiss his hand, which he very
graciously gave me: so did the empress and young princes of the blood.
his majesty presented me with fifty purses of two hundred _sprugs_
a-piece, together with his picture at full length, which i put
immediately into one of my gloves, to keep it from being hurt.  the
ceremonies at my departure were too many to trouble the reader with at
this time.

i stored the boat with the carcases of a hundred oxe
 
 ___________________________
 
n, and three hundred
sheep, with bread and drink proportionable, and as much meat ready
dressed as four hundred cooks could provide.  i took with me six cows and
two bulls alive, with as many ewes and rams, intending to carry them into
my own country, and propagate the breed.  and to feed them on board, i
had a good bundle of hay, and a bag of corn.  i would gladly have taken a
dozen of the natives, but this was a thing the emperor would by no means
permit; and, besides a diligent search into my pockets, his majesty
engaged my honour “not to carry away any of his subjects, although with
their own consent and desire.”

having thus prepared all things as well as i was able, i set sail on the
twenty-fourth day of september 1701, at six in the morning; and when i
had gone about four-leagues to the northward, the wind being at
south-east, at six in the evening i descried a small island, about half a
league to the north-wes
 
 ___________________________
 
comrade of mine, one peter
williams, who gave me a good character to the captain.  this gentleman
treated me with kindness, and desired i would let him know what place i
came from last, and whither i was bound; which i did in a few words, but
he thought i was raving, and that the dangers i underwent had disturbed
my head; whereupon i took my black cattle and sheep out of my pocket,
which, after great astonishment, clearly convinced him of my veracity.  i
then showed him the gold given me by the emperor of blefuscu, together
with his majesty’s picture at full length, and some other rarities of
that country.  i gave him two purses of two hundreds _sprugs_ each, and
promised, when we arrived in england, to make him a present of a cow and
a sheep big with young.

i shall not trouble the reader with a particular account of this voyage,
which was very prosperous for the most part.  we arrived in the downs on
the 13th of april, 1702.  i had only one misfortune, that the rats on
board carried away 
 
 ___________________________
 
k
him up in my hand, and brought him close, which he confessed was at first
a very shocking sight.  he said, “he could discover great holes in my
skin; that the stumps of my beard were ten times stronger than the
bristles of a boar, and my complexion made up of several colours
altogether disagreeable:” although i must beg leave to say for myself,
that i am as fair as most of my sex and country, and very little sunburnt
by all my travels.  on the other side, discoursing of the ladies in that
emperor’s court, he used to tell me, “one had freckles; another too wide
a mouth; a third too large a nose;” nothing of which i was able to
distinguish.  i confess this reflection was obvious enough; which,
however, i could not forbear, lest the reader might think those vast
creatures were actually deformed: for i must do them the justice to say,
they are a comely race of people, and particularly the features of my
master’s countenance, although he was but a farmer, when i beheld him
from the h
 
 ___________________________
 
s in europe, is
no great matter for admiration, nor at all equal in proportion (if i
rightly remember) to salisbury steeple.  but, not to detract from a
nation, to which, during my life, i shall acknowledge myself extremely
obliged, it must be allowed, that whatever this famous tower wants in
height, is amply made up in beauty and strength: for the walls are near a
hundred feet thick, built of hewn stone, whereof each is about forty feet
square, and adorned on all sides with statues of gods and emperors, cut
in marble, larger than the life, placed in their several niches.  i
measured a little finger which had fallen down from one of these statues,
and lay unperceived among some rubbish, and found it exactly four feet
and an inch in length.  glumdalclitch wrapped it up in her handkerchief,
and carried it home in her pocket, to keep among other trinkets, of which
the girl was very fond, as children at her age usually are.

the king’s kitchen is indeed a noble building, vaulted at top, and abo
 
 ___________________________
 
xtends itself, as i have
reason to believe, eastward, to that unknown tract of america westward of
california; and north, to the pacific ocean, which is not above a hundred
and fifty miles from lagado; where there is a good port, and much
commerce with the great island of luggnagg, situated to the north-west
about 29 degrees north latitude, and 140 longitude.  this island of
luggnagg stands south-eastward of japan, about a hundred leagues distant.
there is a strict alliance between the japanese emperor and the king of
luggnagg; which affords frequent opportunities of sailing from one island
to the other.  i determined therefore to direct my course this way, in
order to my return to europe.  i hired two mules, with a guide, to show
me the way, and carry my small baggage.  i took leave of my noble
protector, who had shown me so much favour, and made me a generous
present at my departure.

my journey was without any accident or adventure worth relating.  when i
arrived at the port of maldonada (
 
 ___________________________
 
, were equally to be
exploded.  he predicted the same fate to _attraction_, whereof the
present learned are such zealous asserters.  he said, “that new systems
of nature were but new fashions, which would vary in every age; and even
those, who pretend to demonstrate them from mathematical principles,
would flourish but a short period of time, and be out of vogue when that
was determined.”

i spent five days in conversing with many others of the ancient learned.
i saw most of the first roman emperors.  i prevailed on the governor to
call up heliogabalus’s cooks to dress us a dinner, but they could not
show us much of their skill, for want of materials.  a helot of agesilaus
made us a dish of spartan broth, but i was not able to get down a second
spoonful.

the two gentlemen, who conducted me to the island, were pressed by their
private affairs to return in three days, which i employed in seeing some
of the modern dead, who had made the greatest figure, for two or three
hundred years past
 
 ___________________________
 
, which was the sole cause of antony’s flight, and of the victory
that ensued; that the youth standing by him, his only son, was killed in
the action.”  he added, “that upon the confidence of some merit, the war
being at an end, he went to rome, and solicited at the court of augustus
to be preferred to a greater ship, whose commander had been killed; but,
without any regard to his pretensions, it was given to a boy who had
never seen the sea, the son of libertina, who waited on one of the
emperor’s mistresses.  returning back to his own vessel, he was charged
with neglect of duty, and the ship given to a favourite page of
publicola, the vice-admiral; whereupon he retired to a poor farm at a
great distance from rome, and there ended his life.”  i was so curious to
know the truth of this story, that i desired agrippa might be called, who
was admiral in that fight.  he appeared, and confirmed the whole account:
but with much more advantage to the captain, whose modesty had extenuated
o
 
 ___________________________
 
s_; but my stay in japan was so
short, and i was so entirely a stranger to the language, that i was not
qualified to make any inquiries.  but i hope the dutch, upon this notice,
will be curious and able enough to supply my defects.

his majesty having often pressed me to accept some employment in his
court, and finding me absolutely determined to return to my native
country, was pleased to give me his license to depart; and honoured me
with a letter of recommendation, under his own hand, to the emperor of
japan.  he likewise presented me with four hundred and forty-four large
pieces of gold (this nation delighting in even numbers), and a red
diamond, which i sold in england for eleven hundred pounds.

on the 6th of may, 1709, i took a solemn leave of his majesty, and all my
friends.  this prince was so gracious as to order a guard to conduct me
to glanguenstald, which is a royal port to the south-west part of the
island.  in six days i found a vessel ready to carry me to japan, and
spent fift
 
 ___________________________
 
officers my
letter from the king of luggnagg to his imperial majesty.  they knew the
seal perfectly well; it was as broad as the palm of my hand.  the
impression was, _a king lifting up a lame beggar from the earth_.  the
magistrates of the town, hearing of my letter, received me as a public
minister.  they provided me with carriages and servants, and bore my
charges to yedo; where i was admitted to an audience, and delivered my
letter, which was opened with great ceremony, and explained to the
emperor by an interpreter, who then gave me notice, by his majesty’s
order, “that i should signify my request, and, whatever it were, it
should be granted, for the sake of his royal brother of luggnagg.”  this
interpreter was a person employed to transact affairs with the
hollanders.  he soon conjectured, by my countenance, that i was a
european, and therefore repeated his majesty’s commands in low dutch,
which he spoke perfectly well.  i answered, as i had before determined,
“that i was a du
 
 ___________________________
 
ning into europe: i
therefore most humbly entreated his royal favour, to give order that i
should be conducted in safety to nangasac.”  to this i added another
petition, “that for the sake of my patron the king of luggnagg, his
majesty would condescend to excuse my performing the ceremony imposed on
my countrymen, of trampling upon the crucifix: because i had been thrown
into his kingdom by my misfortunes, without any intention of trading.”
when this latter petition was interpreted to the emperor, he seemed a
little surprised; and said, “he believed i was the first of my countrymen
who ever made any scruple in this point; and that he began to doubt,
whether i was a real hollander, or not; but rather suspected i must be a
christian.  however, for the reasons i had offered, but chiefly to
gratify the king of luggnagg by an uncommon mark of his favour, he would
comply with the singularity of my humour; but the affair must be managed
with dexterity, and his officers should be commanded to
 
 ___________________________
 
retended to be obscure people in the province of gelderland.  i would
have given the captain (one theodorus vangrult) what he pleased to ask
for my voyage to holland; but understanding i was a surgeon, he was
contented to take half the usual rate, on condition that i would serve
him in the way of my calling.  before we took shipping, i was often asked
by some of the crew, whether i had performed the ceremony above
mentioned?  i evaded the question by general answers; “that i had
satisfied the emperor and court in all particulars.”  however, a
malicious rogue of a skipper went to an officer, and pointing to me, told
him, “i had not yet trampled on the crucifix;” but the other, who had
received instructions to let me pass, gave the rascal twenty strokes on
the shoulders with a bamboo; after which i was no more troubled with such
questions.

nothing happened worth mentioning in this voyage.  we sailed with a fair
wind to the cape of good hope, where we staid only to take in fresh
water. 
 
 ___________________________
 
nal creature.  i
pointed to every thing, and inquired the name of it, which i wrote down
in my journal-book when i was alone, and corrected my bad accent by
desiring those of the family to pronounce it often.  in this employment,
a sorrel nag, one of the under-servants, was very ready to assist me.

in speaking, they pronounced through the nose and throat, and their
language approaches nearest to the high-dutch, or german, of any i know
in europe; but is much more graceful and significant.  the emperor
charles v. made almost the same observation, when he said “that if he
were to speak to his horse, it should be in high-dutch.”

the curiosity and impatience of my master were so great, that he spent
many hours of his leisure to instruct me.  he was convinced (as he
afterwards told me) that i must be a _yahoo_; but my teachableness,
civility, and cleanliness, astonished him; which were qualities
altogether opposite to those animals.  he was most perplexed about my
clothes, reasoning sometime