ome

aunt polly beguiled

a good opportunity

who�s afraid

late home

jim

�tendin� to business

ain�t that work?

cat and toys

amusement

becky thatcher

paying off

after the battle

�showing off�

not amiss

mary

tom contemplating

dampened ardor

youth

boyhood

using the �barlow�

the church

necessities

tom as a sunday-school hero����

the prize

at church

the model boy

the church choir

a side show

result of playing in church

the pinch-bug

sid

dentistry

huckleberry finn

mother hopkins

result of tom�s truthfulness

tom as an artist

interrupted courtship

the master

vain pleading

tail piece

the grave in the woods

tom meditates

robin hood and his foe

death of robin hood

midnight

tom�s mode of egress

tom�s effort at prayer

muff potter outwitted

the graveyard

forewarnings

disturbing muff�s sleep

tom�s talk with his aunt

muff potter

a suspicious incident

injun joe�s two victims

in the coils

peter

aunt polly seeks information

a gen
 
 ___________________________
 
m of study. the
interruption roused him.

�thomas sawyer!�

tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.

�sir!�

�come up here. now, sir, why are you late again, as usual?�

tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of
yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric
sympathy of love; and by that form was _the only vacant place_ on the
girls� side of the school-house. he instantly said:

�_i stopped to talk with huckleberry finn!_�

the master�s pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. the buzz of
study ceased. the pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his
mind. the master said:

�you--you did what?�

�stopped to talk with huckleberry finn.�

there was no mistaking the words.

�thomas sawyer, this is the most astounding confession i have ever
listened to. no mere ferule will answer for this offence. take off your
jacket.�

the master�s arm performed until it was tired and the stock of swi
 
 ___________________________
 
, mingling with his half-formed dreams, a most
melancholy caterwauling. the raising of a neighboring window disturbed
him. a cry of �scat! you devil!� and the crash of an empty bottle
against the back of his aunt�s woodshed brought him wide awake, and a
single minute later he was dressed and out of the window and creeping
along the roof of the �ell� on all fours. he �meow�d� with caution once
or twice, as he went; then jumped to the roof of the woodshed and thence
to the ground. huckleberry finn was there, with his dead cat. the boys
moved off and disappeared in the gloom. at the end of half an hour they
were wading through the tall grass of the graveyard.

it was a graveyard of the old-fashioned western kind. it was on a hill,
about a mile and a half from the village. it had a crazy board fence
around it, which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of the
time, but stood upright nowhere. grass and weeds grew rank over the
whole cemetery. all the old graves were sunken in, ther
 
 ___________________________
 
ted to be a pirate.

three miles below st. petersburg, at a point where the mississippi river
was a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, narrow, wooded island,
with a shallow bar at the head of it, and this offered well as a
rendezvous. it was not inhabited; it lay far over toward the further
shore, abreast a dense and almost wholly unpeopled forest. so jackson�s
island was chosen. who were to be the subjects of their piracies was a
matter that did not occur to them. then they hunted up huckleberry finn,
and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to him; he was
indifferent. they presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on the
river-bank two miles above the village at the favorite hour--which was
midnight. there was a small log raft there which they meant to capture.
each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he could steal
in the most dark and mysterious way--as became outlaws. and before the
afternoon was done, they had all managed to enjoy the sweet glory of
sprea
 
 ___________________________
 
 for the sight of one blessed
sinful face, but disappointment crossed him everywhere. he found joe
harper studying a testament, and turned sadly away from the depressing
spectacle. he sought ben rogers, and found him visiting the poor with a
basket of tracts. he hunted up jim hollis, who called his attention to
the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning. every boy
he encountered added another ton to his depression; and when, in
desperation, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of huckleberry finn
and was received with a scriptural quotation, his heart broke and he
crept home and to bed realizing that he alone of all the town was lost,
forever and forever.

and that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain, awful
claps of thunder and blinding sheets of lightning. he covered his head
with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his doom; for
he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about him.
he believed he had taxed the forbearance of the pow
 
 ___________________________
 
rned
himself as carefully as if he were a ship--and then stepped quickly but
cautiously along. when he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and
so he picked up his nimble heels and flew. down, down he sped, till he
reached the welshman�s. he banged at the door, and presently the heads
of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from windows.

�what�s the row there? who�s banging? what do you want?�

�let me in--quick! i�ll tell everything.�

�why, who are you?�

�huckleberry finn--quick, let me in!�

�huckleberry finn, indeed! it ain�t a name to open many doors, i judge!
but let him in, lads, and let�s see what�s the trouble.�

�please don�t ever tell i told you,� were huck�s first words when he got
in. �please don�t--i�d be killed, sure--but the widow�s been good friends
to me sometimes, and i want to tell--i _will_ tell if you�ll promise you
won�t ever say it was me.�

�by george, he _has_ got something to tell, or he wouldn�t act