tly
encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he passed. she hurled
one in return, and the angry breach was complete. it seemed to becky, in
her hot resentment, that she could hardly wait for school to �take in,�
 she was so impatient to see tom flogged for the injured spelling-book.
if she had had any lingering notion of exposing alfred temple, tom�s
offensive fling had driven it entirely away.

poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself.
the master, mr. dobbins, had reached middle age with an unsatisfied
ambition. the darling of his desires was, to be a doctor, but
poverty had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village
schoolmaster. every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and
absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting. he kept
that book under lock and key. there was not an urchin in school but was
perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. every boy
and girl had a theory about the nature o
 
 ___________________________
 
be_ so mean if you want to! i know something that�s going to happen.
you just wait and you�ll see! hateful, hateful, hateful!�--and she flung
out of the house with a new explosion of crying.

tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught. presently he said
to himself:

�what a curious kind of a fool a girl is! never been licked in
school! shucks! what�s a licking! that�s just like a girl--they�re so
thin-skinned and chicken-hearted. well, of course i ain�t going to tell
old dobbins on this little fool, because there�s other ways of getting
even on her, that ain�t so mean; but what of it? old dobbins will ask
who it was tore his book. nobody�ll answer. then he�ll do just the way
he always does--ask first one and then t�other, and when he comes to the
right girl he�ll know it, without any telling. girls� faces always tell
on them. they ain�t got any backbone. she�ll get licked. well, it�s a
kind of a tight place for becky thatcher, because there ain�t 
 
 ___________________________
 
aring the picture sure. i wouldn�t say a word, not to save his life!�

tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all
broken-hearted, for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly
upset the ink on the spelling-book himself, in some skylarking bout--he
had denied it for form�s sake and because it was custom, and had stuck
to the denial from principle.

a whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his throne, the air
was drowsy with the hum of study. by and by, mr. dobbins straightened
himself up, yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book,
but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it. most of the
pupils glanced up languidly, but there were two among them that watched
his movements with intent eyes. mr. dobbins fingered his book absently
for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read!
tom shot a glance at becky. he had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit
look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head. instantly he 
 
 ___________________________
 
t like lightning through tom�s brain. he sprang to his feet
and shouted--�i done it!�

the school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. tom stood a
moment, to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped forward
to go to his punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that
shone upon him out of poor becky�s eyes seemed pay enough for a hundred
floggings. inspired by the splendor of his own act, he took without
an outcry the most merciless flaying that even mr. dobbins had ever
administered; and also received with indifference the added cruelty of a
command to remain two hours after school should be dismissed--for he
knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done, and not
count the tedious time as loss, either.

tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against alfred temple; for
with shame and repentance becky had told him all, not forgetting her own
treachery; but even the longing for vengeance had to give way, soon, to
pleasanter musin
 
 ___________________________
 
gs, and he fell asleep at last with becky�s latest words
lingering dreamily in his ear--

�tom, how _could_ you be so noble!�




chapter xxi

vacation was approaching. the schoolmaster, always severe, grew severer
and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good
showing on �examination� day. his rod and his ferule were seldom idle
now--at least among the smaller pupils. only the biggest boys, and young
ladies of eighteen and twenty, escaped lashing. mr. dobbins� lashings
were very vigorous ones, too; for although he carried, under his wig, a
perfectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle age, and there
was no sign of feebleness in his muscle. as the great day approached,
all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface; he seemed to take a
vindictive pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings. the consequence
was, that the smaller boys spent their days in terror and suffering and
their nights in plotting revenge. they threw away no o