. the fate of injun joe--huck and tom compare notes
--an expedition to the cave--protection against ghosts--�an awful snug
place�--a reception at the widow douglas�s

chapter xxxiv. springing a secret--mr. jones� surprise a failure

chapter xxxv. a new order of things--poor huck--new adventures planned




illustrations

tom sawyer

tom at home

aunt polly beguiled

a good opportunity

who�s afraid

late home

jim

�tendin� to business

ain�t that work?

cat and toys

amusement

becky thatcher

paying off

after the battle

�showing off�

not amiss

mary

tom contemplating

dampened ardor

youth

boyhood

using the �barlow�

the church

necessities

tom as a sunday-school hero����

the prize

at church

the model boy

the church choir

a side show

result of playing in church

the pinch-bug

sid

dentistry

huckleberry finn

mother hopkins

result of tom�s truthfulness

tom as an artist

interrupted courtship

the master

vain pleading

tail piece

the grave in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
as satisfied with the monster, and whispered:

�it�s a beautiful man--now make me coming along.�

tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and armed
the spreading fingers with a portentous fan. the girl said:

�it�s ever so nice--i wish i could draw.�

�it�s easy,� whispered tom, �i�ll learn you.�

�oh, will you? when?�

�at noon. do you go home to dinner?�

�i�ll stay if you will.�

�good--that�s a whack. what�s your name?�

�becky thatcher. what�s yours? oh, i know. it�s thomas sawyer.�

�that�s the name they lick me by. i�m tom when i�m good. you call me
tom, will you?�

�yes.�

now tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from
the girl. but she was not backward this time. she begged to see. tom
said:

�oh, it ain�t anything.�

�yes it is.�

�no it ain�t. you don�t want to see.�

�yes i do, indeed i do. please let me.�

�you�ll tell.�

�no i won�t--deed and 
 
 ___________________________
 

a tremendous whack came down on tom�s shoulders, and its duplicate on
joe�s; and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly from
the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. the boys had been
too absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school awhile
before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over them.
he had contemplated a good part of the performance before he contributed
his bit of variety to it.

when school broke up at noon, tom flew to becky thatcher, and whispered
in her ear:

�put on your bonnet and let on you�re going home; and when you get to
the corner, give the rest of �em the slip, and turn down through the
lane and come back. i�ll go the other way and come it over �em the same
way.�

so the one went off with one group of scholars, and the other with
another. in a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and
when they reached the school they had it all to themselves. then they
sat together, with a slate before 
 
 ___________________________
 
formidable was his character
that nobody could be found who was willing to take the lead in the
matter, so it was dropped. he had been careful to begin both of his
inquest-statements with the fight, without confessing the grave-robbery
that preceded it; therefore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in
the courts at present.




chapter xii

one of the reasons why tom�s mind had drifted away from its secret
troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty matter to interest
itself about. becky thatcher had stopped coming to school. tom had
struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to �whistle her down the
wind,� but failed. he began to find himself hanging around her father�s
house, nights, and feeling very miserable. she was ill. what if she
should die! there was distraction in the thought. he no longer took an
interest in war, nor even in piracy. the charm of life was gone; there
was nothing but dreariness left. he put his hoop away, and his bat;
there was no joy in them any more
 
 ___________________________
 
rocks
ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered
the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer. then one more frock passed
in at the gate, and tom�s heart gave a great bound. the next instant he
was out, and �going on� like an indian; yelling, laughing, chasing boys,
jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing handsprings,
standing on his head--doing all the heroic things he could conceive of,
and keeping a furtive eye out, all the while, to see if becky thatcher
was noticing. but she seemed to be unconscious of it all; she never
looked. could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there?
he carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came war-whooping
around, snatched a boy�s cap, hurled it to the roof of the schoolhouse,
broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every direction, and
fell sprawling, himself, under becky�s nose, almost upsetting her--and
she turned, with her nose in the air, and he heard her say: �mf! some
peo
 
 ___________________________
 
ty in the little town that same tranquil saturday
afternoon. the harpers, and aunt polly�s family, were being put into
mourning, with great grief and many tears. an unusual quiet possessed
the village, although it was ordinarily quiet enough, in all conscience.
the villagers conducted their concerns with an absent air, and talked
little; but they sighed often. the saturday holiday seemed a burden to
the children. they had no heart in their sports, and gradually gave them
up.

in the afternoon becky thatcher found herself moping about the deserted
schoolhouse yard, and feeling very melancholy. but she found nothing
there to comfort her. she soliloquized:

�oh, if i only had a brass andiron-knob again! but i haven�t got
anything now to remember him by.� and she choked back a little sob.

presently she stopped, and said to herself:

�it was right here. oh, if it was to do over again, i wouldn�t say
that--i wouldn�t say it for the whole world. but he�s gone now; i�ll
never, never, neve
 
 ___________________________
 
ldren made so much of him and of joe, and delivered
such eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the two heroes were
not long in becoming insufferably �stuck-up.� they began to tell their
adventures to hungry listeners--but they only began; it was not a
thing likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish
material. and finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely
puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached.

tom decided that he could be independent of becky thatcher now. glory
was sufficient. he would live for glory. now that he was distinguished,
maybe she would be wanting to �make up.� well, let her--she should see
that he could be as indifferent as some other people. presently she
arrived. tom pretended not to see her. he moved away and joined a group
of boys and girls and began to talk. soon he observed that she was
tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes,
pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates, and screaming with laught
 
 ___________________________
 
 he
wanted to cry with vexation. amy chatted happily along, as they walked,
for her heart was singing, but tom�s tongue had lost its function. he
did not hear what amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly
he could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as often misplaced
as otherwise. he kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse, again and
again, to sear his eyeballs with the hateful spectacle there. he could
not help it. and it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that
becky thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the
living. but she did see, nevertheless; and she knew she was winning her
fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.

amy�s happy prattle became intolerable. tom hinted at things he had
to attend to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting. but in
vain--the girl chirped on. tom thought, �oh, hang her, ain�t i ever going
to get rid of her?� at last he must be attending to those things--and she
said artles
 
 ___________________________
 
elf with the thought:
�it�s a good lie--it�s a good lie--i won�t let it grieve me.� so she
sought the jacket pocket. a moment later she was reading tom�s piece of
bark through flowing tears and saying: �i could forgive the boy, now, if
he�d committed a million sins!�




chapter xx

there was something about aunt polly�s manner, when she kissed tom, that
swept away his low spirits and made him lighthearted and happy again. he
started to school and had the luck of coming upon becky thatcher at the
head of meadow lane. his mood always determined his manner. without a
moment�s hesitation he ran to her and said:

�i acted mighty mean today, becky, and i�m so sorry. i won�t ever, ever
do that way again, as long as ever i live--please make up, won�t you?�

the girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face:

�i�ll thank you to keep yourself _to_ yourself, mr. thomas sawyer. i�ll
never speak to you again.�

she tossed her head and passed on. tom was so stunned th
 
 ___________________________
 
se i ain�t going to tell
old dobbins on this little fool, because there�s other ways of getting
even on her, that ain�t so mean; but what of it? old dobbins will ask
who it was tore his book. nobody�ll answer. then he�ll do just the way
he always does--ask first one and then t�other, and when he comes to the
right girl he�ll know it, without any telling. girls� faces always tell
on them. they ain�t got any backbone. she�ll get licked. well, it�s a
kind of a tight place for becky thatcher, because there ain�t any way
out of it.� tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added: �all
right, though; she�d like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it
out!�

tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. in a few moments the
master arrived and school �took in.� tom did not feel a strong interest
in his studies. every time he stole a glance at the girls� side of the
room becky�s face troubled him. considering all things, he did not want
to pity her, a
 
 ___________________________
 
r searched face after face for signs of guilt.

�benjamin rogers, did you tear this book?�

a denial. another pause.

�joseph harper, did you?�

another denial. tom�s uneasiness grew more and more intense under the
slow torture of these proceedings. the master scanned the ranks of
boys--considered a while, then turned to the girls:

�amy lawrence?�

a shake of the head.

�gracie miller?�

the same sign.

�susan harper, did you do this?�

another negative. the next girl was becky thatcher. tom was trembling
from head to foot with excitement and a sense of the hopelessness of the
situation.

�rebecca thatcher� [tom glanced at her face--it was white with
terror]--�did you tear--no, look me in the face� [her hands rose in
appeal]--�did you tear this book?�

a thought shot like lightning through tom�s brain. he sprang to his feet
and shouted--�i done it!�

the school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. tom stood a
moment, to gather his dismembered facult
 
 ___________________________
 
ot
twenty-five feet high, nor even anywhere in the neighborhood of it.

a circus came. the boys played circus for three days afterward in tents
made of rag carpeting--admission, three pins for boys, two for girls--and
then circusing was abandoned.

a phrenologist and a mesmerizer came--and went again and left the village
duller and drearier than ever.

there were some boys-and-girls� parties, but they were so few and so
delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.

becky thatcher was gone to her constantinople home to stay with her
parents during vacation--so there was no bright side to life anywhere.

the dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery. it was a very
cancer for permanency and pain.

then came the measles.

during two long weeks tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its
happenings. he was very ill, he was interested in nothing. when he got
upon his feet at last and moved feebly downtown, a melancholy change had
come over everything and every crea