 garland of flowers--evidently made for me
and me alone. the thing took my imagination. very possibly i had
been feeling desolate. at any rate i did my best to display my
appreciation of the gift. we were soon seated together in a little
stone arbour, engaged in conversation, chiefly of smiles. the
creature's friendliness affected me exactly as a child's might have
done. we passed each other flowers, and she kissed my hands. i did
the same to hers. then i tried talk, and found that her name was
weena, which, though i don't know what it meant, somehow seemed
appropriate enough. that was the beginning of a queer friendship
which lasted a week, and ended--as i will tell you!

'she was exactly like a child. she wanted to be with me always. she
tried to follow me everywhere, and on my next journey out and about
it went to my heart to tire her down, and leave her at last,
exhausted and calling after me rather plaintively. but the problems
of the world had to be mastered. i had not, i said to myse
 
 ___________________________
 
darkness
to her was the one thing dreadful. it was a singularly passionate
emotion, and it set me thinking and observing. i discovered then,
among other things, that these little people gathered into the great
houses after dark, and slept in droves. to enter upon them without a
light was to put them into a tumult of apprehension. i never found
one out of doors, or one sleeping alone within doors, after dark.
yet i was still such a blockhead that i missed the lesson of that
fear, and in spite of weena's distress i insisted upon sleeping away
from these slumbering multitudes.

'it troubled her greatly, but in the end her odd affection for me
triumphed, and for five of the nights of our acquaintance, including
the last night of all, she slept with her head pillowed on my arm.
but my story slips away from me as i speak of her. it must have been
the night before her rescue that i was awakened about dawn. i had
been restless, dreaming most disagreeably that i was drowned, and
that sea anemones we
 
 ___________________________
 
re creatures of the half light. "they must have been ghosts," i
said; "i wonder whence they dated." for a queer notion of grant
allen's came into my head, and amused me. if each generation die and
leave ghosts, he argued, the world at last will get overcrowded with
them. on that theory they would have grown innumerable some eight
hundred thousand years hence, and it was no great wonder to see four
at once. but the jest was unsatisfying, and i was thinking of these
figures all the morning, until weena's rescue drove them out of my
head. i associated them in some indefinite way with the white animal
i had startled in my first passionate search for the time machine.
but weena was a pleasant substitute. yet all the same, they were
soon destined to take far deadlier possession of my mind.

'i think i have said how much hotter than our own was the weather
of this golden age. i cannot account for it. it may be that the sun
was hotter, or the earth nearer the sun. it is usual to assume that
the sun
 
 ___________________________
 
 her as he ran.

'they seemed distressed to find me, my arm against the overturned
pillar, peering down the well. apparently it was considered bad form
to remark these apertures; for when i pointed to this one, and tried
to frame a question about it in their tongue, they were still more
visibly distressed and turned away. but they were interested by my
matches, and i struck some to amuse them. i tried them again about
the well, and again i failed. so presently i left them, meaning to
go back to weena, and see what i could get from her. but my mind was
already in revolution; my guesses and impressions were slipping and
sliding to a new adjustment. i had now a clue to the import of these
wells, to the ventilating towers, to the mystery of the ghosts; to
say nothing of a hint at the meaning of the bronze gates and the
fate of the time machine! and very vaguely there came a suggestion
towards the solution of the economic problem that had puzzled me.

'here was the new view. plainly, this second
 
 ___________________________
 
 by the by, was the name by which
these creatures were called--i could imagine that the modification
of the human type was even far more profound than among the "eloi,"
the beautiful race that i already knew.

'then came troublesome doubts. why had the morlocks taken my time
machine? for i felt sure it was they who had taken it. why, too, if
the eloi were masters, could they not restore the machine to me? and
why were they so terribly afraid of the dark? i proceeded, as i have
said, to question weena about this under-world, but here again i was
disappointed. at first she would not understand my questions, and
presently she refused to answer them. she shivered as though the
topic was unendurable. and when i pressed her, perhaps a little
harshly, she burst into tears. they were the only tears, except my
own, i ever saw in that golden age. when i saw them i ceased
abruptly to trouble about the morlocks, and was only concerned in
banishing these signs of the human inheritance from weena's eyes.
 
 ___________________________
 
thily cold to the
touch. probably my shrinking was largely due to the sympathetic
influence of the eloi, whose disgust of the morlocks i now began
to appreciate.

'the next night i did not sleep well. probably my health was a
little disordered. i was oppressed with perplexity and doubt. once
or twice i had a feeling of intense fear for which i could perceive
no definite reason. i remember creeping noiselessly into the great
hall where the little people were sleeping in the moonlight--that
night weena was among them--and feeling reassured by their presence.
it occurred to me even then, that in the course of a few days the
moon must pass through its last quarter, and the nights grow dark,
when the appearances of these unpleasant creatures from below, these
whitened lemurs, this new vermin that had replaced the old, might be
more abundant. and on both these days i had the restless feeling of
one who shirks an inevitable duty. i felt assured that the time
machine was only to be recovered by bol
 
 ___________________________
 
i knew, and the facade had an oriental look: the face
of it having the lustre, as well as the pale-green tint, a kind
of bluish-green, of a certain type of chinese porcelain. this
difference in aspect suggested a difference in use, and i was minded
to push on and explore. but the day was growing late, and i had come
upon the sight of the place after a long and tiring circuit; so i
resolved to hold over the adventure for the following day, and i
returned to the welcome and the caresses of little weena. but next
morning i perceived clearly enough that my curiosity regarding the
palace of green porcelain was a piece of self-deception, to enable
me to shirk, by another day, an experience i dreaded. i resolved i
would make the descent without further waste of time, and started
out in the early morning towards a well near the ruins of granite
and aluminium.

'little weena ran with me. she danced beside me to the well, but
when she saw me lean over the mouth and look downward, she seemed
strangely
 
 ___________________________
 
 disconcerted. "good-bye, little weena," i said, kissing
her; and then putting her down, i began to feel over the parapet
for the climbing hooks. rather hastily, i may as well confess, for
i feared my courage might leak away! at first she watched me in
amazement. then she gave a most piteous cry, and running to me, she
began to pull at me with her little hands. i think her opposition
nerved me rather to proceed. i shook her off, perhaps a little
roughly, and in another moment i was in the throat of the well. i
saw her agonized face 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i was speedily
cramped and fatigued by the descent. and not simply fatigued! one of
the bars bent suddenly under my weight, and almost swung me off into
the blackness beneath. for a moment i hung by one hand, and after
that experience i did not dare to rest again. though my arms and
back were presently acutely painful, i went on clambering down the
sheer descent with as quick a motion as possible. glancing upward,
i saw the aperture, a small blue disk, in which a star was visible,
while little weena's head showed as a round black projection. the
thudding sound of a machine below grew louder and more oppressive.
everything save that little disk above was profoundly dark, and when
i looked up again weena had disappeared.

'i was in an agony of discomfort. i had some thought of trying to go
up the shaft again, and leave the under-world alone. but even while
i turned this over in my mind i continued to descend. at last, with
intense relief, i saw dimly coming up, a foot to the right of me, a
s
 
 ___________________________
 
t as a trophy.

'that climb seemed interminable to me. with the last twenty or
thirty feet of it a deadly nausea came upon me. i had the greatest
difficulty in keeping my hold. the last few yards was a frightful
struggle against this faintness. several times my head swam, and i
felt all the sensations of falling. at last, however, i got over the
well-mouth somehow, and staggered out of the ruin into the blinding
sunlight. i fell upon my face. even the soil smelt sweet and clean.
then i remember weena kissing my hands and ears, and the voices of
others among the eloi. then, for a time, i was insensible.




vii


'now, indeed, i seemed in a worse case than before. hitherto,
except during my night's anguish at the loss of the time machine,
i had felt a sustaining hope of ultimate escape, but that hope was
staggered by these new discoveries. hitherto i had merely thought
myself impeded by the childish simplicity of the little people, and
by some unknown forces which i had only to understand to
 
 ___________________________
 
 overcome;
but there was an altogether new element in the sickening quality of
the morlocks--a something inhuman and malign. instinctively i
loathed them. before, i had felt as a man might feel who had fallen
into a pit: my concern was with the pit and how to get out of it.
now i felt like a beast in a trap, whose enemy would come upon him
soon.

'the enemy i dreaded may surprise you. it was the darkness of the
new moon. weena had put this into my head by some at first
incomprehensible remarks about the dark nights. it was not now
such a very difficult problem to guess what the coming dark nights
might mean. the moon was on the wane: each night there was a longer
interval of darkness. and i now understood to some slight degree at
least the reason of the fear of the little upper-world people for
the dark. i wondered vaguely what foul villainy it might be that
the morlocks did under the new moon. i felt pretty sure now
 
 ___________________________
 
ecure from them. i
shuddered with horror to think how they must already have examined
me.

'i wandered during the afternoon along the valley of the thames, but
found nothing that commended itself to my mind as inaccessible. all
the buildings and trees seemed easily practicable to such dexterous
climbers as the morlocks, to judge by their wells, must be. then the
tall pinnacles of the palace of green porcelain and the polished
gleam of its walls came back to my memory; and in the evening,
taking weena like a child upon my shoulder, i went up the hills
towards the south-west. the distance, i had reckoned, was seven or
eight miles, but it must have been nearer eighteen. i had first seen
the place on a moist afternoon when distances are deceptively
diminished. in addition, the heel of one of my shoes was loose, and
a nail was working through the sole--they were comfortable old shoes
i wore about indoors--so that i was lame. and it was already long
past sunset when i came in sight of the palace,
 
 ___________________________
 
 silhouetted black
against the pale yellow of the sky.

'weena had been hugely delighted when i began to carry her, but
after a while she desired me to let her down, and ran along by the
side of me, occasionally darting off on either hand to pick flowers
to stick in my pockets. my pockets had always puzzled weena, but at
the last she had concluded that they were an eccentric kind of vase
for floral decoration. at least she utilized them for that purpose.
and that reminds me! in changing my jacket i found...'

the time traveller paused, put his hand into his pocket, and
silently placed two withered flowers, not unlike very large white
mallows, upon the little table. then he resumed his narrative.

'as the hush of evening crept over the world and we proceeded over
the hill crest towards wimbledon, weena g
 
 ___________________________
 
 feel the hollowness of the ground
beneath my feet: could, indeed, almost see through it the morlocks
on their ant-hill going hither and thither and waiting for the dark.
in my excitement i fancied that they would receive my invasion of
their burrows as a declaration of war. and why had they taken my
time machine?

'so we went on in the quiet, and the twilight deepened into night.
the clear blue of the distance faded, and one star after another
came out. the ground grew dim and the trees black. weena's fears and
her fatigue grew upon her. i took her in my arms and talked to her
and caressed her. then, as the darkness grew deeper, she put her
arms round my neck, and, closing her eyes, tightly pressed her face
against my shoulder. so we went down a long slope into a valley, and
there in the dimness i almost walked into a little river. this i
waded, and went up the opposite side of the valley, past a number
of sleeping houses, and by a statue--a faun, or some such figure,
_minus_ the head. her
 
 ___________________________
 
e too were acacias. so far i had seen nothing of
the morlocks, but it was yet early in the night, and the darker hours
before the old moon rose were still to come.

'from the brow of the next hill i saw a thick wood spreading wide
and black before me. i hesitated at this. i could see no end to
it, either to the right or the left. feeling tired--my feet, in
particular, were very sore--i carefully lowered weena from my
shoulder as i halted, and sat down upon the turf. i could no
longer see the palace of green porcelain, and i was in doubt of my
direction. i looked into the thickness of the wood and thought of
what it might hide. under that dense tangle of branches one would
be out of sight of the stars. even were there no other lurking
danger--a danger i did not care to let my imagination loose
upon--there would still be all the roots to stumble over and the
tree-boles to strike against.

'i was very 
 
 ___________________________
 
tired, too, after the excitements of the day; so i
decided that i would not face it, but would pass the night upon the
open hill.

'weena, i was glad to find, was fast asleep. i carefully wrapped her
in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait for the moonrise. the
hill-side was quiet and deserted, but from the black of the wood
there came now and then a stir of living things. above me shone the
stars, for the night was very clear. i felt a certain sense of
friendly comfort in their twinkling. all the old constellations
had gone from the sky, however: that slow movement which is
imperceptible in a hundred human lifetimes, had l
 
 ___________________________
 
ons, the complex organizations, the nations,
languages, literatures, aspirations, even the mere memory of man as
i knew him, had been swept out of existence. instead were these
frail creatures who had forgotten their high ancestry, and the white
things of which i went in terror. then i thought of the great fear
that was between the two species, and for the first time, with a
sudden shiver, came the clear knowledge of what the meat i had seen
might be. yet it was too horrible! i looked at little weena sleeping
beside me, her face white and starlike under the stars, and
forthwith dismissed the thought.

'through that long night i held my mind off the morlocks as well as
i could, and whiled away the time by trying to fancy i could find
signs of the old constellations in the new confusion. the sky kept
very clear, except for a hazy cloud or so. no doubt i dozed at
times. then, as my vigil wore on, came a faintness in the eastward
sky, like the reflection of some colourless fire, and the old moo
 
 ___________________________
 
ose, thin and peaked and white. and close behind, and overtaking
it, and overflowing it, the dawn came, pale at first, and then
growing pink and warm. no morlocks had approached us. indeed, i had
seen none upon the hill that night. and in the confidence of renewed
day it almost seemed to me that my fear had been unreasonable. i
stood up and found my foot with the loose heel swollen at the ankle
and painful under the heel; so i sat down again, took off my shoes,
and flung them away.

'i awakened weena, and we went down into the wood, now green and
pleasant instead of black and forbidding. we found some fruit
wherewith to break our fast. we soon met others of the dainty ones,
laughing and dancing in the sunlight as though there was no such
thing in nature as the night. and then i thought once more of the
meat that i had seen. i felt assured now of what it was, and from
the bottom of my heart i pitied this last feeble rill from the great
flood of humanity. clearly, at some time in the long-ago
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst human flesh is no deep-seated instinct. and so
these inhuman sons of men----! i tried to look at the thing in a
scientific spirit. after all, they were less human and more remote
than our cannibal ancestors of three or four thousand years ago.
and the intelligence that would have made this state of things a
torment had gone. why should i trouble myself? these eloi were mere
fatted cattle, which the ant-like morlocks preserved and preyed
upon--probably saw to the breeding of. and there was weena dancing
at my side!

'then i tried to preserve myself from the horror that was coming
upon me, by regarding it as a rigorous punishment of human
selfishness. man had been content to live in ease and delight upon
the labours of his fellow-man, had taken necessity as his watchword
and excuse, and in the fullness of time necessity had come home to
him. i even tried a carlyle-like scorn of this wretched aristocracy
in decay. but this attitude of mind was impossible. however great
their intellectual
 
 ___________________________
 
hoped to procure some
means of fire, so that i should have the weapon of a torch at hand,
for nothing, i knew, would be more efficient against these morlocks.
then i wanted to arrange some contrivance to break open the doors of
bronze under the white sphinx. i had in mind a battering ram. i had
a persuasion that if i could enter those doors and carry a blaze of
light before me i should discover the time machine and escape. i
could not imagine the morlocks were strong enough to move it far
away. weena i had resolved to bring with me to our own time. and
turning such schemes over in my mind i pursued our way towards the
building which my fancy had chosen as our dwelling.




viii


'i found the palace of green porcelain, when we approached it about
noon, deserted and falling into ruin. only ragged vestiges of glass
remained in its windows, and great sheets of the green facing had
fallen away from the corroded metallic framework. it lay very high
upon a turfy down, and looking north-eastward b
 
 ___________________________
 
efore i entered it, i
was surprised to see a large estuary, or even creek, where i judged
wandsworth and battersea must once have been. i thought then--though
i never followed up the thought--of what might have happened, or
might be happening, to the living things in the sea.

'the material of the palace proved on examination to be indeed
porcelain, and along the face of it i saw an inscription in some
unknown character. i thought, rather foolishly, that weena might
help me to interpret this, but i only learned that the bare idea of
writing had never entered her head. she always seemed to me, i
fancy, more human than she was, perhaps because her affection was so
human.

'within the big valves of the door--which were open and broken--we
found, instead of the customary hall, a long gallery lit by many
side windows. at the first glance i was reminded of a museum.
the tiled floor was thick with dust, and a remarkable array of
miscellaneous objects was sh
 
 ___________________________
 
off for a time, and
had, through the extinction of bacteria and fungi, lost ninety-nine
hundredths of its force, was nevertheless, with extreme sureness if
with extreme slowness at work again upon all its treasures. here and
there i found traces of the little people in the shape of rare
fossils broken to pieces or threaded in strings upon reeds. and the
cases had in some instances been bodily removed--by the morlocks as
i judged. the place was very silent. the thick dust deadened our
footsteps. weena, who had been rolling a sea urchin down the sloping
glass of a case, presently came, as i stared about me, and very
quietly took my hand and stood beside me.

'and at first i was so much surprised by this ancient monument of an
intellectual age, that i gave no thought to the possibilities it
presented. even my preoccupation about the time machine receded a
little from my mind.

'to judge from the size of the place, this palace of green porcelain
had a great deal more in it than a gallery of pal
 
 ___________________________
 
 either side of me were the huge bulks of
big machines, all greatly corroded and many broken down, but some
still fairly complete. you know i have a certain weakness for
mechanism, and i was inclined to linger among these; the more so as
for the most part they had the interest of puzzles, and i could make
only the vaguest guesses at what they were for. i fancied that if
i could solve their puzzles i should find myself in possession of
powers that might be of use against the morlocks.

'suddenly weena came very close to my side. so suddenly that she
startled me. had it not been for her i do not think i should have
noticed that the floor of the gallery sloped at all. [footnote: it
may be, of course, that the floor did not slope, but that the museum
was built into the side of a hill.--ed.] the end i had come in at
was quite above ground, and was lit by rare slit-like windows. as
you went down the length, the ground came up against these windows,
until at last there was a pit like the "area" of
 
 ___________________________
 
 a london house
before each, and only a narrow line of daylight at the top. i went
slowly along, puzzling about the machines, and had been too intent
upon them to notice the gradual diminution of the light, until
weena's increasing apprehensions drew my attention. then i saw that
the gallery ran down at last into a thick darkness. i hesitated, and
then, as i looked round me, i saw that the dust was less abundant
and its surface less even. further away towards the dimness, it
appeared to be broken by a number of small narrow footprints. my
sense of the immediate presence of the morlocks revived at that.
i felt that i was wasting my time in the academic examination of
machinery. i called to mind that it was alr
 
 ___________________________
 
eady far advanced in the
afternoon, and that i had still no weapon, no refuge, and no means
of making a fire. and then down in the remote blackness of the
gallery i heard a peculiar pattering, and the same odd noises i had
heard down the well.

'i took weena's hand. then, struck with a sudden idea, i left her
and turned to a machine from which projected a lever not unlike
those in a signal-box. clambering upon the stand, and grasping this
lever in my hands, i put all my weight upon it sideways. suddenly
weena, deserted in the central aisle, began to whimper. i had judged
the strength of the lever pretty correctly, for it snapped after a
minute's strain, and i rejoined her with a mace in my hand more than
sufficient, i judged, for any morlock skull 
 
 ___________________________
 
i might encounter. and i
longed very much to kill a morlock or so. very inhuman, you may
think, to want to go killing one's own descendants! but it was
impossible, somehow, to feel any humanity in the things. only my
disinclination to leave weena, and a persuasion that if i began to
slake my thirst for murder my time machine might suffer, restrained
me from going straight down the gallery and killing the brutes i
heard.

'well, mace in one hand and weena in the other, i went out of that
gallery and into another and still larger one, which at the first
glance reminded me of a military chapel hung with tattered flags.
the brown and charred rags that hung from the sides of it, i
presently recognized as the decaying vestiges of books. they had
long since dropped to pieces, and every semblance of print had left
them. but here and there were warped boards and cracked metallic
clasps that told the tale well enough. had i been a literary man i
might, p
 
 ___________________________
 
_ and my own seventeen papers upon
physical optics.

'then, going up a broad staircase, we came to what may once have
been a gallery of technical chemistry. and here i had not a little
hope of useful discoveries. except at one end where the roof had
collapsed, this gallery was well preserved. i went eagerly to every
unbroken case. and at last, in one of the really air-tight cases,
i found a box of matches. very eagerly i tried them. they were
perfectly good. they were not even damp. i turned to weena. "dance,"
i cried to her in her own tongue. for now i had a weapon indeed
against the horrible creatures we feared. and so, in that derelict
museum, upon the thick soft carpeting of dust, to weena's huge
delight, i solemnly performed a kind of composite dance, whistling
_the land of the leal_ as cheerfully as i could. in part it was a
modest _cancan_, in part a step dance, in part a skirt-dance (so far
as my tail-coat permitted), and in part original. for i am naturally
inventive, as you know.

 
 ___________________________
 
art above
the horizon. i was determined to reach the white sphinx early the
next morning, and ere the dusk i purposed pushing through the woods
that had stopped me on the previous journey. my plan was to go as
far as possible that night, and then, building a fire, to sleep
in the protection of its glare. accordingly, as we went along i
gathered any sticks or dried grass i saw, and presently had my arms
full of such litter. thus loaded, our progress was slower than i had
anticipated, and besides weena was tired. and i began to suffer from
sleepiness too; so that it was full night before we reached the
wood. upon the shrubby hill of its edge weena would have stopped,
fearing the darkness before us; but a singular sense of impending
calamity, that should indeed have served me as a warning, drove me
onward. i had been without sleep for a night and two days, and i was
feverish and irritable. i felt sleep coming upon me, and the
morlocks with it.

'while we hesitated, among the black bushes behin
 
 ___________________________
 
s
heat is rarely strong enough to burn, even when it is focused by
dewdrops, as is sometimes the case in more tropical districts.
lightning may blast and blacken, but it rarely gives rise to
widespread fire. decaying vegetation may occasionally smoulder with
the heat of its fermentation, but this rarely results in flame. in
this decadence, too, the art of fire-making had been forgotten on
the earth. the red tongues that went licking up my heap of wood were
an altogether new and strange thing to weena.

'she wanted to run to it and play with it. i believe she would have
cast herself into it had i not restrained her. but i caught her up,
and in spite of her struggles, plunged boldly before me into the
wood. for a little way the glare of my fire lit the path. looking
back presently, i could see, through the crowded stems, that from my
heap of sticks the blaze had spread to some bushes adjacent, and a
curved line of fire was creeping up the grass of the hill. i laughed
at that, and turned again
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the dark trees before me. it was very
black, and weena clung to me convulsively, but there was still, as
my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, sufficient light for me to
avoid the stems. overhead it was simply black, except where a gap of
remote blue sky shone down upon us here and there. i struck none of
my matches because i had no hand free. upon my left arm i carried my
little one, in my right hand i had my iron bar.

'for some way i heard nothing but the crackling twigs under my feet,
the faint rustle of the breeze above, and my own breathin
 
 ___________________________
 
g and the
throb of the blood-vessels in my ears. then i seemed to know of a
pattering about me. i pushed on grimly. the pattering grew more
distinct, and then i caught the same queer sound and voices i had
heard in the under-world. there were evidently several of the
morlocks, and they were closing in upon me. indeed, in another
minute i felt a tug at my coat, then something at my arm. and weena
shivered violently, and became quite still.

'it was time for a match. but to get one i must put her down. i did
so, and, as i fumbled with my pocket, a struggle began in the
darkness about my knees, perfectly silent on her part and with the
same peculiar cooing sounds from the morlocks. soft little hands,
too, were creeping over my coat and back, touching even my neck.
then the match scratched and fizzed. i held it flaring, and saw the
white backs of the morlocks in flight amid the trees. i ha
 
 ___________________________
 
stily took
a lump of camphor from my pocket, and prepared to light it as soon
as the match should wane. then i looked at weena. she was lying
clutching my feet and quite motionless, with her face to the ground.
with a sudden fright i stooped to her. she seemed scarcely to
breathe. i lit the block of camphor and flung it to the ground,
and as it split and flared up and drove back the morlocks and the
shadows, i knelt down and lifted her. the wood behind seemed full of
the stir and murmur of a great company!

'she seemed to have fainted. i put her carefully upon my shoulder
and rose to push on, and then there came a horr
 
 ___________________________
 
ible realization. in
manoeuvring with my matches and weena, i had turned myself about
several times, and now i had not the faintest idea in what direction
lay my path. for all i knew, i might be facing back towards the
palace of green porcelain. i found myself in a cold sweat. i had to
think rapidly what to do. i determined to build a fire and encamp
where we were. i put weena, still motionless, down upon a turfy
bole, and very hastily, as my first lump of camphor waned, i began
collecting sticks and leaves. here and there out of the darkness
round me the morlocks' eyes shone like carbuncles.

'the camphor flickered and went out. i lit a match, and as i did so,
two white forms that had been approaching weena dashed hastily away.
one was so blinded by the light that he came straight for me, and i
felt his bones grind under the blow of my fist. he gave a whoop of
disma
 
 ___________________________
 
y, staggered a little way, and fell down. i lit another piece
of camphor, and went on gathering my bonfire. presently i noticed
how dry was some of the foliage above me, for since my arrival
on the time machine, a matter of a week, no rain had fallen. so,
instead of casting about among the trees for fallen twigs, i began
leaping up and dragging down branches. very soon i had a choking
smoky fire of green wood and dry sticks, and could economize my
camphor. then i turned to where weena lay beside my iron mace. i
tried what i could to revive her, but she lay like one dead. i could
not even satisfy myself whether or not she breathed.

'now, the smoke of the fire beat over towards me, and it must have
made me heavy of a sudden. moreover, the vapour of camphor was in
the air. my fire would not need replenishing for an hour or so. i
felt very weary after my exertion, and sat down. the wood, too, was
full of a slumbrous murmur that i did not understand. i seemed just
to nod and ope
 
 ___________________________
 
er's web. i was overpowered, and went down. i felt
little teeth nipping at my neck. i rolled over, and as i did so my
hand came against my iron lever. it gave me strength. i struggled
up, shaking the human rats from me, and, holding the bar short,
i thrust where i judged their faces might be. i could feel the
succulent giving of flesh and bone under my blows, and for a moment
i was free.

'the strange exultation that so often seems to accompany hard
fighting came upon me. i knew that both i and weena were lost, but i
determined to make the morlocks pay for their meat. i stood with my
back to a tree, swinging the iron bar before me. the whole wood was
full of the stir and cries of them. a minute passed. their voices
seemed to rise to a higher pitch of excitement, and their movements
grew faster. yet none came within reach. i stood glaring at the
blackness. then suddenly came hope. what if the morlocks were
afraid? and close on the heels of that came a strange thing. the
darkness seemed to gr
 
 ___________________________
 
no longer white, but reddish.
as i stood agape, i saw a little red spark go drifting across a gap
of starlight between the branches, and vanish. and at that i
understood the smell of burning wood, the slumbrous murmur that was
growing now into a gusty roar, the red glow, and the morlocks'
flight.

'stepping out from behind my tree and looking back, i saw, through
the black pillars of the nearer trees, the flames of the burning
forest. it was my first fire coming after me. with that i looked for
weena, but she was gone. the hissing and crackling behind me, the
explosive thud as each fresh tree burst into flame, left little
time for reflection. my iron bar still gripped, i followed in the
morlocks' path. it was a close race. once the flames crept forward
so swiftly on my right as i ran that i was outflanked and had to
strike off to the left. but at last i emerged upon a small open
space, and as i did so, a morlock came blundering towards me, and
past me, and went on straight into the fire!

'
 
 ___________________________
 
re, and i struck
no more of them.

'yet every now and then one would come straight towards me, setting
loose a quivering horror that made me quick to elude him. at one
time the flames died down somewhat, and i feared the foul creatures
would presently be able to see me. i was thinking of beginning the
fight by killing some of them before this should happen; but the
fire burst out again brightly, and i stayed my hand. i walked about
the hill among them and avoided them, looking for some trace of
weena. but weena was gone.

'at last i sat down on the summit of the hillock, and watched this
strange incredible company of blind things groping to and fro, and
making uncanny noises to each other, as the glare of the fire beat
on them. the coiling uprush of smoke streamed across the sky, and
through the rare tatters of that red canopy, remote as though they
belonged to another universe, shone the little stars. two or three
morlocks came blundering into me, and i drove them off with blows
of my fist
 
 ___________________________
 
and got up and sat down again, and
wandered here and there, and again sat down. then i would fall to
rubbing my eyes and calling upon god to let me awake. thrice i saw
morlocks put their heads down in a kind of agony and rush into the
flames. but, at last, above the subsiding red of the fire, above the
streaming masses of black smoke and the whitening and blackening
tree stumps, and the diminishing numbers of these dim creatures,
came the white light of the day.

'i searched again for traces of weena, but there were none. it was
plain that they had left her poor little body in the forest. i
cannot describe how it relieved me to think that it had escaped the
awful fate to which it seemed destined. as i thought of that, i was
almost moved to begin a massacre of the helpless abominations about
me, but i contained myself. the hillock, as i have said, was a kind
of island in the forest. from its summit i could now make out
through a haze of smoke the palace of green porcelain, and from that
i co
 
 ___________________________
 
uld get my bearings for the white sphinx. and so, leaving the
remnant of these damned souls still going hither and thither and
moaning, as the day grew clearer, i tied some grass about my feet
and limped on across smoking ashes and among black stems, that still
pulsated internally with fire, towards the hiding-place of the time
machine. i walked slowly, for i was almost exhausted, as well as
lame, and i felt the intensest wretchedness for the horrible death
of little weena. it seemed an overwhelming calamity. now, in this
old familiar room, it is more like the sorrow of a dream than an
actual loss. but that morning it left me absolutely lonely
again--terribly alone. i began to think of this house of mine, of
this fireside, of some of you, and with such thoughts came a longing
that was pain.

'but as i walked over the smoking ashes under the bright morning
sky, i made a discovery. in my trouser pocket were still some loose
matches. the box must have leaked before 
 
 ___________________________
 

yellow metal from which i had viewed the world upon the evening of
my arrival. i thought of my hasty conclusions upon that evening and
could not refrain from laughing bitterly at my confidence. here
was the same beautiful scene, the same abundant foliage, the same
splendid palaces and magnificent ruins, the same silver river
running between its fertile banks. the gay robes of the beautiful
people moved hither and thither among the trees. some were bathing
in exactly the place where i had saved weena, and that suddenly gave
me a keen stab of pain. and like blots upon the landscape rose the
cupolas above the ways to the under-world. i understood now what all
the beauty of the over-world people covered. very pleasant was their
day, as pleasant as the day of the cattle in the field. like the
cattle, they knew of no enemies and provided against no needs. and
their end was the same.

'i grieved to think how brief the dream of the human intellect had
been. it had committed suicide. it had set its
 
 ___________________________
 
 the journalist.
'how shall we get home?'

'plenty of cabs at the station,' said the psychologist.

'it's a curious thing,' said the medical man; 'but i certainly don't
know the natural order of these flowers. may i have them?'

the time traveller hesitated. then suddenly: 'certainly not.'

'where did you really get them?' said the medical man.

the time traveller put his hand to his head. he spoke like one who
was trying to keep hold of an idea that eluded him. 'they were put
into my pocket by weena, when i travelled into time.' he stared
round the room. 'i'm damned if it isn't all going. this room and you
and the atmosphere of every day is too much for my memory. did i
ever make a time machine, or a model of a time machine? or is it all
only a dream? they say life is a dream, a precious poor dream at
times--but i can't stand another that won't fit. it's madness. and
where did the dream come from? ... i must look at that machine. if
there is one!'

he caught up the lamp swiftly, and carrie