

the time machine
i


the time traveller (for so it will be convenient to speak of him)
was expounding a recondite matter to us. his grey eyes shone and
twinkled, and his usually pale face was flushed and animated. the
fire burned brightly, and the soft radiance of the incandescent
lights in the lilies of silver caught the bubbles that flashed and
passed in our glasses. our chairs, being his patents, embraced and
caressed us rather than submitted to be sat upon, and there was that
luxurious after-dinner atmosphere when thought roams g
 
 ___________________________
 
mathematical plane. these things are mere abstractions.'

'that is all right,' said the psychologist.

'nor, having only length, breadth, and thickness, can a cube have a
real existence.'

'there i object,' said filby. 'of course a solid body may exist. all
real things--'

'so most people think. but wait a moment. can an _instantaneous_
cube exist?'

'don't follow you,' said filby.

'can a cube that does not last for any time at all, have a real
existence?'

filby became pensive. 'clearly,' the time traveller proceeded, 'any
real body must have extension in _four_ directions: it must have
length, breadth, thickness, and--duration. but through a natural
infirmity of the flesh, which i will explain to you in a moment, we
incline to overlook this fact. there are really four dimensions,
three which we call the three planes of space, and a fourth, time.
there is, however, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction between
the former three dimensions and the latter, because it happens that
our consciousness
 
 ___________________________
 
 moves intermittently in one direction along the
latter from the beginning to the end of our lives.'

'that,' said a very young man, making spasmodic efforts to relight
his cigar over the lamp; 'that ... very clear indeed.'

'now, it is very remarkable that this is so extensively overlooked,'
continued the time traveller, with a slight accession of
cheerfulness. 'really this is what is meant by the fourth dimension,
though some people who talk about the fourth dimension do not know
they mean it. it is only another way of looking at time. _there is
no difference between time and any of the three dimensions of space
except that our consciousness moves along it_. but some foolish
people have got hold of the wrong side of that idea. you have all
heard what they have to say about this fourth dimension?'

'_i_ have n
 
 ___________________________
 
ing in a quite transitory manner.

'well, i do not mind telling you i have been at work upon this
geometry of four dimensions for some time. some of my results
are curious. for instance, here is a portrait of a man at eight
years old, another at fifteen, another at seventeen, another at
twenty-three, and so on. all these are evidently sections, as it
were, three-dimensional representations of his four-dimensioned
being, which is a fixed and unalterable thing.

'scientific people,' proceeded the time traveller, after the pause
required for the proper assimilation of this, 'know very well that
time is only a kind of space. here is a popular scientific diagram,
a weather record. this line i trace with my finger shows the
movement of the barometer. yesterday it was so high, yesterday night
it fell, then this morning it rose again, and so gently upward to
here. surely the mercury did not trace this line in any of the
dimensions of space generally recognized? but certainly it traced
such a line, and that 
 
 ___________________________
 
line, therefore, we must conclude was along
the time-dimension.'

'but,' said the medical man, staring hard at a coal in the fire, 'if
time is really only a fourth dimension of space, why is it, and why
has it always been, regarded as something different? and why cannot
we move in time as we move about in the other dimensions of space?'

the time traveller smiled. 'are you sure we can move freely in
space? right and left we can go, backward and forward freely enough,
and men always have done so. i admit we move freely in two
dimensions. but how about up and down? gravitation limits us there.'

'not exactly,' said the medical man. 'there are balloons.'

'but before the balloons, save for spasmodic jumping and the
inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of vertical
movement.'

'still they could move a little up and down,' said the medical m
 
 ___________________________
 
back for a moment. of
course we have no means of staying back for any length of time, any
more than a savage or an animal has of staying six feet above the
ground. but a civilized man is better off than the savage in this
respect. he can go up against gravitation in a balloon, and why
should he not hope that ultimately he may be able to stop or
accelerate his drift along the time-dimension, or even turn about
and travel the other way?'

'oh, _this_,' began filby, 'is all--'

'why not?' said the time traveller.

'it's against reason,' said filby.

'what reason?' said the time traveller.

'you can show black is white by argument,' said filby, 'but you will
never convince me.'

'possibly not,' said the time traveller. 'but now you begin to see
the object of my investigations into the geometry of four
dimensions. long ago i had a vague inkling of a machine--'

'to travel through time!' exclaimed the very young man.

'that shall travel indifferently in any direction of space and time,
as the driver deter
 
 ___________________________
 
mines.'

filby contented himself with laughter.

'but i have experimental verification,' said the time traveller.

'it would be remarkably convenient for the historian,' the
psychologist suggested. 'one might travel back and verify the
accepted account of the battle of hastings, for instance!'

'don't you think you would attract attention?' said the medical man.
'our ancestors had no great tolerance for anachronisms.'

'one might get one's greek from the very lips of homer and plato,'
the very young man thought.

'in which case they would certainly plough you for the little-go.
the german scholars have im
 
 ___________________________
 
, leave it to accumulate at
interest, and hurry on ahead!'

'to discover a society,' said i, 'erected on a strictly communistic
basis.'

'of all the wild extravagant theories!' began the psychologist.

'yes, so it seemed to me, and so i never talked of it until--'

'experimental verification!' cried i. 'you are going to verify
_that_?'

'the experiment!' cried filby, who was getting brain-weary.

'let's see your experiment anyhow,' said the psychologist, 'though
it's all humbug, you know.'

the time traveller smiled round at us. then, still smiling faintly,
and with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, he walked slowly
out of the room, and we heard his slippers shuffling down the long
passage to his laboratory.

the psychologist looked at us. 'i wonder what he's got?'

'some sleight-of-hand trick or other,' said the medical man, and
filby tried to tell us about a conjurer he had seen at burslem; but
before he had finished his preface the time traveller came back, and
filby's anecdote collapsed.


 
 ___________________________
 
the thing the time traveller held in his hand was a glittering
metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small clock, and very
delicately made. there was ivory in it, and some transparent
crystalline substance. and now i must be explicit, for this that
follows--unless his explanation is to be accepted--is an absolutely
unaccountable thing. he took one of the small octagonal tables that
were scattered about the room, and set it in front of the fire, with
two legs on the hearthrug. on this table he placed the mechanism.
the
 
 ___________________________
 
n he drew up a chair, and sat down. the only other object on the
table was a small shaded lamp, the bright light of which fell upon
the model. there were also perhaps a dozen candles about, two in
brass candlesticks upon the mantel and several in sconces, so that
the room was brilliantly illuminated. i sat in a low arm-chair
nearest the fire, and i drew this forward so as to be almost between
the time traveller and the fireplace. filby sat behind him, looking
over his shoulder. the medical man and the provincial mayor watched
him in profile from the right, the psychologist from the left. the
very young man stood behind the psychologist. we were all on the
alert. it appears incredible to me that any kind of trick, however
subtly conceived and however adroitly done, could have been played
upon us under these conditions.

the time traveller looked at us, and then at the mechanism. 'well?'
said the psycho
 
 ___________________________
 
logist.

'this little affair,' said the time traveller, resting his elbows
upon the table and pressing his hands together above the apparatus,
'is only a model. it is my plan for a machine to travel through
time. you will notice that it looks singularly askew, and that there
is an odd twinkling appearance about this bar, as though it was in
some way unreal.' he pointed to the part with his finger. 'also,
here is one little white lever, and here is another.'

the medical man got up out of his chair and peered into the thing.
'it's beautifully made,'
 
 ___________________________
 
 he said.

'it took two years to make,' retorted the time traveller. then, when
we had all imitated the action of the medical man, he said: 'now i
want you clearly to understand that this lever, being pressed over,
sends the machine gliding into the future, and this other reverses
the motion. this saddle represents the seat of a time traveller.
presently i am going to press the lever, and off the machine will
go. it will vanish, pass into future time, and disappear. have a
good look at the thing. look at the table too, and satisfy
yourselves there is no trickery. i don't want to waste this model,
and then be told i'm a quack.'

there was a minute's pause perhaps. the psychologist seemed about to
speak to me, but changed his mind. then the time traveller put forth
his finger towards the lever. 'no,' he said suddenly. 'lend me your
han
 
 ___________________________
 
as no trickery. there was a breath of
wind, and the lamp flame jumped. one of the candles on the mantel
was blown out, and the little machine suddenly swung round, became
indistinct, was seen as a ghost for a second perhaps, as an eddy of
faintly glittering brass and ivory; and it was gone--vanished! save
for the lamp the table was bare.

everyone was silent for a minute. then filby said he was damned.

the psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly looked
under the table. at that the time traveller laughed cheerfully.
'well?' he said, with a reminiscence of the psychologist. then,
getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on the mantel, and with his
back to us began to fill his pipe.

we stared at each other. 'look here,' said the medical man, 'are you
in earnest about this? do you seriously believe that that machine
has travelled into time?'

'certainly,' said the time traveller, stooping to light a spill at
the fire. then he turned, lighting his pipe, to look at the
psychologist's face. (t
 
 ___________________________
 
elf to a cigar and tried to light it uncut.)
'what is more, i have a big machine nearly finished in there'--he
indicated the laboratory--'and when that is put together i mean to
have a journey on my own account.'

'you mean to say that that machine has travelled into the future?'
said filby.

'into the future or the past--i don't, for certain, know which.'

after an interval the psychologist had an inspiration. 'it must have
gone into the past if it has gone anywhere,' he said.

'why?' said the time traveller.

'because i presume that it has not moved in space, and if it
travelled into the future it would still be here all this time,
since it must have travelled through this time.'

'but,' i said, 'if it travelled into the past it would have been
visible when we came first into this room; and last thursday when we
were here; and the thursday before that; and so forth!'

'serious objections,' remarked the provincial mayor, with an air of
impartiality, turning towards the time traveller.

'not a bit,'
 
 ___________________________
 
 said the time traveller, and, to the psychologist: 'you
think. you can explain that. it's presentation below the threshold,
you know, diluted presentation.'

'of course,' said the psychologist, and reassured us. 'that's a
simple point of psychology. i should have thought of it. it's plain
enough, and helps the paradox delightfully. we cannot see it, nor
can we appreciate this machine, any more than we can the spoke of
a wheel spinning, or a bullet flying through the air. if it is
travelling through time fifty times or
 
 ___________________________
 
 a hundred times faster than
we are, if it gets through a minute while we get through a second,
the impression it creates will of course be only one-fiftieth or
one-hundredth of what it would make if it were not travelling in
time. that's plain enough.' he passed his hand through the space in
which the machine had been. 'you see?' he said, laughing.

we sat and stared at the vacant table for a minute or so. then the
time traveller asked us what we thought of it all.

'it sounds plausible enough to-night,' said the medical man; 'but
wait until to-morrow. wait for the common sense of the morning.'

'would you like to see the time machine itself?' asked the time
traveller. and therewith, taking the lamp in his hand, he led the
way down the long, draughty corridor to his laboratory. i remember
vividly the flickering light, his queer, broad head in silhouette,
the dance of the shadows, how we all followed him, puzzled but
inc
 
 ___________________________
 
ch we had seen vanish from before
our eyes. parts were of nickel, parts of ivory, parts had certainly
been filed or sawn out of rock crystal. the thing was generally
complete, but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished upon the
bench beside some sheets of drawings, and i took one up for a better
look at it. quartz it seemed to be.

'look here,' said the medical man, 'are you perfectly serious?
or is this a trick--like that ghost you showed us last christmas?'

'upon that machine,' said the time traveller, holding the lamp
aloft, 'i intend to explore time. is that plain? i was never more
serious in my life.'

none of us quite knew how to take it.

i caught filby's eye over the shoulder of the medical man, and he
winked at me solemnly.




ii


i think that at that time none of us quite believed in the time
machine. the fact is, the time traveller was one of those men who
are too clever to be believed: you never felt that you saw all round
him; you always suspected some subtle reserve, some ingen
 
 ___________________________
 
uity in
ambush, behind his lucid frankness. had filby shown the model and
explained the matter in the time traveller's words, we should have
shown _him_ far less scepticism. for we should have perceived his
motives; a pork butcher could understand filby. but the time
traveller had more than a touch of whim among his elements, and we
distrusted him. things that would have made the frame of a less
clever man seemed tricks in his hands. it is a mistake to do things
too easily. the serious people who took him seriously never felt
quite sure of his deportment; they were somehow aware that trusting
their reputation
 
 ___________________________
 
ractical incredibleness,
the curious possibilities of anachronism and of utter confusion it
suggested. for my own part, i was particularly preoccupied with the
trick of the model. that i remember discussing with the medical man,
whom i met on friday at the linnaean. he said he had seen a similar
thing at tubingen, and laid considerable stress on the blowing out
of the candle. but how the trick was done he could not explain.

the next thursday i went again to richmond--i suppose i was one of
the time traveller's most constant guests--and, arriving late, found
four or five men already assembled in his drawing-room. the medical
man was standing before the fire with a sheet of paper in one hand
and his watch in the other. i looked round for the time traveller,
and--'it's half-past seven now,' said the medical man. 'i suppose
we'd better have dinner?'

'where's----?' said i, naming our host.

'you've just come? it's rather odd. he's unavoidably detained. he
asks me in this note to lead off with dinner at
 
 ___________________________
 
a pity to let the dinner spoil,' said the editor of a
well-known daily paper; and thereupon the doctor rang the bell.

the psychologist was the only person besides the doctor and myself
who had attended the previous dinner. the other men were blank, the
editor aforementioned, a certain journalist, and another--a quiet,
shy man with a beard--whom i didn't know, and who, as far as my
observation went, never opened his mouth all the evening. there was
some speculation at the dinner-table about the time traveller's
absence, and i suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular spirit.
the editor wanted that explained to him, and the psychologist
volunteered a wooden account of the 'ingenious paradox and trick' we
had witnessed that day week. he was in the midst of his exposition
when the door from the corridor opened slowly and without noise. i
was facing the door, and saw it first. 'hallo!' i said. 'at last!'
and the door opened wider, and the time traveller stood before us.
i gave a cry of surprise. 'goo
 
 ___________________________
 
en he came into the room.
he walked with just such a limp as i have seen in footsore tramps.
we stared at him in silence, expecting him to speak.

he said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a
motion towards the wine. the editor filled a glass of champagne, and
pushed it towards him. he drained it, and it seemed to do him good:
for he looked round the table, and the ghost of his old smile
flickered across his face. 'what on earth have you been up to, man?'
said the doctor. the time traveller did not seem to hear. 'don't let
me disturb you,' he said, with a certain faltering articulation.
'i'm all right.' he stopped, held out his glass for more, and took
it off at a draught. 'that's good,' he said. his eyes grew brighter,
and a faint colour came into his cheeks. his glance flickered over
our faces with a certain dull approval, and then went round the warm
and comfortable room. then he spoke again, still as it were feeling
his way among his words. 'i'm going to wash and dress, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
en i'll
come down and explain things ... save me some of that mutton. i'm
starving for a bit of meat.'

he looked across at the editor, who was a rare visitor, and hoped he
was all right. the editor began a question. 'tell you presently,'
said the time traveller. 'i'm--funny! be all right in a minute.'

he put down his glass, and walked towards the staircase door. again
i remarked his lameness and the soft padding sound of his footfall,
and standing up in my place, i saw his feet as he went out. he had
nothing on them but a pair of tattered, blood-stained socks. then the
door closed upon him. i had half a mind to follow, till i remembered
how he detested any fuss about himself. for a minute, perhaps, my
mind was wool-gathering. then, 'remarkable behavi
 
 ___________________________
 
editor say, thinking (after his wont) in
headlines. and this brought my attention back to the bright
dinner-table.

'what's the game?' said the journalist. 'has he been doing the
amateur cadger? i don't follow.' i met the eye of the psychologist,
and read my own interpretation in his face. i thought of the time
traveller limping painfully upstairs. i don't think any one else had
noticed his lameness.

the first to recover completely from this surprise was the medical
man, who rang the bell--the time traveller hated to have servants
waiting at dinner--for a hot plate. at that the editor turned to his
knife and fork with a grunt, and the silent man followed suit. the
dinner was resumed. conversation was exclamatory for a little while,
with gaps of wonderment; and then the editor got fervent in his
curiosity. 'does our friend eke out his modest income with a
crossing? or has he his nebuchadnezzar phases?' he inquired. 'i feel
assured it's this business of the time machine,' i said, and took up
the psyc
 
 ___________________________
 
er himself with dust by
rolling in a paradox, could he?' and then, as the idea came home to
him, he resorted to caricature. hadn't they any clothes-brushes in
the future? the journalist too, would not believe at any price, and
joined the editor in the easy work of heaping ridicule on the whole
thing. they were both the new kind of journalist--very joyous,
irreverent young men. 'our special correspondent in the day
after to-morrow reports,' the journalist was saying--or rather
shouting--when the time traveller came back. he was dressed in
ordinary evening clothes, and nothing save his haggard look remained
of the change that had startled me.

'i say,' said the editor hilariously, 'these chaps here say you have
been travelling into the middle of next week! tell us all about
little rosebery, will you? what will you take for the lot?'

the time traveller came to the place reserved for him without a
word. he smiled quietly, in his old way. 'where's my mutton?' he
said. 'what a treat it is to stick a fork
 
 ___________________________
 
 into meat again!'

'story!' cried the editor.

'story be damned!' said the time traveller. 'i want something to
eat. i won't say a word until i get some peptone into my arteries.
thanks. and the salt.'

'one word,' said i. 'have you been time travelling?'

'yes,' said the time traveller, with his mouth full, nodding his
head.

'i'd give a shilling a line for a verbatim note,' said the editor.
the time traveller pushed his glass towards the silent man and rang
it with his fingernail; at which the silent man, who had been
staring at his face, started convulsively, and poured him wine.
the rest of the dinner was uncomfortable. for my own part, sudden
questions kept on rising to my lips, and i dare say it was the same
with the others. the journalist tried to relieve the tension by
telling anecdotes of hettie potter. the time traveller devoted his
attention to his dinner, and displayed the appetite of a tr
 
 ___________________________
 
amp.
the medical man smoked a cigarette, and watched the time traveller
through his eyelashes. the silent man seemed even more clumsy than
usual, and drank champagne with regularity and determination out of
sheer nervousness. at last the time traveller pushed his plate away,
and looked round us. 'i suppose i must apologize,' he said. 'i was
simply starving. i've had a most amazing time.' he reached out his
hand for a cigar, and cut the end. 'but come into the smoking-room.
it's too long a story to tell over greasy plates.' and ringing the
bell in passing, he led the way into the adjoining room.

'you have told blank, and dash, and chose about the machine?' he
said to me, leaning back in his easy-chair and naming the three new
guests.

'but th
 
 ___________________________
 
must refrain from
interruptions. i want to tell it. badly. most of it will sound like
lying. so be it! it's true--every word of it, all the same. i was in
my laboratory at four o'clock, and since then ... i've lived eight
days ... such days as no human being ever lived before! i'm nearly
worn out, but i shan't sleep till i've told this thing over to you.
then i shall go to bed. but no interruptions! is it agreed?'

'agreed,' said the editor, and the rest of us echoed 'agreed.' and
with that the time traveller began his story as i have set it forth.
he sat back in his chair at first, and spoke like a weary man.
afterwards he got more animated. in writing it down i feel with only
too much keenness the inadequacy of pen and ink--and, above all, my
own inadequacy--to express its quality. you read, i will suppose,
attentively enough; but you cannot see the speaker's white,
sincere face in the bright circle of the little lamp, nor hear the
intonation of his voice. you cannot know how his expression follow
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
the turns of his story! most of us hearers were in shadow, for the
candles in the smoking-room had not been lighted, and only the face
of the journalist and the legs of the silent man from the knees
downward were illuminated. at first we glanced now and again at each
other. after a time we ceased to do that, and looked only at the
time traveller's face.




iii


'i told some of you last thursday of the principles of the time
machine, and showed you the actual thing itself, incomplete in the
workshop. there it is now, a little travel-worn, truly; and one of
the ivory bars is cracked, and a brass rail bent; but the rest of
it's sound enough. i expected to finish it on friday, but on friday,
when the putting together was nearly done, i found that one of the
nickel bars was exactly one inch too short, and this i had to get
remade; so that
 
 ___________________________
 
against the pale yellow of the sky.

'weena had been hugely delighted when i began to carry her, but
after a while she desired me to let her down, and ran along by the
side of me, occasionally darting off on either hand to pick flowers
to stick in my pockets. my pockets had always puzzled weena, but at
the last she had concluded that they were an eccentric kind of vase
for floral decoration. at least she utilized them for that purpose.
and that reminds me! in changing my jacket i found...'

the time traveller paused, put his hand into his pocket, and
silently placed two withered flowers, not unlike very large white
mallows, upon the little table. then he resumed his narrative.

'as the hush of evening crept over the world and we proceeded over
the hill crest towards wimbledon, weena grew tired and wanted to
return to the house of grey stone. but i pointed out the distant
pinnacles of the palace of green porcelain to her, and contrived to
make her understand that we were seeking a refuge there from h
 
 ___________________________
 
y i dreamed it in the
workshop. consider i have been speculating upon the destinies of our
race until i have hatched this fiction. treat my assertion of its
truth as a mere stroke of art to enhance its interest. and taking
it as a story, what do you think of it?'

he took up his pipe, and began, in his old accustomed manner, to tap
with it nervously upon the bars of the grate. there was a momentary
stillness. then chairs began to creak and shoes to scrape upon the
carpet. i took my eyes off the time traveller's face, and looked
round at his audience. they were in the dark, and little spots of
colour swam before them. the medical man seemed absorbed in the
contemplation of our host. the editor was looking hard at the end
of his cigar--the sixth. the journalist fumbled for his watch. the
others, as far as i remember, were motionless.

the editor stood up with a sigh. 'what a pity it is you're not
a writer of stories!' he said, putting his hand on the time
traveller's shoulder.

'you don't believe it?'
 
 ___________________________
 


'well----'

'i thought not.'

the time traveller turned to us. 'where are the matches?' he said.
he lit one and spoke over his pipe, puffing. 'to tell you the truth
... i hardly believe it myself.... and yet...'

his eye fell with a mute inquiry upon the withered white flowers
upon the little table. then he turned over the hand holding his
pipe, and i saw he was looking at some half-healed scars on his
knuckles.

the medical man rose, came to the lamp, and examined the flowers.
'the gynaeceum's odd,' he said. the psychologist leant forward to
 
 ___________________________
 

see, holding out his hand for a specimen.

'i'm hanged if it isn't a quarter to one,' said the journalist.
'how shall we get home?'

'plenty of cabs at the station,' said the psychologist.

'it's a curious thing,' said the medical man; 'but i certainly don't
know the natural order of these flowers. may i have them?'

the time traveller hesitated. then suddenly: 'certainly not.'

'where did you really get them?' said the medical man.

the time traveller put his hand to his head. he spoke like one who
was trying to keep hold of an idea that eluded him. 'they were put
into my pocket by weena, when i travelled into time.' he stared
round the room. 'i'm damned if it isn't all going. this room and you
and the atmosphere of every day is too much for my memory. did i
ever make a time machine, or a model of a time machine? or is it all
only a dream? they say life is a dream, a precious poor dream at
times--but i can't stand another that won't fit. it'
 
 ___________________________
 
hat machine. if
there is one!'

he caught up the lamp swiftly, and carried it, flaring red, through
the door into the corridor. we followed him. there in the flickering
light of the lamp was the machine sure enough, squat, ugly, and
askew; a thing of brass, ebony, ivory, and translucent glimmering
quartz. solid to the touch--for i put out my hand and felt the rail
of it--and with brown spots and smears upon the ivory, and bits of
grass and moss upon the lower parts, and one rail bent awry.

the time traveller put the lamp down on the bench, and ran his hand
along the damaged rail. 'it's all right now,' he said. 'the story i
told you was true. i'm sorry to have brought you out here in the
cold.' he took up the lamp, and, in an absolute silence, we
returned to the smoking-room.

he came into the hall with us and helped the editor on with his
coat. the medical man looked into his face and, with a certain
hesitation, told him he was suffering from overwork, at which he
laughed hugely. i remember him sta
 
 ___________________________
 
nding in the open doorway, bawling
good night.

i shared a cab with the editor. he thought the tale a 'gaudy lie.'
for my own part i was unable to come to a conclusion. the story was
so fantastic and incredible, the telling so credible and sober. i
lay awake most of the night thinking about it. i determined to go
next day and see the time traveller again. i was told he was in the
laboratory, and being on easy terms in the house, i went up to him.
the laboratory, however, was empty. i stared for a minute at the
time machine and put out my hand and touched the lever. at that the
squat substantial-looking mass swayed like a bough shaken by the
wind. its instability startled me extremely, and i had a queer
reminiscence of the childish days when i used to be forbidden to
meddle. i came back through the corridor. the time traveller met me
in th
 
 ___________________________
 
eaving you now?'

i consented, hardly comprehending then the full import of his words,
and he nodded and went on down the corridor. i heard the door of
the laboratory slam, seated myself in a chair, and took up a daily
paper. what was he going to do before lunch-time? then suddenly
i was reminded by an advertisement that i had promised to meet
richardson, the publisher, at two. i looked at my watch, and saw
that i could barely save that engagement. i got up and went down the
passage to tell the time traveller.

as i took hold of the handle of the door i heard an exclamation,
oddly truncated at the end, and a click and a thud. a gust of air
whirled round me as i opened the door, and from within came the
sound of broken glass falling on the floor. the time traveller was
not there. i seemed to see a ghostly, indistinct figure sitting in
a whirling mass of black and brass for a moment--a figure so
transparent that the bench behind with its sheets of drawings was
absolutely distinct; but this phantasm va
 
 ___________________________
 
.

i felt an unreasonable amazement. i knew that something strange had
happened, and for the moment could not distinguish what the strange
thing might be. as i stood staring, the door into the garden opened,
and the man-servant appeared.

we looked at each other. then ideas began to come. 'has mr. ----
gone out that way?' said i.

'no, sir. no one has come out this way. i was expecting to find him
here.'

at that i understood. at the risk of disappointing richardson i
stayed on, waiting for the time traveller; waiting for the second,
perhaps still stranger story, and the specimens and photographs he
would bring with him. but i am beginning now to fear that i must
wait a lifetime. the time traveller vanished three years ago. and,
as everybody knows now, he has never returned.




epilogue


one cannot choose but wonder. will he ever return? it may be that he
swept back into the past, and fell among the blood-drinking, hairy
savages of the age of unpolished stone; into the abysses of the
cretaceous se