fireman had thrown the switch, and at the
rajah's command the rosemary shot out on the spur to be thrust with
locked brakes fairly into the breach left defenseless by the ditched
engine. with a mob-roar of wrath the infuriated track-layers made a
rush for the new obstruction. but winton was before them.

"hold on!" he shouted, bearing them back with outflung arms. "hold on,
men, for god's sake! there are women in that car!"

the wrathful wave broke and eddied murmurous while a square-shouldered
old man with fierce eyes and huge white mustaches, and with an extinct
cigar between his teeth, clambered down from the rosemary's engine to
say:

"hah! a ratheh close connection, eh, misteh winton? faveh me with a
match, if you please, seh. may i assume that you won't tumble my
private car into the ditch?"

winton was white-hot, but he found a light for the rajah's cigar,
easing his mind only as he might with virginia looking on.

"i shall be more considerate of the safety of the ladies than you seem

 
 ___________________________
 
semary, there was one chance in a million that he might fling
himself upon the car in mid flight and alight with life enough left to
help calvert with the hand-brakes.

now, in the most unhopeful struggle it is often the thing least hoped
for that comes to pass. at argentine, winton's speed was a mile a
minute over a track rougher than a corduroy wagon-road; yet the
octopod held the rail and was neck and neck with the runaway. whisking
past the station, winton had a glimpse of a white-mustached old man
standing bareheaded on the platform and gazing horror-stricken at the
tableau; then man and station and lurching car were left behind, and
the fierce strife to gain the needed mile of lead went on.

three miles more of the surging, racking, nerve-killing race and
winton had his hand's-breadth of lead and had picked his place for the
million-chanced wrestle with death. it was at the c. g. r. station of
tierra blanca, just below a series of sharp curves which he hoped
might check a little the arr
 
 ___________________________
 
  *

three days afterward, to a screaming of smelter whistles and other
noisy demonstrations of mining-camp joy, the utah short line laid the
final rail of its new extension in the carbonate yards.

the driving of the silver spike accomplished, winton and adams slipped
out of the congratulatory throng and made their way across the
c. g. r. tracks to a private car standing along the siding. its railed
platform, commanding a view of the civic celebration, had its quota of
onlookers--a fierce-eyed old man with huge mustaches, an athletic
young clergyman, two bisques, and a goddess.

"climb up, misteh winton, and you, misteh adams; climb up and join
us," said the fierce-eyed one heartily. "virginia, heah, thinks we
ought to call one anotheh out, but i tell her--"

what the rajah had told his niece is of small account to us. but what
winton whispered in her ear when he had taken his place beside her is
more to the purpose of this history.

"i have built my railroad, as you told me to, and now i ha
 
 ___________________________
 
urmured.

but when the rajah proposed an adjournment to the gathering-room of
the car, and to luncheon therein, he surprised them standing
hand-in-hand and laughed.

"hah, you little rebel!" he said. "do you think you dese've that block
of stock i promised you when you should marry? anseh me, my deah."

she blushed and shook her head, but the brown eyes were dancing.

the rajah opened the car door with his courtliest bow.

"nevertheless, you shall have it, my deah virginia, if only to remind
an old man of the time when he was simple enough to make a business
confederate of a cha'ming young woman. straight on, misteh adams;
afteh you, misteh winton."
