al demonstration.
i shall ossify out there in those mountains. it's written in the
book."

"humph! it's too bad about you," said the other ironically. he was
a fit figure of a man, clean-cut and vigorous, from the steadfast
outlook of the gray eyes and the firm, smooth-shaven jaw to the square
fingertips of the strong hands, and his smile was of good-natured
contempt. "as you say, it is an outrage on filial complaisance. all
the same, with the right-of-way fight in prospect, quartz creek canyon
may not prove to be such a valley of dry bones as--look out, there!"

the shifting-engine had cut a car from the rear of the lately-arrived
alton, and was sending it down the outbound track to a coupling with
the transcontinental limited. adams stepped back and let it miss him
by a hand's-breadth, and as the car was passing, winton read the name
on the paneling.

"the rosemary: somebody's twenty-ton private outfit. that cooks our
last chance of making up any lost time between this and tomorrow--"


 
 ___________________________
 
about this mysterious jangle we are heading for," he
rejoined. "have i enlisted for a soldier when i thought i was only
going into peaceful exile as assistant engineer of construction on
the utah short line?"

"that remains to be seen." winton took a leaf from his pocket
memorandum and drew a rough outline map. "here is denver, and here
is carbonate," he explained. "at present the utah is running into
carbonate this way over the rails of the c. g. r. on a joint track
agreement which either line may terminate by giving six months'
notice of its intention to the other. got that?"

"to have and to hold," said adams. "go on."

"well, on the first day of september the c. g. r. people gave the
utah management notice to quit."

"they are bloated monopolists," said adams sententiously. "still i
don't see why there should be any scrapping over the line in quartz
creek canyon."

"no? you are not up in monopolistic methods. in six months from
september first the utah people will be shut out of carbo
 
 ___________________________
 
tion; and adams laughed and shook hands with
the reverend william calvert and made virginia's peace all in the same
breath.

"don't apologize for miss virginia, mrs. carteret. we were very good
friends in boston, chiefly, i think, because i never objected when she
wanted to--er--to take a rise out of me." then to virginia: "i hope i
don't intrude?"

"not in the least. didn't i just say you were good to come? uncle
somerville tells us we are passing through the famous golden
belt,--whatever that may be,--and recommends an easy-chair and a
window. but i haven't seen anything but stubble-fields--dismally wet
stubble-fields at that. won't you sit down and help me watch them go
by?"

adams placed a chair for her and found one for himself.

"'uncle somerville'--am i to have the pleasure of meeting mr.
somerville darrah?"

miss virginia's laugh was non-committal.

"_quien sabe_?" she queried, airing her one westernism before she was
fairly in the longitude of it. "uncle somerville is a law unto

 
 ___________________________
 
separated, as
room at the crowded tables could be found; and miss virginia's fate
gave her the unoccupied seat at one of the duet tables, opposite a
young man with steadfast gray eyes and a firm jaw.

winton was equal to the emergency, or thought he was. adams was still
within call and he beckoned him, meaning to propose an exchange of
seats. but the bostonian misunderstood wilfully.

"most happy, i'm sure," he said, coming instantly to the rescue. "miss
carteret, my friend signals his dilemma. may i present him?"

virginia smiled and gave the required permission in a word. but for
winton self-possession fled shrieking.

"ah--er--i hope you know mr. adams well enough to make allowances for
his--for his--" he broke down helplessly and she had to come to his
assistance.

"for his imagination?" she suggested. "i do, indeed; we are quite old
friends."

here was "well enough," but winton was a man and could not let it
alone.

"i should be very sorry to have you think for a moment that i
would-
 
 ___________________________
 
d recklessly contemptuous
of the moralities minor and major, he saw the birth of an influence
which inevitably must henceforth be desperately reckoned with.

given a name, this new-born life-factor was love; love barely
awakened, and as yet no more than a masterful desire to stand well in
the eyes of one woman. none the less, he saw the possibilities: that a
time might come when this woman would have the power to intervene;
would make him hold his hand in the business affair at the very
moment, mayhap, when he should strike the hardest.

it was a rather unnerving thought, and when he considered it he was
glad that their ways, coinciding for the moment, would presently go
apart, leaving him free to do battle as an honest soldier in any cause
must.

the rosemary party was rising, and winton rose, too, folding the seat
for miss virginia and carefully reaching her wrap from the rack.

"i am so glad to have met you," she said, giving him the tips of her
fingers and going back to the convention
 
 ___________________________
 
tah activities
when she spoke, but at her exclamation the frown softened into a smile
for his favorite niece.

"startled you, eh? pahdon me, my deah virginia. but as i am about to
startle some one else, perhaps you would better go in to your aunt."

she put a hand on his arm. "please let me stay out here, uncle
somerville," she said. "i'll be good and not get in the way."

he shook his head, in deprecation rather than in refusal.

"an officer will be here right soon now to make an arrest. there may
be a fight, or at least trouble of a sort you wouldn't care to see, my
deah."

"is it--is it mr. winton?" she asked.

he nodded.

"what has he been doing--besides being 'the enemy'?"

the rajah's smile was ferocious.

"just now he is trespassing, and directing others to trespass, upon
private property. do you see that dump up there on the mountain?--the
hole that looks like a mouth with a long gray beard hanging below it?
that is a mine, and its claim runs down across the track where misteh
win
 
 ___________________________
 
 duty in any part, adams explained the use
and need of a "front" wire, and miss carteret was properly interested.

"how convenient!" she commented. "and you can come up here and talk to
anybody you like--just as if it were a telephone?"

"to anyone in the company's service," amended adams. "it is not a
commercial wire."

"then let us send a message to mr. winton," she suggested, playing the
part of the capricious _ingenue_ to the very upcast of a pair of
mischievous eyes. "i'll write it and you may sign it."

adams stretched his complaisance the necessary additional inch and
gave her a pencil and a pad of blanks. she wrote rapidly:

  "miss carteret has been here admiring your drawings. she took one of
   them away with her, and i couldn't stop her without being rude. you
   shouldn't have done it without asking her permission. she says--"

"oh, dear! i am making it awfully long. does it cost so much a word?"

"no," said adams, not without an effort. he was beginning to be
distinctly disa
 
 ___________________________
 
 he comes back."

here the matter rested; and, having done what she conceived to be her
charitable duty, virginia was as anxious to get away as heart--the
heart of a slightly bored reverend billy, for instance--could wish.

so they bade adams good-by and picked their way down the frozen
embankment and across the ice-bridge; down and across and back to the
rosemary, where they found a perturbed chaperon in a flutter of
solicitude arising upon their mysterious disappearance and long
absence.

"it may be just as well not to tell any of them where we have been,"
said virginia in an aside to her cousin. and so the incident of
tea-drinking in the enemy's camp was safely put away like a little
personal note in its envelop with the flap gummed down.




vi

the rajah gives an order


while adams was dispensing commissary tea in iron-stone china cups to
his two guests in the "dinkey" field office, his chief, taking the
rosemary's night run in reverse in the company of town-marshal biggin,
was turn
 
 ___________________________
 
lates for breakfast, and
bessie and the reverend william were at the window, watching the
stirring industry battle now in full swing on the opposite slope.
virginia joined them.

"isn't it a shame!" she said. "of course, i want our side to win;
but it seems such a pity that we can't fight fairly."

calvert said, "isn't what a shame?" thereby eliciting a crisp
explanation from virginia in which she set well-founded suspicion
in the light of fact.

the reverend billy shook his head.

"such things may be within the law--of business; but they will surely
breed bad blood--"

the interruption was the rajah in his proper person, bustling out
fiercely to a conference with his myrmidons. by tacit consent the
three at the window fell silent.

there was a hasty mustering of armed men under the windows of the
rosemary, and they heard sheriff deckert's low-voiced instructions
to his posse.

"take it slow and easy, boys, and don't get rattled. now, then; guns
to the front! steady!"

the reverend billy 
 
 ___________________________
 

"mulcahey, take half the men and go up the grade till you can rake
those fellows without hitting the car. branagan, you take the other
half and go down till you can cross-fire with mulcahey. aim low, both
of you; and the man who fires before he gets the word from me will
break his neck at a rope's end. fall in!"

"by jove!" said adams. "are you going to resist? that spells felony,
doesn't it?"

winton pointed to the waiting octopod.

"i'm going to order the two-fifteen down out of the way: you may go
with her if you like."

"i guess not!" quoth the assistant, calmly lighting a fresh cigarette.
and then to the water-boy, who was acting quartermaster: "give me
a rifle and a cartridge-belt, chunky, and i'll stay here with the
boss."

"and where do i come in?" said biggin to winton reproachfully.

"you'll stay out, if your head's level. you've done enough already
to send you to canyon city."

"i ain't a-forgettin' nothing," said peter cheerfully, casting himself
flat behind a heap of earth o
 
 ___________________________
 
e, the deputies hung back to a man.

virginia could not forbear a smile. the sheriff burst into caustic
profanity. whereupon mr. peter biggin rose up and sent a bullet to
plow a little furrow in the ice within an inch of deckert's heels.

"ex-cuse _me_, bart," he drawled, "but no cuss words don't go."

the sheriff ignored peter biggin as a person who could be argued with
at leisure and turned to winton.

"come down!" he bellowed.

winton laughed.

"let me return the invitation. come up, and you may read your warrants
to us all day."

deckert withdrew his men, and at winton's signal the track-layers
came in and the earth began to fly again.

virginia sighed her relief, and bessie plucked up courage to go to
the window, which she had deserted in the moment of impending battle.

"breakfast is served," announced the waiter as calmly as if the
morning meal were the only matter of consequence in a world of
happenings.

they gathered about the table, a silent trio made presently a quartet
by the
 
 ___________________________
 

later, when calvert had been eliminated by miss bessie, winton looked
to see the true inwardness of the dinner-bidding made manifest by his
host.

but mr. darrah chatted on, affably noncommittal, and after a time
winton began to upbraid himself for suspecting the ulterior motive.
and when he finally rose to excuse himself on a letter-writing plea,
his leave-taking was that of the genial host reluctant to part company
with his guest.

"i've enjoyed your conve'sation, seh; enjoyed it right much. may i
hope you will faveh us often while we are neighbors?"

winton rose, made the proper acknowledgments, and would have crossed
the compartment to make his adieus to mrs. carteret. but at that
moment virginia came between.

"you are not going yet, are you, mr. winton? don't hurry. if you are
dying to smoke a pipe, as mr. adams says you are, we can go out on the
platform. it isn't too cold, is it?"

"it is clear and frosty, a beautiful night," he hastened to say. "may
i help you with your coat?"


 
 ___________________________
 
so presently winton had his heart's desire, which was to be alone with
virginia.

she nerved herself for the plunge,--her uncle's plunge.

"your part in the building of this other railroad is purely a business
affair, is it not?"

"my personal interest? quite so; a mere matter of dollars and cents,
you may say."

"if you should have another offer, from some other company--"

"that is not your argument; it is mr. darrah's. you know well enough
what is involved: honor, integrity, good faith, everything a man
values, or should value. i can't believe you would ask such a
sacrifice of me--of any man.

"indeed, i do not ask it, mr. winton. but it is only fair that you
should have your warning. my uncle will leave no stone unturned to
defeat you."

he was still looking into her eyes, and so had courage 
 
 ___________________________
 
ary. on the contrary, he extended his tramp westward, stumbling
on aimlessly up the canyon over the unsurfaced embankment of the new
line.

truth to tell, virginia's messenger was not unwilling to spend a
little time alone with the immensities. to put it baldly, he was
beginning to be desperately cloyed with the sweets of a day-long miss
bessie, ennuye on the one hand and despondent on the other.

why could not the cousin bessies see, without being told in so many
words, that the heart of a man may have been given in times long past
to another woman?--to a cousin virginia, let us say. and why must the
cousin virginias, passing by the lifelong devotion of a kinsman lover,
throw themselves--if one must put it thus brutally--fairly at the head
of an acquaintance of a day?

so questioning the immensities, the reverend billy came out after some
little time in a small upland valley where the two lines, old and new,
ran parallel at the same level, with low embankments less than a
hundred yards a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd social
divagations. he had acquired the right of way across the utah's line
for his blockading spur; had taken advantage of winton's inalertness
to construct the track; and was now prepared to hold the crossing with
a live engine and such a show of force as might be needful.

calvert turned back from the entrance of the valley, and was minded,
in a spirit of fairness, to pass the word concerning the new
obstruction on to the man who was most vitally concerned. but alas!
even a reverend billy may not always arise superior to his hamperings
as a man and a lover. here was defeat possible--nay, say rather defeat
probable--for a rival, with the probability increasing with each hour
of delay. calvert fought it out by length and by breadth a dozen times
before he came in sight of the track force toiling at the shale-slide.
should he tell winton, and so, indirectly, help to frustrate mr.
darrah's well-laid plan? or should he hold his peace and thus,
indirectly again, help to defeat the utah co
 
 ___________________________
 
ought
him in the way of decision let him declare as he sets his face finally
toward the station and the private car.

"i can't do it: i can't turn traitor to the kinsman whose bread i eat.
and that is what it would come to in plain english. beyond that i have
no right to go: it is not for me to pass upon the justice of this
petty war between rival corporations."

ah, william calvert! is there no word then of that other and far
subtler temptation? when you have reached your goal, if reach it you
may, will there be no remorseful looking back to this mile-stone where
a word from you might have taken the fly from your pot of precious
ointment?

the short winter day was darkening to its close when he returned to
the rosemary. by dint of judicious manoeuvering, with a too-fond
bessie for an unconscious confederate, he managed to keep virginia
from questioning him; this up to a certain moment of climaxes in the
evening.

but virginia read momentous things in his face and eyes, and when the
time 
 
 ___________________________
 
, a dilettante; a man with all the god-given ability to
do as he will and to succeed, and yet who will not take the trouble to
persevere."

winton smiled, a grim little smile.

"you are not quite like any other woman i have ever known--not like
any other in the world, i believe. your sisters, most of them, would
take it as the sincerest homage that a man should neglect his work for
his love. do you care so much for success, then?"

"for the thing itself--nothing, less than nothing. but--but one may
care a little for the man who wins or loses."

he tried to take her hand again, tried and failed.

"virginia!--is that my word of hope?"

"no. will you never see the commonplace effrontery of it, mr. winton?
day after day you have come here, idling away the precious hours that
meant everything to you, and now you come once again to offer me a
share in what you have lost. is that your idea of chivalry, of true
manhood?"

again the grim smile came and went.

"an unprejudiced onlooker might say th
 
 ___________________________
 
at you have made me very
welcome."

"mr. winton! is that generous?"

"no; perhaps it is hardly just. because i counted the cost and have
paid the price open-eyed. you may remember that i told you that first
evening i should come as often as i dared. i knew then, what i have
known all along: that it was a part of your uncle's plan to delay my
work."

"his and mine, you mean; only you are too kind--or not quite brave
enough--to say so."

"yours? never! if i could believe you capable of such a thing--"

"you may believe it," she broke in. "it was i who suggested it."

he drew a deep breath, and she heard his teeth come together with a
click. it was enough to try th
 
 ___________________________
 
 purpose?"

"not if you will give me the one priceless word i am thirsting for."

"oh, how shameless you are!" she cried. "will nothing serve to arouse
the better part of you?"

"there is no better part of any man than his love for a woman. you
have aroused that."

"_then prove it by going and building your railroad_, mr. winton. when
you have done that--"

he caught at the word as a drowning man catches at a straw.

"when i have won the fight--virginia, let me see your eyes--when i
have won, i may come back to you?"

"i didn't say anything of the kind! but i will say what i said to mr.
adams. i like men who _do_ things. good night." and before he could
reply she had made him open the door for her, and he was left alone on
the square-railed platform.

in the gathering-room of the private car virginia found an atmosphere
surcharged with electrical possibilities, felt it and inhaled it,
though there was nothing visible to indicate it. the rajah was buried
in the depths of his particular eas
 
 ___________________________
 
roper appreciation of the
successful realities. i--"

she stopped him with a quick little gesture of impatience.

"will you be good enough to stand aside and let me go in?"

the keen breath of the snow-caps was summer-warm in comparison with
the chilling iciness of her manner; but the secretary went on unmoved:

"success is the only thing worth while in this world. winton will
fail, but i shan't. and when i do succeed, i shall marry a woman who
can wear the purple most becomingly."

"i hope you may, i'm sure," she answered wearily. "yet you will excuse
me if i say that i don't understand how it concerns me, or why you
should keep me out here in the cold to tell me about it."

"don't you? it concerns you very nearly. you are the woman, miss
carteret."

"indeed? and if i decline the honor?"

the contingency was one for which the suitor seemed not entirely
prepared. yet he evinced a willingness to meet the hypothesis in a
spirit of perfect candor.

"you wouldn't do that, definitely, i fancy.
 
 ___________________________
 
de a
rush for the new obstruction. but winton was before them.

"hold on!" he shouted, bearing them back with outflung arms. "hold on,
men, for god's sake! there are women in that car!"

the wrathful wave broke and eddied murmurous while a square-shouldered
old man with fierce eyes and huge white mustaches, and with an extinct
cigar between his teeth, clambered down from the rosemary's engine to
say:

"hah! a ratheh close connection, eh, misteh winton? faveh me with a
match, if you please, seh. may i assume that you won't tumble my
private car into the ditch?"

winton was white-hot, but he found a light for the rajah's cigar,
easing his mind only as he might with virginia looking on.

"i shall be more considerate of the safety of the ladies than you seem
to be, mr. darrah," he retorted. "you are taking long chances in this
game, sir."

the rajah's laugh rumbled deep in his chest. "not so vehy much longer
than you have been taking during the past fo'tnight, my deah seh. but
neveh mind; all
 
 ___________________________
 
, surged around the circling spur track
and shot out masterless on the steeper gradient of the main line.

now, for the occupants of a runaway car on a rocky mountain canyon
line there is death and naught else. winton saw, in a phantasmagoric
flash of second sight, the meteor flight of the heavy car; saw the
reverend billy's ineffectual efforts to apply the hand-brakes, if by
good hap he should even guess that there were any hand-brakes; saw the
car, bounding and lurching, keeping to the rails, mayhap, for some few
miles below argentine, where it would crash headlong into the upward
climbing carbonate train, and all would end.

in unreasoning misery, he did the only thing that offered: ran blindly
down his own embankment, hoping nothing but that he might have one
last glimpse of virginia clinging to the hand-rail before she should
be lost to him for ever.

but as he ran a thought white-hot from the furnace of despair fell
into his brain to set it ablaze with purpose. beyond the litter of

 
 ___________________________
 
 eyes and virginia wept unaffectedly and
fell to dabbling his forehead with handfuls of snow.

"help me get him in to the divan, cousin billy," said virginia, when
all was over and the rosemary was safely coupled in ahead of the
upcoming train to be slowly pushed back to argentine.

but winton opened his eyes and struggled to his feet unaided.

"not yet," he said. "i've left my automobile on the other side of the
creek; and besides, i have a railroad to build. my respects to mr.
darrah, and you may tell him i'm not beaten yet." and he swung over
the railing and dropped off to mount the octopod and to race it back
to the front.

       *       *       *       *       *

three days afterward, to a screaming of smelter whistles and other
noisy demonstrations of mining-camp joy, the utah short line laid the
final rail of its new extension in the carbonate yards.

the driving of the silver spike accomplished, winton and adams slipped
out of the congratulatory throng and made their way across t