urther and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the myrmidons. they found achilles sitting by his tent and
his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. they stood
fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak,
but he knew them and said, "welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and
men; draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with agamemnon who has
sent you for the girl briseis. therefore, patroclus, bring her and give
her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by mortal
men, and by the fierceness of agamemnon's anger, that if ever again
there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they shall seek and
they shall not find. agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to
look before and after that the achaeans may fight by their ships in
safety."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. he brought briseis
from the tent and gave her over to the heralds, who too
 
 ___________________________
 
o a bad end. we will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from
actual fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to the
argives, that they may not all of them perish in your displeasure."

and jove answered, "to-morrow morning, juno, if you choose to do so,
you will see the son of saturn destroying large numbers of the argives,
for fierce hector shall not cease fighting till he has roused the son
of peleus when they are fighting in dire straits at their ships' sterns
about the body of patroclus. like it or no, this is how it is decreed;
for aught i care, you may go to the lowest depths beneath earth and
sea, where iapetus and saturn dwell in lone tartarus with neither ray
of light nor breath of wind to cheer them. you may go on and on till
you get there, and i shall not care one whit for your displeasure; you
are the greatest vixen living."

juno made him no answer. the sun's glorious orb now sank into oceanus
and drew down night over the land. sorry indeed were the trojans when
light
 
 ___________________________
 
r way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed
earnestly to earth-encircling neptune that the high spirit of the son
of aeacus might incline favourably towards them. when they reached the
ships and tents of the myrmidons, they found achilles playing on a
lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. it
was part of the spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city of
eetion, and he was now diverting himself with it and singing the feats
of heroes. he was alone with patroclus, who sat opposite to him and
said nothing, waiting till he should cease singing. ulysses and ajax
now came in--ulysses leading the way--and stood before him. achilles
sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his hand, and patroclus,
when he saw the strangers, rose also. achilles then greeted them
saying, "all hail and welcome--you must come upon some great matter,
you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the achaeans."

with this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats co
 
 ___________________________
 
vered with
purple rugs; then he said to patroclus who was close by him, "son of
menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water with the
wine, and give every man his cup, for these are very dear friends, who
are now under my roof."

patroclus did as his comrade bade him; he set the chopping-block in
front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the loin also
of a goat, and the chine of a fat hog. automedon held the meat while
achilles chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and put them on spits
while the son of menoetius made the fire burn high. when the flame had
died down, he spread the embers, laid the spits on top of them, lifting
them up and setting them upon the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them
with salt. when the 
 
 ___________________________
 
meat was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed
bread round the table in fair baskets, while achilles dealt them their
portions. then achilles took his seat facing ulysses against the
opposite wall, and bade his comrade patroclus offer sacrifice to the
gods; so he cast the offerings into the fire, and they laid their hands
upon the good things that were before them. as soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink, ajax made a sign to phoenix, and when he saw
this, ulysses filled his cup with wine and pledged achilles.

"hail," said he, "achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer, neither
in the tent of agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat
and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. sir, we a
 
 ___________________________
 
re strong.
i say further--and lay my saying to your heart--vex me no more with
this weeping and lamentation, all in the cause of the son of atreus.
love him so well, and you may lose the love i bear you. you ought to
help me rather in troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as i
am, and share like honour with myself; the others shall take my answer;
stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we
will consider whether to remain or go."

on this he nodded quietly to patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare
a bed for phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. ajax
son of telamon then said, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, let us be
gone, for i see that our journey is vain. we must now take our answer,
unwelcome though it be, to the danaans who are waiting to receive it.
achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for
the love his comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. he
is implacable--and yet if a man's brother or 
 
 ___________________________
 
ome
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the argives. go, then, and
deliver your message; say that i will have no concern with fighting
till hector, son of noble priam, reaches the tents of the myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. for all his
lust of battle, i take it he will be held in check when he is at my own
tent and ship."

on this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, ulysses leading the way. but patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for
phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of
fine linen. the old man then laid himself down and waited till morning
came. but achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter
of phorbas lovely diomede, whom he had carried off from lesbos.
patroclus lay on the other side of the room, and with him fair iphis
whom achilles had given him when he took scyros the city of enyeus.

when the envoy
 
 ___________________________
 
full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

and now as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, jove sent fierce discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the achaeans. she took her
stand by the huge black hull of ulysses' ship which was middlemost of
all, so that her voice might carry farthest on either side, on the one
hand towards the tents of ajax son of 
 
 ___________________________
 
om their
shoulders so as to give him cover. ajax then made towards them, and
turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the mares
of neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing nestor out of the
fight, and with him machaon shepherd of his people. achilles saw and
took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the
hard stress and struggle of the fight. he called from the ship to his
comrade patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking like
mars himself--here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently
befell him. "why," said he, "achilles, do you call me? what do you want
with me?" and achilles answered, "noble son of menoetius, man after my
own heart, i take it that i shall now have the achaeans praying at my
knees, for they are in great straits; go, patroclus, and ask nestor who
it is that he is bearing away wounded from the field; from his back i
should say it was mac
 
 ___________________________
 
haon son of aesculapius, but i could not see his
face for the horses went by me at full speed."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running
by the ships and tents of the achaeans.

when nestor and machaon had reached the tents of the son of neleus,
they dismounted, and an esquire, eurymedon, took the horses from the
chariot. the pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the
sweat from their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside and
took their seats. fair hecamede, whom nestor had had awarded to him
from tenedos when achilles took it, mixed them a mes
 
 ___________________________
 
 had two feet to stand on. any one else would hardly have been able
to lift it from the table when it was full, but nestor could do so
quite easily. in this the woman, as fair as a goddess, mixed them a
mess with pramnian wine; she grated goat's milk cheese into it with a
bronze grater, threw in a handful of white barley-meal, and having thus
prepared the mess she bade them drink it. when they had done so and had
thus quenched their thirst, they fell talking with one another, and at
this moment patroclus appeared at the door.

when the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand, led
him into the tent, and bade him take his place among them; but
patroclus stood where he was and said, "noble sir, i may not stay, you
cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me is not one to be trifled
with, and he bade me ask who the wounded man was whom you were bearing
away from the field. i can now see for myself that he is machaon,
shepherd of his people. i must go back and tell achilles. you,
 
 ___________________________
 
of the myrmidons follow with you, if
perchance you may bring light and saving to the danaans. and let him
send you into battle clad in his own armour, that the trojans may
mistake you for him and leave off fighting; the sons of the achaeans
may thus have time to get their breath, for they are hard pressed and
there is little breathing time in battle. you, who are fresh, might
easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls and away from the tents
and ships."

with these words he moved the heart of patroclus, who set off running
by the line of the ships to achilles, descendant of aeacus. when he had
got as far as the ships of ulysses, where was their place of assembly
and court of justice, with their altars dedicated to the gods,
eurypylus son of euaemon, met him, wounded in the thigh with an arrow,
and limping out of the fight. sweat rained from his head and shoulders,
and black blood welled from his cruel wound, but his mind did not
wander. the son of menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon
 
 ___________________________
 
 him
and spoke piteously saying, "o unhappy princes and counsellors of the
danaans, are you then doomed to feed the hounds of troy with your fat,
far from your friends and your native land? say, noble eurypylus, will
the achaeans be able to hold great hector in check, or will they fall
now before his spear?"

wounded eurypylus made answer, "noble patroclus, there is no hope left
for the achaeans but they will perish at their ships. all they that
were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the hands of
the trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. but save me and take
me to your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash the black blood
from off it with warm water, and lay upon it those gracious herbs
which, so they say, have been shown you by achilles, who was himself
shown them by chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs. 
 
 ___________________________
 
e speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the
rank and file of the gods, and tell iris and apollo lord of the bow,
that i want them--iris, that she may go to the achaean host and tell
neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and apollo, that he may send
hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of achilles son of peleus. achilles will
then send his comrade patroclus into battle, and hector will kill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my
own noble son sarpedon. achilles will kill hector to avenge patroclus,
and from that time i will bring it about that the achaeans shall
persistently drive the trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of
minerva and take ilius. but i will not stay my anger, nor permit any
god to help the danaans till i have accomplished the desire of the son
of peleus, according to the promise i made by 
 
 ___________________________
 
r the bulwarks
of a ship when the sea runs high before a gale--for it is the force of
the wind that makes the waves so great--even so did the trojans spring
over the wall with a shout, and drive their chariots onwards. the two
sides fought with their double-pointed spears in hand-to-hand
encounter-the trojans from their chariots, and the achaeans climbing up
into their ships and wielding the long pikes that were lying on the
decks ready for use in a sea-fight, jointed and shod with bronze.

now patroclus, so long as the achaeans and trojans were fighting about
the wall, but were not yet within it and at the ships, remained sitting
in the tent of good eurypylus, entertaining him with his conversation
and spreading herbs over his wound to ease his pain. when, however, he
saw the trojans swarming through the breach in the wall, while the
achaeans were clamouring and struck with panic, he cried aloud, and
smote his two thighs with the flat of his hands. "eurypylus," said he
in his dismay, "i know y
 
 ___________________________
 
plain
of the armed trojans with the sea behind us, and far from our own
country. our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our hands and in
hard fighting."

as he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and when any
trojan made towards the ships with fire at hector's bidding, he would
be on the look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear.
twelve men did he thus kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships.



book xvi

  fire being now thrown on the ship of protesilaus, patroclus
  fights in the armour of achilles--he drives the trojans back,
  but is in the end killed by euphorbus and hector.

thus did they fight about the ship of protesilaus. then patroclus drew
near to achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from some spring
whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high precipice. when
achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said, "why,
patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes
running to her mother, and begs t
 
 ___________________________
 
o be taken up and carried--she catches
hold of her mother's dress to stay her though she is in a hurry, and
looks tearfully up until her mother carries her--even such tears,
patroclus, are you now shedding. have you anything to say to the
myrmidons or to myself? or have you had news from phthia which you
alone know? they tell me menoetius son of actor is still alive, as also
peleus son of aeacus, among the myrmidons--men whose loss we two should
bitterly deplore; or are you grieving about the argives and the way in
which they are being killed at the ships, through their own high-handed
doings? do not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may
know about it."

then
 
 ___________________________
 
, o knight patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "achilles, son
of peleus, foremost champion of the achaeans, do not be angry, but i
weep for the disaster that has now befallen the argives. all those who
have been their champions so far are lying at the ships, wounded by
sword or spear. brave diomed son of tydeus has been hit with a spear,
while famed ulysses and agamemnon have received sword-wounds; eurypylus
again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries
are attending to these heroes, 
 
 ___________________________
 

myrmidons with me, if i may bring deliverance to the danaans. let me
moreover wear your armour; the trojans may thus mistake me for you and
quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the achaeans may have
breathing time--which while they are fighting may hardly be. we who are
fresh might soon drive tired men back from our ships and tents to their
own city."

he knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own
destruction. achilles was deeply moved and answered, "what, noble
patroclus, are you saying? i know no prophesyings which i am heeding,
nor has my mother told me anything from the mouth of jove, but i am cut
to the very heart that one of my own rank should dare to rob me because
he is more powerful than i am. this, after all that i have gone
through, is more than i can endure. the girl whom the sons of the
achaeans chose for me, whom i won as the fruit of my spear on having
sacked a city--her has king agamemnon taken from me as though i were
some common vagrant. still,
 
 ___________________________
 
 been filled with
their dead as they fled back again. and so it would have been, if only
king agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. as it is the trojans have beset
our host. diomed son of tydeus no longer wields his spear to defend the
danaans, neither have i heard the voice of the son of atreus coming
from his hated head, whereas that of murderous hector rings in my cars
as he gives orders to the trojans, who triumph over the achaeans and
fill the whole plain with their cry of battle. but even so, patroclus,
fall upon them and save the fleet, lest the trojans fire it and prevent
us from being able to return. do, however, as i now bid you, that you
may win me great honour from all the danaans, and that they may restore
the girl to me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. when you
have driven the trojans from the ships, come back again. though juno's
thundering husband should put triumph within your reach, do not fight
the trojans further in my absence, or you will rob me of glory that
shou
 
 ___________________________
 
he
spear. ajax, therefore, had now nothing but a headless spear, while the
bronze point flew some way off and came ringing down on to the ground.
ajax knew the hand of heaven in this, and was dismayed at seeing that
jove had now left him utterly defenceless and was willing victory for
the trojans. therefore he drew back, and the trojans flung fire upon
the ship which was at once wrapped in flame.

the fire was now flaring about the ship's stern, whereon achilles smote
his two thighs and said to patroclus, "up, noble knight, for i see the
glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they destroy our ships,
and there be no way by which we may retreat. gird on your armour at
once while i call our people together."

as he spoke patroclus put on his armour. first he greaved his legs with
greaves of good make, and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver; after
this he donned the cuirass of the son of aeacus, richly inlaid and
studded. he hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his
shoulders, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
gularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. when
ilithuia goddess of the pains of child-birth brought him to the light
of day, and he saw the face of the sun, mighty echecles son of actor
took the mother to wife, and gave great wealth to gain her, but her
father phylas brought the child up, and took care of him, doting as
fondly upon him as though he were his own son. the third company was
led by pisander son of maemalus, the finest spearman among all the
myrmidons next to achilles' own comrade patroclus. the old knight
phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and alcimedon, noble son of
laerceus of the fifth.

when achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, "myrmidons, remember your
threats against the trojans while you were at the ships in the time of
my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'cruel son of peleus,'
you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless
are you. you keep us here at the ship
 
 ___________________________
 
ied
their companies yet more closely when they heard the words of their
king. as the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high house
which is to give shelter from the winds--even so closely were the
helmets and bossed shields set against one another. shield pressed on
shield, helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the
horse-hair plumes on the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each
other as they bent their heads.

in front of them all two men put on their armour--patroclus and
automedon--two men, with but one mind to lead the myrmidons. then
achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest
which silver-footed thetis had given him to take on board ship, and
which she had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good
thick rugs. in this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which
no man but himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to
any other god save only to father jove. he took the cup from the chest
and clea
 
 ___________________________
 
t your courage into his heart that hector
may learn whether my squire is man enough to fight alone, or whether
his might is only then so indomitable when i myself enter the turmoil
of war. afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of battle
from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armour and
his comrades, fighters in close combat."

thus did he pray, and all-counselling jove heard his prayer. part of it
he did indeed vouchsafe him--but not the whole. he granted that
patroclus should thrust back war and battle from the ships, but refused
to let him come safely out of the fight.

when he had made his drink-offering and had thus prayed, achilles went
inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest.

then he again came out, for he still loved to look upon the fierce
fight that raged between the trojans and achaeans.

meanwhile the armed band that was about patroclus marched on till they
sprang high in hope upon the trojans. they came swarming out like wasps
whose ne
 
 ___________________________
 
sts are by the roadside, and whom silly children love to tease,
whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung--or again, if a
wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident, every wasp will
come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones--even with such
rage and courage did the myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their
cry of battle rose heavenwards. patroclus called out to his men at the
top of his voice, "myrmidons, followers of achilles son of peleus, be
men my friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory
for the son of peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the
argives--he, and his close fighting followers. the son of atreus king
agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the
bravest of the achaeans."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell in
a body upon the trojans. t
 
 ___________________________
 
he ships rang again with the cry which the
achaeans raised, and when the trojans saw the brave son of menoetius
and his squire all gleaming in their armour, they were daunted and
their battalions were thrown into confusion, for they thought the fleet
son of peleus must now have put aside his anger, and have been
reconciled to agamemnon; every one, therefore, looked round about to
see whither he might fly for safety.

patroclus first aimed a spear into the middle of the press where men
were packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of protesilaus. he
hit pyraechmes who had led his paeonian horsemen from the amydon and
the broad waters of the river axius; the spear struck him on the right
shoulder, and with a groan he fell backwards in the dust; on this his
men were thrown into confusion, for by killing their leader, who was
the finest soldier among them, patroclus struck panic into them all. he
thus drove them fro
 
 ___________________________
 
ground and tried to protect
his comrades.

as when a cloud goes up into heaven from olympus, rising out of a clear
sky when jove is brewing a gale--even with such panic stricken rout did
the trojans now fly, and there was no order in their going. hector's
fleet horses bore him and his armour out of the fight, and he left the
trojan host penned in by the deep trench against their will. many a
yoke of horses snapped the pole of their chariots in the trench and
left their master's car behind them. patroclus gave chase, calling
impetuously on the danaans and full of fury against the trojans, who,
being now no longer in a body, filled all the ways with their cries of
panic and rout; the air was darkened with the clouds of dust they
raised, and the horses strained every nerve in their flight from the
tents and ships towards the city.

patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men flying in
confusion, cheering on his men the while. chariots were being smashed
in all directions, and man
 
 ___________________________
 
y a man came tumbling down from his own car
to fall beneath the wheels of that of patroclus, whose immortal steeds,
given by the gods to peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound as they
sped onward. he was intent on trying to get near hector, for he had set
his heart on spearing him, but hector's horses were now hurrying him
away. as the whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day
when jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving crooked judgement
in their courts, and driving justice therefrom without heed to the
decrees of heaven--all the rivers run full and the to
 
 ___________________________
 
rrents tear many a
new channel as they roar headlong from the mountains to the dark sea,
and it fares ill with the works of men--even such was the stress and
strain of the trojan horses in their flight.

patroclus now cut off the battalions that were nearest to him and drove
them back to the ships. they were doing their best to reach the city,
but he would not let them, and bore down on them between the river and
the ships and wall. many a fallen comrade did he then avenge. first he
hit pronous with a spear on the chest where it was exposed near the rim
of his shield, and he fell heavily to the ground. next he sprang on
thestor son of enops, who was sitting all huddled up in his chariot,
for he had lost 
 
 ___________________________
 
his head and the reins had been torn out of his hands.
patroclus went up to him and drove a spear into his right jaw; he thus
hooked him by the teeth and the spear pulled him over the rim of his
car, as one who sits at the end of some jutting rock and draws a strong
fish out of the sea with a hook and a line--even so with his spear did
he pull thestor all gaping from his chariot; he then threw him down on
his face and he died while falling. on this, as erylaus was on coming
to attack him, he struck him full on the head with a stone, and his
brains were all b
 
 ___________________________
 
attered inside his helmet, whereon he fell headlong to
the ground and the pangs of death took hold upon him. then he laid low,
one after the other, erymas, amphoterus, epaltes, tlepolemus, echius
son of damastor, pyris, ipheus, euippus and polymelus son of argeas.

now when sarpedon saw his comrades, men who wore ungirdled tunics,
being overcome by patroclus son of menoetius, he rebuked the lycians
saying. "shame on you, where are you flying to? show your mettle; i
will myself meet this man in fight and learn who it is that is so
masterful; he has done us much hurt, and has stretched many a brave man
upon the ground."

he sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and patroclus, when he saw
this, leaped on to the ground also. the two then rushed at one another
with loud cries like eagle-beaked crook-taloned vultures that scream
and tear at one another in
 
 ___________________________
 
 some high mountain fastness.

the son of scheming saturn looked down upon them in pity and said to
juno who was his wife and sister, "alas, that it should be the lot of
sarpedon whom i love so dearly to perish by the hand of patroclus. i am
in two minds whether to catch him up out of the fight and set him down
safe and sound in the fertile land of lycia, or to let him now fall by
the hand of the son of menoetius."

and juno answered, "most dread son of saturn, what is this that you are
saying? would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has long been fated,
out of the jaws of death? do as you will, but we shall not all of us be
of your mind. i say further, and lay my saying to your heart, that if
you send sarpedon safely to hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s own home, some other of the gods will
be also wanting to escort his son out of battle, for there are many
sons of gods fighting round the city of troy, and you will make every
one jealous. if, however, you are fond of him and pity him, let him
indeed fall by the hand of patroclus, but as soon as the life is gone
out of him, send death and sweet sleep to bear him off the field and
take him to the broad lands of lycia, where his brothers and his
kinsmen will bury him with mound and pillar, in due honour to the dead."

the sire of gods and men assented, but he shed a rain of blood upon the
earth in honour of his son whom patroclus was about to kill on the rich
plain of troy far from his home.

when they were now come close to one another patroclus struck
thrasydemus, the b
 
 ___________________________
 
rave squire of sarpedon, in the lower part of the
belly, and killed him. sarpedon then aimed a spear at patroclus and
missed him, but he struck the horse pedasus in the right shoulder, and
it screamed aloud as it lay, groaning in the dust until the life went
out of it. the other two horses began to plunge; the pole of the
chariot cracked and they got entangled in the reins through the fall of
the horse that was yoked along with them; but automedon knew what to
do; without the loss of a moment he drew the keen blade that hung by
his sturdy thigh and cut the third horse adrift; whereon the other two
righted 
 
 ___________________________
 
themselves, and pulling hard at the reins again went together
into battle.

sarpedon now took a second aim at patroclus, and again missed him, the
point of the spear passed over his left shoulder without hitting him.
patroclus then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped not from his hand
in vain, for he hit sarpedon just where the midriff surrounds the
ever-beating heart. he fell like some oak or silver poplar or tall pine
to which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains to make timber
for ship-building--even so did he lie stretched at full length in front
of his chariot and horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained
dust. as when a lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and
fastens on a great
 
 ___________________________
 
 black bull which dies bellowing in its
clutches--even so did the leader of the lycian warriors struggle in
death as he fell by the hand of patroclus. he called on his trusty
comrade and said, "glaucus, my brother, hero among heroes, put forth
all your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit yourself
like a valiant soldier. first go about among the lycian captains and
bid them fight for sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save my
armour from being taken. my name will haunt you henceforth and for ever
if the achaeans rob me of my armour now that i have fallen at their
ships. do your very utmost and call all my people toget
 
 ___________________________
 
her."

death closed his eyes as he spoke. patroclus planted his heel on his
breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out
along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and sarpedon's soul at
the same time. hard by the myrmidons held his snorting steeds, who were
wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.

glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what sarpedon said, for
he could not help him. he had to support his arm with his other hand,
being in great pain through the wound which teucer's arrow 
 
 ___________________________
 
 bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. sarpedon leader of the lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of lycia; mars has laid
him low by the spear of patroclus. stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body
with contumely in revenge for all the danaans whom we have speared at
the ships."

as he spoke the trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief;
for sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of
their city, both as having much people with him, and himself the
foremost among them all. led by hector, who was infuriated by the fall
of sarpedon, they made instantly 
 
 ___________________________
 
for the danaans with all their might,
while the undaunted spirit of patroclus son of menoetius cheered on the
achaeans. first he spoke to the two ajaxes, men who needed no bidding.
"ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show yourselves the men
you have always been, or even better--sarpedon is fallen--he who was
first to overleap the wall of the achaeans; let us take the body and
outrage it; let us strip the armour from his shoulders, and kill his
comrades if they try to rescue his body."

he spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides,
therefore, the
 
 ___________________________
 
dons was killed, epeigeus, son of noble
agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with peleus and thetis, who sent him to ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the trojans under achilles. hector now struck him on the head
with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains
inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost
upon the body of sarpedon, and there died. patroclus was enraged by the
death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. even so swiftly,
o noble knight patroclus, did you make straight for the lycians and
trojans to avenge your comrade. forthwith he struck sthenelaus the son
of ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join
it to the head and spine. on this hector and the front rank of his men
gave ground. as far as a man can throw a javelin when c
 
 ___________________________
 
ds, as men smote
each other with their swords and spears pointed at both ends. a man had
need of good eyesight now to know sarpedon, so covered was he from head
to foot with spears and blood and dust. men swarmed about the body, as
flies that buzz round the full milk-pails in spring when they are
brimming with milk--even so did they gather round sarpedon; nor did
jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept
looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill
patroclus, and considering whether hector should be allowed to end him
now in the fight round the body of sarpedon, and strip him of his
armour, or whether he should let him give yet further trouble to the
trojans. in the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire of
achilles son of peleus should drive hector and the trojans back towards
the city and take the lives of many. first, therefore, he made hector
turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and fled, bidding the
other trojans fly also, f
 
 ___________________________
 
o his memory, in
due honour to the dead."

thus he spoke. apollo obeyed his father's saying, and came down from
the heights of ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he took
sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way off,
where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and
clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to the
arms of the two fleet messengers, death, and sleep, who presently set
him down in the rich land of lycia.

meanwhile patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to automedon,
pursued the trojans and lycians in the pride and foolishness of his
heart. had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of peleus, he would
have escaped death and have been scatheless; but the counsels of jove
pass man's understanding; he will put even a brave man to flight and
snatch victory from his grasp, or again he will set him on to fight, as
he now did when he put a high spirit into the heart of patroclus.

who then first, and who last, was 
 
 ___________________________
 
slain by you, o patroclus, when the
gods had now called you to meet your doom? first adrestus, autonous,
echeclus, perimus the son of megas, epistor and melanippus; after these
he killed elasus, mulius, and pylartes. these he slew, but the rest
saved themselves by flight.

the sons of the achaeans would now have taken troy by the hands of
patroclus, for his spear flew in all directions, had not phoebus apollo
taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the
trojans. thrice did patroclus charge at an angle of the high wall, and
thrice did apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his own
immortal hands. when patroclus was coming on like a god for yet a
fourth time, apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "draw
back, noble patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of the
trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of achilles who is a far
better man than you are." on hearing this, patroclus withdrew to some
distance and avoided the anger of apollo.

meanwhil
 
 ___________________________
 
e
army inside the gates. as he was thus doubting phoebus apollo drew near
him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior asius, who was
hector's uncle, being own brother to hecuba, and son of dymas who lived
in phrygia by the waters of the river sangarius; in his likeness jove's
son apollo now spoke to hector saying, "hector, why have you left off
fighting? it is ill done of you. if i were as much better a man than
you, as i am worse, you should soon rue your slackness. drive straight
towards patroclus, if so be that apollo may grant you a triumph over
him, and you may rule him."

with this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and hector bade
cebriones drive again into the fight. apollo passed in among them, and
struck panic into the argives, while he gave triumph to hector and the
trojans. hector let the other danaans alone and killed no man, but
drove straight at patroclus. patroclus then sprang from his chariot to
the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right a jagged
ston
 
 ___________________________
 
 could hold. he stood still and threw it, nor
did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for
the stone struck cebriones, hector's charioteer, a bastard son of
priam, as he held the reins in his hands. the stone hit him on the
forehead and drove his brows into his head for the bone was smashed,
and his eyes fell to the ground at his feet. he dropped dead from his
chariot as though he were diving, and there was no more life left in
him. over him did you then vaunt, o knight patroclus, saying, "bless my
heart, how active he is, and how well he dives. if we had been at sea
this fellow would have dived from the ship's side and brought up as
many oysters as the whole crew could stomach, even in rough water, for
he has dived beautifully off his chariot on to the ground. it seems,
then, that there are divers also among the trojans."

as he spoke he flung himself on cebriones with the spring, as it were,
of a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself struck in the
chest, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d his courage is his own bane--even so furiously, o patroclus,
did you then spring upon cebriones. hector sprang also from his chariot
to the ground. the pair then fought over the body of cebriones. as two
lions fight fiercely on some high mountain over the body of a stag that
they have killed, even so did these two mighty warriors, patroclus son
of menoetius and brave hector, hack and hew at one another over the
corpse of cebriones. hector would not let him go when he had once got
him by the head, while patroclus kept fast hold of his feet, and a
fierce fight raged between the other danaans and trojans. as the east
and south wind buffet one another when they beat upon some dense forest
on the mountains--there is beech and ash and spreading cornel; the top
of the trees roar as they beat on one another, and one can hear the
boughs cr
 
 ___________________________
 
 as they fought around his
body, but there he lay in the whirling clouds of dust, all huge and
hugely, heedless of his driving now.

so long as the sun was still high in mid-heaven the weapons of either
side were alike deadly, and the people fell; but when he went down
towards the time when men loose their oxen, the achaeans proved to be
beyond all forecast stronger, so that they drew cebriones out of range
of the darts and tumult of the trojans, and stripped the armour from
his shoulders. then patroclus sprang like mars with fierce intent and a
terrific shout upon the trojans, and thrice did he kill nine men; but
as he was coming on like a god for a time, then, o patroclus, was the
hour of your end approaching, for phoebus fought you in fell earnest.
patroclus did not see him as he moved about in the crush, for he was
enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his
back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his
eyes turned dizzy. phoebus apollo beat
 
 ___________________________
 
 the helmet from off his head,
and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where its horse-hair
plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. never indeed had that
helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect the head and
comely forehead of the godlike hero achilles. now, however, zeus
delivered it over to be worn by hector. nevertheless the end of hector
also was near. the bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was
broken in the hand of patroclus, while his shield that covered him from
head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and
apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.

on this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as
one dazed; whereon euphorbus son of panthous a dardanian, the best
spearman of his time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner,
came behind him and struck him in the back with a spear, midway between
the shoulders. this man as soon as ever he had come up with hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s chariot
had dismounted twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of
war--he it was, o knight patroclus, that first drove a weapon into you,
but he did not quite overpower you. euphorbus then ran back into the
crowd, after drawing his ashen spear out of the wound; he would not
stand firm and wait for patroclus, unarmed though he now was, to attack
him; but patroclus unnerved, alike by the blow the god had given him
and by the spear-wound, drew back under cover of his men in fear for
his life. hector on this, seeing him to be wounded and giving ground,
forced his way through the ranks, and when close up with him struck him
in the lower part of the belly with a spear, driving the bronze point
right through it, so that he fell heavily to the ground to the great
grief of the achaeans. as when a lion has fought some fierce wild-boar
and worsted him--the two fig
 
 ___________________________
 
ht furiously upon the mountains over some
little fountain at which they would both drink, and the lion has beaten
the boar till he can hardly breathe--even so did hector son of priam
take the life of the brave son of menoetius who had killed so many,
striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him the while.
"patroclus," said he, "you deemed that you should sack our city, rob
our trojan women of their freedom, and carry them off in your ships to
your own country. fool; hector and his fleet horses were ever straining
their utmost to defend them. i am foremost of all the trojan warriors
to stave the day of bondage from off them; as for you, vultures shall
devour you here. poor wretch, achilles with all his bravery availed you
nothing; and yet i ween when you left him he charged you straitly
saying, 'come not ba
 
 ___________________________
 
ck to the ships, knight patroclus, till you have
rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous hector about his body.' thus i
ween did he charge you, and your fool's heart answered him 'yea' within
you."

then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, o knight patroclus:
"hector, vaunt as you will, for jove the son of saturn and apollo have
vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have vanquished me so easily,
and they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had twenty
such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my
spear. fate and the son of leto have overpowered me, and among mortal
men euphorbus; you are yourself third only in the killing of me. i say
further, and lay my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a
little se
 
 ___________________________
 
ason; death and the day of your doom are close upon you, and
they will lay you low by the hand of achilles son of aeacus."

when he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left
his body and flitted down to the house of hades, mourning its sad fate
and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. dead though
he was, hector still spoke to him saying, "patroclus, why should you
thus foretell my doom? who knows but achilles, son of lovely thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?"

as he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. he then
went spear in hand after automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of
aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the
gods had given as a rich gift to peleus bore him swiftly from the field.



book xvii
 
 ___________________________
 


  the fight around the body of patroclus.

brave menelaus son of atreus now came to know that patroclus had
fallen, and made his way through the front ranks clad in full armour to
bestride him. as a cow stands lowing over her first calf, even so did
yellow-haired menelaus bestride patroclus. he held his round shield and
his spear in front of him, resolute to kill any who should dare face
him. but the son of panthous had also noted the body, and came up to
menelaus saying, "menelaus, son of atreus, draw back, leave the body,
and let the bloodstained spoils be. i was first of the trojans and
their brave allies to drive my spear into patroclus, let me, therefore,
have my full glory among the trojans, or i will take aim and kill you."

to this menelaus answered in great anger "by fath
 
 ___________________________
 
iant menelaus. the son
of atreus would have then carried off the armour of the son of panthous
with ease, had not phoebus apollo been angry, and in the guise of
mentes chief of the cicons incited hector to attack him. "hector," said
he, "you are now going after the horses of the noble son of aeacus, but
you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven by
mortal man, save only by achilles, who is son to an immortal mother.
meanwhile menelaus son of atreus has bestridden the body of patroclus
and killed the noblest of the trojans, euphorbus son of panthous, so
that he can fight no more."

the god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of
hector was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the ranks
and saw euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still flowing from
his wound, and menelaus stripping him of his armour. on this he made
his way to the front like a flame of fire, clad in his gleaming armour,
and crying with a loud voice. when the son of atreus 
 
 ___________________________
 
heard him, he said
to himself in his dismay, "alas! what shall i do? i may not let the
trojans take the armour of patroclus who has fallen fighting on my
behalf, lest some danaan who sees me should cry shame upon me. still if
for my honour's sake i fight hector and the trojans single-handed, they
will prove too many for me, for hector is bringing them up in force.
why, however, should i thus hesitate? when a man fights in despite of
heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue it. let no
danaan think ill of me if i give place to hector, for the hand of
heaven is with him. yet, if i could find ajax, the two
 
 ___________________________
 
 of us would
fight hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of
patroclus for achilles son of peleus. this, of many evils would be the
least."

while he was thus in two minds, the trojans came up to him with hector
at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off--even so did menelaus son of atreus turn and leave the body
of patroclus. when among the body of his men, he looked around for
mighty aja
 
 ___________________________
 
x son of telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme left
of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep on
fighting, for phoebus apollo had spread a great panic among them. he
ran up to him and said, "ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to
dead patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to achilles--as for
his armour, hector already has it."

these words stirred the heart of ajax, and he made his way among the
front ranks, menelaus going with him. hector had stripped patroclus of
his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the
body to fling before the dogs of troy. but ajax came up with his shield
like wall before him, on which hector withdrew under shelter of his
men, and sprang on to his chariot, giving the armour over to the
trojans to take to the city, as a great trophy for himself; ajax,
therefore, covered the body of patroclus with his broad shield and
bestrode him; as a lion stands over his whelps if hunters have come
upon him in a fores
 
 ___________________________
 
t when he is with his little ones--in the pride and
fierceness of his strength he draws his knit brows down till they cover
his eyes--even so did ajax bestride the body of patroclus, and by his
side stood menelaus son of atreus, nursing great sorrow in his heart.

then glaucus son of hippolochus looked fiercely at hector and rebuked
him sternly. "hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight
you are sadly wanting. a runaway like yourself has no claim to so great
a reputation. think how you may now save your town and citadel by the
hands of your own people born in ilius; for you will get no lycians to
fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incess
 
 ___________________________
 
e, after leaving sarpedon, who was at once your guest and comrade in
arms, to be the spoil and prey of the danaans? so long as he lived he
did good service both to your city and yourself; yet you had no stomach
to save his body from the dogs. if the lycians will listen to me, they
will go home and leave troy to its fate. if the trojans had any of that
daring fearless spirit which lays hold of men who are fighting for
their country and harassing those who would attack it, we should soon
bear off patroclus into ilius. could we get this dead man away and
bring him into the city of priam, the argives would readily give up the
armour of sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. for he whose
squire has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the
achaeans--he and his close-fighting followers. nevertheless you dared
not make a stand against ajax, nor face him, eye to eye, with battle
all round you, for he is a braver man than you are."

hector scowled at him and answered, "glaucus, you 
 
 ___________________________
 
ycia, but now i despise you for saying that i am afraid of ajax. i
fear neither battle nor the din of chariots, but jove's will is
stronger than ours; jove at one time makes even a strong man draw back
and snatches victory from his grasp, while at another he will set him
on to fight. come hither then, my friend, stand by me and see indeed
whether i shall play the coward the whole day through as you say, or
whether i shall not stay some even of the boldest danaans from fighting
round the body of patroclus."

as he spoke he called loudly on the trojans saying, "trojans, lycians,
and dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and fight
might and main, while i put on the goodly armour of achilles, which i
took when i killed patroclus."

with this hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men who
were taking the armour of achilles to troy, but had not yet got far.
standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed his
armour. his own he sent to the strong city of i
 
 ___________________________
 
augur. all these did he exhort saying, "hear me, allies from other
cities who are here in your thousands, it was not in order to have a
crowd about me that i called you hither each from his several city, but
that with heart and soul you might defend the wives and little ones of
the trojans from the fierce achaeans. for this do i oppress my people
with your food and the presents that make you rich. therefore turn, and
charge at the foe, to stand or fall as is the game of war; whoever
shall bring patroclus, dead though he be, into the hands of the
trojans, and shall make ajax give way before him, i will give him one
half of the spoils while i keep the other. he will thus share like
honour with myself."

when he had thus spoken they charged full weight upon the danaans with
their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran high that
he should force ajax son of telamon to yield up the body--fools that
they were, for he was about to take the lives of many. then ajax said
to menelaus, "my 
 
 ___________________________
 
good friend menelaus, you and i shall hardly come out
of this fight alive. i am less concerned for the body of patroclus, who
will shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures of troy, than for
the safety of my own head and yours. hector has wrapped us round in a
storm of battle from every quarter, and our destruction seems now
certain. call then upon the princes of the danaans if there is any who
can hear us."

menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the danaans for help at the top
of his voice. "my friends," he cried, "princes and counsellors of the
argives, all you who with agamemnon and menelaus drink at the
 
 ___________________________
 
 public
cost, and give orders each to his own people as jove vouchsafes him
power and glory, the fight is so thick about me that i cannot
distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and
think it shame that patroclus should become meat and morsel for trojan
hounds."

fleet ajax son of oileus heard him and was first to force his way
through the fight and run to help him. next came idomeneus and meriones
his esquire, peer of murderous mars. as for the others that came into
the fight after these, who of his own self could name them?

the trojans with hector at their head charged in a body. as a great
wave that comes thundering in at the mouth of some heaven-born river,
and the rocks that jut into the sea ring 
 
 ___________________________
 
d in killing any one,
nevertheless they drew the body away. but the achaeans did not lose it
long, for ajax, foremost of all the danaans after the son of peleus
alike in stature and prowess, quickly rallied them and made towards the
front like a wild boar upon the mountains when he stands at bay in the
forest glades and routs the hounds and lusty youths that have attacked
him--even so did ajax son of telamon passing easily in among the
phalanxes of the trojans, disperse those who had bestridden patroclus
and were most bent on winning glory by dragging him off to their city.
at this moment hippothous brave son of the pelasgian lethus, in his
zeal for hector and the trojans, was dragging the body off by the foot
through the press of the fight, having bound a strap round the sinews
near the ancle; but a mischief soon befell him from which none of those
could save him who would have gladly done so, for the son of telamon
sprang forward and smote him on his bronze-cheeked helmet. the plumed
headpiec
 
 ___________________________
 
e broke about the point of the weapon, struck at once by the
spear and by the strong hand of ajax, so that the bloody brain came
oozing out through the crest-socket. his strength then failed him and
he let patroclus' foot drop from his hand, as he fell full length dead
upon the body; thus he died far from the fertile land of larissa, and
never repaid his parents the cost of bringing him up, for his life was
cut short early by the spear of mighty ajax. hector then took aim at
ajax with a spear, but he saw it coming and just managed to avoid it;
the spear passed on and struck schedius son of noble iphitus, captain
of the phoceans, who dwelt in famed panopeus and reigned over much
people; it struck him under 
 
 ___________________________
 
victory
to us than to the danaans, if you would only fight instead of being so
terribly afraid."

aeneas knew apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to
hector saying, "hector and all other trojans and allies, shame on us if
we are beaten by the achaeans and driven back to ilius through our own
cowardice. a god has just come up to me and told me that jove the
supreme disposer will be with us. therefore let us make for the
danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they bear away dead
patroclus to the ships."

as he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied
and again faced the achaeans. aeneas speared leiocritus son of arisbas,
a valiant follower of lycomedes, and lycomedes was moved with pity as
he saw him fall; he therefore went close up, and speared apisaon son of
hippasus shepherd of his people in the liver under the midriff, so that
he died; he had come from fertile paeonia and was the best man of them
all after asteropaeus. asteropaeus flew forward to aven
 
 ___________________________
 
ge him and
attack the danaans, but this might no longer be, inasmuch as those
about patroclus were well covered by their shields, and held their
spears in front of them, for ajax had given them strict orders that no
man was either to give ground, or to stand out before the others, but
all were to hold well together about the body and fight hand to hand.
thus did huge ajax bid them, and the earth ran red with blood as the
corpses fell thick on one another alike on the side of the trojans and
allies, and on that of the danaans; for these last, too, fought no
bloodless fight though many fe
 
 ___________________________
 
nt sunshine all round them, and there was
not a cloud to be seen neither on plain nor mountain. these last
moreover would rest for a while and leave off fighting, for they were
some distance apart and beyond the range of one another's weapons,
whereas those who were in the thick of the fray suffered both from
battle and darkness. all the best of them were being worn out by the
great weight of their armour, but the two valiant heroes, thrasymedes
and antilochus, had not yet heard of the death of patroclus, and
believed him to be still alive and leading the van against the trojans;
they were keeping themselves in reserve against the death or rout of
their own comrades, for so nestor had ordered when he sent them from
the ships into battle.

thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the sweat
of their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on their hands
and eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet son of peleus. it
was as when a man gives a great ox-hide all dre
 
 ___________________________
 
ll at it, and it is well stretched--even so did the two sides tug the
dead body hither and thither within the compass of but a little
space--the trojans steadfastly set on dragging it into ilius, while the
achaeans were no less so on taking it to their ships; and fierce was
the fight between them. not mars himself the lord of hosts, nor yet
minerva, even in their fullest fury could make light of such a battle.

such fearful turmoil of men and horses did jove on that day ordain
round the body of patroclus. meanwhile achilles did not know that he
had fallen, for the fight was under the wall of troy a long way off the
ships. he had no idea, therefore, that patroclus was dead, and deemed
that he would return alive as soon as he had gone close up to the
gates. he knew that he was not to sack the city neither with nor
without himself, for his mother had often told him this when he had sat
alone with her, and she had informed him of the counsels of great jove.
now, however, she had not told him how gr
 
 ___________________________
 
eat a disaster had befallen
him in the death of the one who was far dearest to him of all his
comrades.

the others still kept on charging one another round the body with their
pointed spears and killing each other. then would one say, "my friends,
we can never again show our faces at the ships--better, and greatly
better, that earth should open and swallow us here in this place, than
that we should let the trojans have the triumph of bearing off
patroclus to their city."

the trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying, "friends,
though we fall to a man beside this body, let none shrink from
fighting." with such words did they exhort each other. they fought and
fought, and an iron clank rose through the void air to the brazen vault
of heaven. the horses of the descendant of aeacus stood out of the
fight and wept when they heard that their driver had been laid low by
the hand of murderous hector. automedon, valiant son of diores, lashe
 
 ___________________________
 
 laerces son of haemon caught sight of him and came up behind his
chariot. "automedon," said he, "what god has put this folly into your
heart and robbed you of your right mind, that you fight the trojans in
the front rank single-handed? he who was your comrade is slain, and
hector plumes himself on being armed in the armour of the descendant of
aeacus."

automedon son of diores answered, "alcimedon, there is no one else who
can control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you can, save only
patroclus--while he was alive--peer of gods in counsel. take then the
whip and reins, while i go down from the car and fight."

alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and reins,
while automedon leaped from off the car. when hector saw him he said to
aeneas who was near him, "aeneas, counsellor of the mail-clad trojans,
i see the steeds of the fleet son of aeacus come into battle with weak
hands to drive them. i am sure, if you think well, that we might take
them; they will not dare fa
 
 ___________________________
 
ng aretus to lie there struck to the heart. automedon, peer of
fleet mars, then stripped him of his armour and vaunted over him
saying, "i have done little to assuage my sorrow for the son of
menoetius, for the man i have killed is not so good as he was."

as he spoke he took the blood-stained spoils and laid them upon his
chariot; then he mounted the car with his hands and feet all steeped in
gore as a lion that has been gorging upon a bull.

and now the fierce groanful fight again raged about patroclus, for
minerva came down from heaven and roused its fury by the command of
far-seeing jove, who had changed his mind and sent her to encourage the
danaans. as when jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token to
mankind either of war or of the chill storms that stay men from their
labour and plague the flocks--even so, wrapped in such radiant raiment,
did minerva go in among the host and speak man by man to each. first
she took the form and voice of phoenix and spoke to menelaus son of
atreus, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
o was standing near her. "menelaus," said she, "it will be
shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of achilles
under the walls of troy. therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be
so also."

menelaus answered, "phoenix, my good old friend, may minerva vouchsafe
me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall i stand by
patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but hector is
as a raging fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for jove is now
granting him a time of triumph."

minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the other
gods. therefore she put strength into his knees and shoulders, and made
him as bold as a fly, which, though driven off will yet come again and
bite if it can, so dearly does it love man's blood--even so bold as
this did she make him as he stood over patroclus a
 
 ___________________________
 
 him of all his comrades has
fallen."

menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a
stockyard--the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep
watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of
their herd. in his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain,
for darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt
him for all his hunger, so in the morning he slinks sulkily away--even
so did menelaus sorely against his will leave patroclus, in great fear
lest the achaeans should be driven back in rout and let him fall into
the hands of the foe. he charged meriones and the two ajaxes straitly
saying, "ajaxes and meriones, leaders of the argives, now indeed
remember how good patroclus was; he was ever courteous while alive,
bear it in mind now that he is dead."

with this menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an eagle,
whose sight they say is keener than that of any other bird--however
high he may be in the heavens, no
 
 ___________________________
 
d of it--even so, o menelaus, did your keen eyes range round
the mighty host of your followers to see if you could find the son of
nestor still alive. presently menelaus saw him on the extreme left of
the battle cheering on his men and exhorting them to fight boldly.
menelaus went up to him and said, "antilochus, come here and listen to
sad news, which i would indeed were untrue. you must see with your own
eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the danaans, and giving
victory to the trojans. patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of
the achaeans, and sorely will the danaans miss him. run instantly to
the ships and tell achilles, that he may come to rescue the body and
bear it to the ships. as for the armour, hector already has it."

antilochus was struck with horror. for a long time he was speechless;
his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did
as menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his
armour to a comrade, laodocus, who was wheeling hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s horses round, close
beside him.

thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to
achilles son of peleus. nor were you, o menelaus, minded to succour his
harassed comrades, when antilochus had left the pylians--and greatly
did they miss him--but he sent them noble thrasymedes, and himself went
back to patroclus. he came running up to the two ajaxes and said, "i
have sent antilochus to the ships to tell achilles, but rage against
hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour.
what then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and
our own escape from death amid the battle-cries of the trojans?"

ajax answered, "menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and
meriones stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while
we two behind you keep off hector an
 
 ___________________________
 
pears pointed at both the ends, but when the two ajaxes faced them and
stood at bay, they would turn pale and no man dared press on to fight
further about the dead.

in this wise did the two heroes strain every nerve to bear the body to
the ships out of the fight. the battle raged round them like fierce
flames that when once kindled spread like wildfire over a city, and the
houses fall in the glare of its burning--even such was the roar and
tramp of men and horses that pursued them as they bore patroclus from
the field. or as mules that put forth all their strength to draw some
beam or great piece of ship's timber down a rough mountain-track, and
they pant and sweat as they go--even so did menelaus and pant and sweat
as they bore the body of patroclus. behind them the two ajaxes held
stoutly out. as some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain
will turn water and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there
any stream strong enough to break through it--even so did the two
ajaxe
 
 ___________________________
 
s them and foremost among them all was aeneas son
of anchises with valiant hector. as a flock of daws or starlings fall
to screaming and chattering when they see a falcon, foe to all small
birds, come soaring near them, even so did the achaean youth raise a
babel of cries as they fled before aeneas and hector, unmindful of
their former prowess. in the rout of the danaans much goodly armour
fell round about the trench, and of fighting there was no end.



book xviii

  the grief of achilles over patroclus--the visit of thetis
  to vulcan and the armour that he made for achilles.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the fleet
runner antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached achilles,
and found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that which was
indeed too surely true. "alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of
his heart, "why are the achaeans again scouring the plain and flocking
towards the ships? heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that
sorrow u
 
 ___________________________
 
 should fall before the trojans,
and see the light of the sun no longer. i fear the brave son of
menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet i bade him return
to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing
fire against them, and not join battle with hector."

as he was thus pondering, the son of nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "alas," he cried, "son of noble
peleus, i bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue.
patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked body--for
hector holds his armour."

a dark cloud of grief fell upon achilles as he listened. he filled both
hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head,
disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refuse settle over his
shirt so fair and new. he flung himself down all huge and hugely at
full length, and tore his hair with his hands. the bondswomen whom
achilles and patroclus had taken captive screamed aloud for grief,
beat
 
 ___________________________
 
teously, saying, "my son, why are you thus weeping? what sorrow has
now befallen you? tell me; hide it not from me. surely jove has granted
you the prayer you made him, when you lifted up your hands and besought
him that the achaeans might all of them be pent up at their ships, and
rue it bitterly in that you were no longer with them."

achilles groaned and answered, "mother, olympian jove has indeed
vouchsafed me the fulfilment of my prayer, but what boots it to me,
seeing that my dear comrade patroclus has fallen--he whom i valued more
than all others, and loved as dearly as my own life? i have lost him;
aye, and hector when he had killed him stripped the wondrous armour, so
glorious to behold, which the gods gave to peleus when they laid you in
the couch of a mortal man. would that you were still dwelling among the
immortal sea-nymphs, and that peleus had taken to himself some mortal
bride. for now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of
that son whom you can never welcome ho
 
 ___________________________
 
me--nay, i will not live nor go
about among mankind unless hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for
having slain patroclus son of menoetius."

thetis wept and answered, "then, my son, is your end near at hand--for
your own death awaits you full soon after that of hector."

then said achilles in his great grief, "i would die here and now, in
that i could not save my comrade. he has fallen far from home, and in
his hour of need my hand was not there to help him. what is there for
me? return to my own land i shall not, and i have brought no saving
neither to patroclus nor to my other comrades of whom so many have been
 
 ___________________________
 

will go to the cunning workman vulcan on high olympus, and ask him to
provide my son with a suit of splendid armour."

when she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves, while
silver-footed thetis went her way that she might bring the armour for
her son.

thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to olympus, and meanwhile the
achaeans were flying with loud cries before murderous hector till they
reached the ships and the hellespont, and they could not draw the body
of mars's servant patroclus out of reach of the weapons that were
showered upon him, for hector son of priam with his host and horsemen
had again caught up to him like the flame of a fiery furnace; thrice
did brave hector seize him by the feet, striving with might and main to
draw him away and calling loudly on the trojans, and thrice did the two
ajaxes, clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him from off the
body; but all undaunted he would now charge into the thick of the
fight, and now again he would stand still and
 
 ___________________________
 
 cry aloud, but he would
give no ground. as upland shepherds that cannot chase some famished
lion from a carcase, even so could not the two ajaxes scare hector son
of priam from the body of patroclus.

and now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable
glory, had not iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger from
olympus to the son of peleus and bidden him arm. she came secretly
without the knowledge of jove and of the other gods, for juno sent her,
and when she had got close to him she said, "up, son of peleus,
mightiest of all mankind; rescue patroclus about whom this fearful
fight is now raging by the ships. men are killing one another, the
danaans in defence o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the dead body, while the trojans are trying to
hale it away, and take it to windy ilius: hector is the most furious of
them all; he is for cutting the head from the body and fixing it on the
stakes of the wall. up, then, and bide here no longer; shrink from the
thought that patroclus may become meat for the dogs of troy. shame on
you, should his body suffer any kind of outrage."

and achilles said, "iris, which of the gods was it that sent you to me?"

iris answered, "it was juno the royal spouse of jove, but the son of
saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of the
immortals who dwell on the snowy summits of olympus."

then fleet achilles answered her saying, "how can i go up into the
battle? they have my armour. my mother forbade me to arm till i should

 
 ___________________________
 
see her come, for she promised to bring me goodly armour from vulcan; i
know no man whose arms i can put on, save only the shield of ajax son
of telamon, and he surely must be fighting in the front rank and
wielding his spear about the body of dead patroclus."

iris said, "we know that your armour has been taken, but go as you are;
go to the deep trench and show yourself before the trojans, that they
may fear you and cease fighting. thus will the fainting sons of the
achaeans gain some brief breathing-time, which in battle may hardly be."

iris left him when she had so spoken. but achilles dear to jove arose,
and minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong shoulders; she
crowned his head with a halo of golden cloud from which she kindled a
g
 
 ___________________________
 
rses turned
back with their chariots for they boded mischief, and their drivers
were awe-struck by the steady flame which the grey-eyed goddess had
kindled above the head of the great son of peleus.

thrice did achilles raise his loud cry as he stood by the trench, and
thrice were the trojans and their brave allies thrown into confusion;
whereon twelve of their noblest champions fell beneath the wheels of
their chariots and perished by their own spears. the achaeans to their
great joy then drew patroclus out of reach of the weapons, and laid him
on a litter: his comrades stood mourning round him, and among them
fleet achilles who wept bitterly as he saw his true comrade lying dead
upon his bier. he had sent him out with horses and chariots into
battle, but his return he was not to welcome.

then juno sent the busy sun, loth though he was, into the waters of
oceanus; so he set, and the achaeans had rest from the tug and turmoil
of war.

now the trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoke
 
 ___________________________
 
go hard with him. i shall not shun him, but
will fight him, to fall or conquer. the god of war deals out like
measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain."

thus spoke hector; and the trojans, fools that they were, shouted in
applause, for pallas minerva had robbed them of their understanding.
they gave ear to hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words of
polydamas no man would heed. they took their supper throughout the
host, and meanwhile through the whole night the achaeans mourned
patroclus, and the son of peleus led them in their lament. he laid his
murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again and
again as a bearded lion when a man who was chasing deer has robbed him
of his young in some dense forest; when the lion comes back he is
furious, and searches dingle and dell to track the hunter if he can
find him, for he is mad with rage--even so with many a sigh did
achilles speak among the myrmidons saying, "alas! vain were the words
with which i cheered the hero me
 
 ___________________________
 
noetius in his own house; i said that i
would bring his brave son back again to opoeis after he had sacked
ilius and taken his share of the spoils--but jove does not give all men
their heart's desire. the same soil shall be reddened here at troy by
the blood of us both, for i too shall never be welcomed home by the old
knight peleus, nor by my mother thetis, but even in this place shall
the earth cover me. nevertheless, o patroclus, now that i am left
behind you, i will not bury you, till i have brought hither the head
and armour of mighty hector who has slain you. twelve noble sons of
trojans will i behead before your bier to avenge you; till i have done
so you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women of troy and
dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we
sacked men's goodly cities, shall weep over you both night and day."

then achilles told his men to set a large tripod upon the fire t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat
they might wash the clotted gore from off patroclus. thereon they set a
tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire: they threw sticks on to
it to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played about
the belly of the tripod. when the water in the cauldron was boiling
they washed the body, anointed it with oil, and closed its wounds with
ointment that had been kept nine years. then they laid it on a bier and
covered it with a linen cloth from head to foot, and over this they
laid a fair white robe. thus all night long did the myrmid
 
 ___________________________
 
ons gather
round achilles to mourn patroclus.

then jove said to juno his sister-wife, "so, queen juno, you have
gained your end, and have roused fleet achilles. one would think that
the achaeans were of your own flesh and blood."

and juno answered, "dread son of saturn, why should you say this thing?
may not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than we do, do
what he can for another person? and shall not i--foremost of all
goddesses both by descent and as wife to you who reign in
heaven--devise evil for the trojans if i am angr
 
 ___________________________
 
to look upon the light of the sun, he is in
heaviness, and though i go to him i cannot help him; king agamemnon has
made him give up the maiden whom the sons of the achaeans had awarded
him, and he wastes with sorrow for her sake. then the trojans hemmed
the achaeans in at their ships' sterns and would not let them come
forth; the elders, therefore, of the argives besought achilles and
offered him great treasure, whereon he refused to bring deliverance to
them himself, but put his own armour on patroclus and sent him into the
fight with much people after him. all day long they fought by the
scaean gates and would have taken the city there and then, had not
apollo vouchsafed glory to hector and slain the valiant son of
menoetius after he had done the trojans much evil. therefore i am
suppliant at your knees if haply you may be pleased to provide my son,
whose end is near at hand, with helmet and shield, with goodly greaves
fitted with ancle-clasps, and with a breastplate, for he lost his own
whe
 
 ___________________________
 
mother of achilles; whereon she darted like a falcon
from the snowy summits of olympus and bore away the gleaming armour
from the house of vulcan.



book xix

  achilles is reconciled with agamemnon, puts on the armour
  which vulcan had made him, and goes out to fight.

now when dawn in robe of saffron was hasting from the streams of
oceanus, to bring light to mortals and immortals, thetis reached the
ships with the armour that the god had given her. she found her son
fallen about the body of patroclus and weeping bitterly. many also of
his followers were weeping round him, but when the goddess came among
them she clasped his hand in her own, saying, "my son, grieve as we may
we must let this man lie, for it is by heaven's will that he has
fallen; now, therefore, accept from vulcan this rich and goodly armour,
which no man has ever yet borne upon his shoulders."

as she spoke she set the armour before achilles, and it rang out
bravely as she did so. the myrmidons were struck with awe, and non
 
 ___________________________
 
ieted about this
matter. i will find means to protect him from the swarms of noisome
flies that prey on the bodies of men who have been killed in battle. he
may lie for a whole year, and his flesh shall still be as sound as
ever, or even sounder. call, therefore, the achaean heroes in assembly;
unsay your anger against agamemnon; arm at once, and fight with might
and main."

as she spoke she put strength and courage into his heart, and she then
dropped ambrosia and red nectar into the wounds of patroclus, that his
body might suffer no change.

then achilles went out upon the seashore, and with a loud cry called on
the achaean heroes. on this even those who as yet had stayed always at
the ships, the pilots and helmsmen, and even the stewards who were
about the ships and served out rations, all came to the place of
assembly because achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so
long from fighting. two sons of mars, ulysses and the son of tydeus,
came limping, for their wounds still pained 
 
 ___________________________
 
d make it ready for sacrifice to jove and to the sun."

then said achilles, "son of atreus, king of men agamemnon, see to these
matters at some other season, when there is breathing time and when i
am calmer. would you have men eat while the bodies of those whom hector
son of priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain? let the sons
of the achaeans, say i, fight fasting and without food, till we have
avenged them; afterwards at the going down of the sun let them eat
their fill. as for me, patroclus is lying dead in my tent, all hacked
and hewn, with his feet to the door, and his comrades are mourning
round him. therefore i can take thought of nothing save only slaughter
and blood and the rattle in the throat of the dying."

ulysses answered, "achilles, son of peleus, mightiest of all the
achaeans, in battle you are better than i, and that more than a little,
but in counsel i am much before you, for i am older and of greater
knowledge. therefore be patient under my words. fighting is a thi
 
 ___________________________
 
 an anger, nor so stubbornly taken briseis from
me against my will. surely jove must have counselled the destruction of
many an argive. go, now, and take your food that we may begin fighting."

on this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
ship. the myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to the
ship of achilles. they placed them in his tents, while the stable-men
drove the horses in among the others.

briseis, fair as venus, when she saw the mangled body of patroclus,
flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck,
and her lovely face with both her hands. beautiful as a goddess she
wept and said, "patroclus, dearest friend, when i went hence i left you
living; i return, o prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows
multiply upon me one after the other. i saw him to whom my father and
mother married me, cut down before our city, and my three own dear
brothers perished with him on the self-same day; but you, patroclus,
even when achil
 
 ___________________________
 
les slew my husband and sacked the city of noble mynes,
told me that i was not to weep, for you said you would make achilles
marry me, and take me back with him to phthia, we should have a wedding
feast among the myrmidons. you were always kind to me and i shall never
cease to grieve for you."

she wept as she spoke, and the women joined in her lament-making as
though their tears were for patroclus, but in truth each was weeping
for her own sorrows. the elders of the achaeans gathered round achilles
and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. "i
pray you," said he, "if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat
nor drink, for i am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to
the going down of the sun."

on this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of
atreus and ulysses, nestor, idomeneus, and the knight phoenix, who
stayed behind and tried to 
 
 ___________________________
 
comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow:
but he would not be comforted till he should have flung himself into
the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of
patroclus. then he said--

"hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner
ready for me at once and without delay when the achaeans were hasting
to fight the trojans; now, therefore, though i have meat and drink in
my tents, yet will i fast for sorrow. grief greater than this i could
not know, not even though i were to hear of the death of my father, who
is now in phthia weeping for the loss of me his son, who am here
fighting the trojans in a strange land for the accursed sake of he
 
 ___________________________
 
about them, and put the bit in their mouths, drawing the reins back
towards the chariot. automedon, whip in hand, sprang up behind the
horses, and after him achilles mounted in full armour, resplendent as
the sun-god hyperion. then with a loud voice he chided with his
father's horses saying, "xanthus and balius, famed offspring of
podarge--this time when we have done fighting be sure and bring your
driver safely back to the host of the achaeans, and do not leave him
dead on the plain as you did patroclus."

then fleet xanthus answered under the yoke--for white-armed juno had
endowed him with human speech--and he bowed his head till his mane
touched the ground as it hung down from under the yoke-band. "dread
achilles," said he, "we will indeed save you now, but the day of your
death is near, and the blame will not be ours, for it will be heaven
and stern fate that will destroy you. neither was it through any sloth
or slackness on our part that the trojans stripped patroclus of his
armour; it was
 
 ___________________________
 
word only. fell was his purpose as he hewed the trojans down on every
side. their dying groans rose hideous as the sword smote them, and the
river ran red with blood. as when fish fly scared before a huge
dolphin, and fill every nook and corner of some fair haven--for he is
sure to eat all he can catch--even so did the trojans cower under the
banks of the mighty river, and when achilles' arms grew weary with
killing them, he drew twelve youths alive out of the water, to
sacrifice in revenge for patroclus son of menoetius. he drew them out
like dazed fawns, bound their hands behind them with the girdles of
their own shirts, and gave them over to his men to take back to the
ships. then he sprang into the river, thirsting for still further blood.

there he found lycaon, son of priam seed of dardanus, as he was
escaping out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken prisoner
when he was in his father's vineyard, having set upon him by night, as
he was cutting young shoots from a wild fig-tree t
 
 ___________________________
 
ou will have slain. your spear slew noble polydorus as he
was fighting in the front ranks, and now evil will here befall me, for
i fear that i shall not escape you since heaven has delivered me over
to you. furthermore i say, and lay my saying to your heart, spare me,
for i am not of the same womb as hector who slew your brave and noble
comrade."

with such words did the princely son of priam beseech achilles; but
achilles answered him sternly. "idiot," said he, "talk not to me of
ransom. until patroclus fell i preferred to give the trojans quarter,
and sold beyond the sea many of those whom i had taken alive; but now
not a man shall live of those whom heaven delivers into my hands before
the city of ilius--and of all trojans it shall fare hardest with the
sons of priam. therefore, my friend, you too shall die. why should you
whine in this way? patroclus fell, and he was a better man than you
are. i too--see you not how i am great and goodly? i am son to a noble
father, and have a goddess for m
 
 ___________________________
 
m of the sea. there shall the fishes feed on the fat of lycaon as
they dart under the dark ripple of the waters--so perish all of you
till we reach the citadel of strong ilius--you in flight, and i
following after to destroy you. the river with its broad silver stream
shall serve you in no stead, for all the bulls you offered him and all
the horses that you flung living into his waters. none the less
miserably shall you perish till there is not a man of you but has paid
in full for the death of patroclus and the havoc you wrought among the
achaeans whom you have slain while i held aloof from battle."

so spoke achilles, but the river grew more and more angry, and pondered
within himself how he should stay the hand of achilles and save the
trojans from disaster. meanwhile the son of peleus, spear in hand,
sprang upon asteropaeus son of pelegon to kill him. he was son to the
broad river axius and periboea eldest daughter of acessamenus; for the
river had lain with her. asteropaeus stood up out of
 
 ___________________________
 
 made with four
layers of metal, nodding fiercely forward. the thick tresses of gold
with which vulcan had crested the helmet floated round it, and as the
evening star that shines brighter than all others through the stillness
of night, even such was the gleam of the spear which achilles poised in
his right hand, fraught with the death of noble hector. he eyed his
fair flesh over and over to see where he could best wound it, but all
was protected by the goodly armour of which hector had spoiled
patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat where the
collar-bones divide the neck from the shoulders, and this is a most
deadly place: here then did achilles strike him as he was coming on
towards him, and the point of his spear went right through the fleshy
part of the neck, but it did not sever his windpipe so that he could
still speak. hector fell headlong, and achilles vaunted over him
saying, "hector, you deemed that you should come off scatheless when
you were spoiling patroclus, and re
 
 ___________________________
 
mour, he stood among
the argives and said, "my friends, princes and counsellors of the
argives, now that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome this man, who
has done us more hurt than all the others together, consider whether we
should not attack the city in force, and discover in what mind the
trojans may be. we should thus learn whether they will desert their
city now that hector has fallen, or will still hold out even though he
is no longer living. but why argue with myself in this way, while
patroclus is still lying at the ships unburied, and unmourned--he whom
i can never forget so long as i am alive and my strength fails not?
though men forget their dead when once they are within the house of
hades, yet not even there will i forget the comrade whom i have lost.
now, therefore, achaean youths, let us raise the song of victory and go
back to the ships taking this man along with us; for we have achieved a
mighty triumph and have slain noble hector to whom the trojans prayed
throughout their c
 
 ___________________________
 
 wriggling writhing worms will now eat you at
the ships, far from your parents, when the dogs have glutted themselves
upon you. you will lie naked, although in your house you have fine and
goodly raiment made by hands of women. this will i now burn; it is of
no use to you, for you can never again wear it, and thus you will have
respect shown you by the trojans both men and women."

in such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women joined in
her lament.



book xxiii

  the funeral of patroclus, and the funeral games.

thus did they make their moan throughout the city, while the achaeans
when they reached the hellespont went back every man to his own ship.
but achilles would not let the myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave
comrades saying, "myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends,
not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw near
to the body and mourn patroclus, in due honour to the dead. when we
have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our
 
 ___________________________
 
ake
supper all of us here."

on this they all joined in a cry of wailing and achilles led them in
their lament. thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round
the body, and thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning. the
sands of the seashore and the men's armour were wet with their weeping,
so great a minister of fear was he whom they had lost. chief in all
their mourning was the son of peleus: he laid his bloodstained hand on
the breast of his friend. "fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in
the house of hades. i will now do all that i erewhile promised you; i
will drag hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons
of trojans will i also slay before your pyre to avenge you."

as he spoke he treated the body of noble hector with contumely, laying
it at full length in the dust beside the bier of patroclus. the others
then put off every man his armour, took the horses from their chariots,
and seated themselves in great multitude by the ship of the fleet
descend
 
 ___________________________
 
f peleus to agamemnon,
but hardly could they persuade him to come with them, so wroth was he
for the death of his comrade. as soon as they reached agamemnon's tent
they told the serving-men to set a large tripod over the fire in case
they might persuade the son of peleus to wash the clotted gore from
this body, but he denied them sternly, and swore it with a solemn oath,
saying, "nay, by king jove, first and mightiest of all gods, it is not
meet that water should touch my body, till i have laid patroclus on the
flames, have built him a barrow, and shaved my head--for so long as i
live no such second sorrow shall ever draw nigh me. now, therefore, let
us do all that this sad festival demands, but at break of day, king
agamemnon, bid your men bring wood, and provide all else that the dead
may duly take into the realm of darkness; the fire shall thus burn him
out of our sight the sooner, and the people shall turn again to their
own labours."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey ate, and every man had his full share so that
all were satisfied. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
the others went to their rest each in his own tent, but the son of
peleus lay grieving among his myrmidons by the shore of the sounding
sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in one after
another. here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and eased the
burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing hector
round windy ilius. presently the sad spirit of patroclus drew near him,
like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of his beaming
eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. the spirit hovered over
his head and said--

"you sleep, achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living, but
now that i am dead you think for me no further. bury me with all speed
that i may pass the gates of hades; the ghosts, vain shadows of men
that can labour no more, drive me away from them; they will not yet
suffer me to join those that are beyond the ri
 
 ___________________________
 
r to me, let us once more throw our arms around one
another, and find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows."

he opened his arms towards him as he spoke and would have clasped him
in them, but there was nothing, and the spirit vanished as a vapour,
gibbering and whining into the earth. achilles sprang to his feet,
smote his two hands, and made lamentation saying, "of a truth even in
the house of hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life in
them; all night long the sad spirit of patroclus has hovered over head
making piteous moan, telling me what i am to do for him, and looking
wondrously like himself."

thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning about
the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. then king
agamemnon sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to bring wood,
and meriones, squire to idomeneus, was in charge over them. they went
out with woodmen's axes and strong ropes in their hands, and before
them went the mules. up hill and do
 
 ___________________________
 
d the heights of many-fountained
ida, they laid their axes to the roots of many a tall branching oak
that came thundering down as they felled it. they split the trees and
bound them behind the mules, which then wended their way as they best
could through the thick brushwood on to the plain. all who had been
cutting wood bore logs, for so meriones squire to idomeneus had bidden
them, and they threw them down in a line upon the seashore at the place
where achilles would make a mighty monument for patroclus and for
himself.

when they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole
ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but achilles ordered
his brave myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man his
horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted each
his chariot--they and their charioteers with them. the chariots went
before, and they that were on foot followed as a cloud in their tens of
thousands after. in the midst of them his comrades bore patroclus
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
all sorrowfully out upon the dark sea, and said, "spercheius, in vain
did my father peleus vow to you that when i returned home to my loved
native land i should cut off this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb;
fifty she-goats was i to sacrifice to you there at your springs, where
is your grove and your altar fragrant with burnt-offerings. thus did my
father vow, but you have not fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore, that
i shall see my home no more, i give this lock as a keepsake to the hero
patroclus."

as he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and
all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. the sun
would have gone down upon their mourning had not achilles presently
said to agamemnon, "son of atreus, for it is to you that the people
will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from
mourning; bid the people now leave the pyre and set about getting their
dinners: we, to whom the dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted
here, and let the
 
 ___________________________
 
 leaned two-handled jars of honey and unguents;
four proud horses did he then cast upon the pyre, groaning the while he
did so. the dead hero had had house-dogs; two of them did achilles slay
and threw upon the pyre; he also put twelve brave sons of noble trojans
to the sword and laid them with the rest, for he was full of bitterness
and fury. then he committed all to the resistless and devouring might
of the fire; he groaned aloud and called on his dead comrade by name.
"fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in the house of hades; i am now
doing all that i have promised you. twelve brave sons of noble trojans
shall the flames consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall
devour the flesh of hector son of priam."

thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of hector, for
jove's daughter venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him
with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when
achilles was dragging him about. phoebus apollo moreover sent a da
 
 ___________________________
 
rk
cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

now the pyre about dead patroclus would not kindle. achilles therefore
bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two
winds boreas and zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. he made them
many drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come and
help him that the wood might make haste to kindle and the dead bodies
be consumed. fleet iris heard him praying and started off to fetch the
winds. they were holding high feast in the house of boisterous zephyrus
when iris came running up to the stone t
 
 ___________________________
 
hreshold of the house and stood
there, but as soon as they set eyes on her they all came towards her
and each of them called her to him, but iris would not sit down. "i
cannot stay," she said, "i must go back to the streams of oceanus and
the land of the ethiopians who are offering hecatombs to the immortals,
and i would have my share; but achilles prays that boreas and shrill
zephyrus will come to him, and he vows them goodly offerings; he would
have you blow upon the pyre of patroclus for whom all the achaeans are
lamenting."

with this she left them, and the two winds rose with a cry that rent
the air and swept the clouds before them. they blew on and on until
they came to the sea, and the waves rose high beneath them, but when
they reached troy they fell upon the pyre till the mighty flames roared
under the blast that they blew. all night long did they blow hard and
beat upon the fire, and all night long did achilles grasp his double
cup, drawing wine from a mixing-bowl of
 
 ___________________________
 
 gold, and calling upon the
spirit of dead patroclus as he poured it upon the ground until the
earth was drenched. as a father mourns when he is burning the bones of
his bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his parents,
even so did achilles mourn while burning the body of his comrade,
pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation.

at length as the morning star was beginning to herald the light which
saffron-mantled dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames fell
and the fire began to die. the winds then went ho
 
 ___________________________
 
me beyond the thracian
sea, which roared and boiled as they swept over it. the son of peleus
now turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with toil, till he
fell into a sweet slumber. presently they who were about the son of
atreus drew near in a body, and roused him with the noise and tramp of
their coming. he sat upright and said, "son of atreus, and all other
princes of the achaeans, first pour red wine everywhere upon the fire
and quench it; let us then gather the bones of patroclus son of
menoetius, singling them out with care; they are easily found, for they
lie in the middle of the pyre, while all else, both men and horses, has
been thrown in a heap and burned at the outer edge. we will lay the
bones in a golden urn, in two layers of fat, against the time when i
shall myself go down into the house of hades. as for the barrow, labour
not to raise a great one now, but such as is reasonable. afterwards,
let those achaeans who may be left at the ships when i am gone, build

 
 ___________________________
 
ve up the mare
to you, mine though it indeed be; the people will thus see that i am
neither harsh nor vindictive."

with this he gave the mare over to antilochus's comrade noemon, and
then took the cauldron. meriones, who had come in fourth, carried off
the two talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the two-handled urn,
being unawarded, achilles gave it to nestor, going up to him among the
assembled argives and saying, "take this, my good old friend, as an
heirloom and memorial of the funeral of patroclus--for you shall see
him no more among the argives. i give you this prize though you cannot
win one; you can now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot enter for
the javelin-match nor foot-races, for the hand of age has been laid
heavily upon you."

so saying he gave the urn over to nestor, who received it gladly and
answered, "my son, all that you have said is true; there is no strength
now in my legs and feet, nor can i hit out with my hands from either
shoulder. would that i were still young an
 
 ___________________________
 
 and they did even as he had said, and put on their
shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.

the son of peleus then offered prizes for speed in running--a
mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. it would hold six
measures, and far exceeded all others in the whole world for beauty; it
was the work of cunning artificers in sidon, and had been brought into
port by phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it
to thoas. eueneus son of jason had given it to patroclus in ransom of
priam's son lycaon, and achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of
his comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. for the second
prize he offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there
was to be half a talent of gold. he then rose and said among the
argives, "stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

forthwith uprose fleet ajax son of oileus, with cunning ulysses, and
nestor's son antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of his
time. they 
 
 ___________________________
 
raining
his utmost, and cheered him as he shot past them; but when they were
now nearing the end of the course ulysses prayed inwardly to minerva.
"hear me," he cried, "and help my feet, o goddess." thus did he pray,
and pallas minerva heard his prayer; she made his hands and his feet
feel light, and when the runners were at the point of pouncing upon the
prize, ajax, through minerva's spite slipped upon some offal that was
lying there from the cattle which achilles had slaughtered in honour of
patroclus, and his mouth and nostrils were all filled with cow dung.
ulysses therefore carried off the mixing-bowl, for he got before ajax
and came in first. but ajax took the ox and stood with his hand on one
of its horns, spitting the dung out of his mouth. then he said to the
argives, "alas, the goddess has spoiled my running; she watches over
ulysses and stands by him as though she were his own mother." thus did
he speak and they all of them laughed heartily.

antilochus carried off the last prize an
 
 ___________________________
 
eneration, but he is hale in
spite of his years, and no man of the achaeans can run against him save
only achilles."

he said this to pay a compliment to the son of peleus, and achilles
answered, "antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose; i
shall give you an additional half talent of gold." he then gave the
half talent to antilochus, who received it gladly.

then the son of peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that
had been borne by sarpedon, and were taken from him by patroclus. he
stood up and said among the argives, "we bid two champions put on their
armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the
presence of the multitude; whichever of them can first wound the flesh
of the other, cut through his armour, and draw blood, to him will i
give this goodly thracian sword inlaid with silver, which i took from
asteropaeus, but the armour let both hold in partnership, and i will
give each of them a hearty meal in my own tent."

forthwith uprose great aja
 
 ___________________________
 
and
handed the goodly cauldron to talthybius his esquire.



book xxiv

  priam ransoms the body of hector--hector's funeral.

the assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to his
own ship. there they made ready their supper, and then bethought them
of the blessed boon of sleep; but achilles still wept for thinking of
his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could take no
hold upon him. this way and that did he turn as he yearned after the
might and manfulness of patroclus; he thought of all they had done
together, and all they had gone through both on the field of battle and
on the waves of the weary sea. as he dwelt on these things he wept
bitterly and lay now on his side, now on his back, and now face
downwards, till at last he rose and went out as one distraught to
wander upon the seashore. then, when he saw dawn breaking over beach
and sea, he yoked his horses to his chariot, and bound the body of
hector behind it that he might drag it about. thrice did he d
 
 ___________________________
 
 wrath of heaven;
think on your own father and have compassion upon me, who am the more
pitiable, for i have steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled
himself before me, and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew
my son."

thus spoke priam, and the heart of achilles yearned as he bethought him
of his father. he took the old man's hand and moved him gently away.
the two wept bitterly--priam, as he lay at achilles' feet, weeping for
hector, and achilles now for his father and now for patroclus, till the
house was filled with their lamentation. but when achilles was now
sated with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he
left his seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white
hair and beard; then he said, "unhappy man, you have indeed been
greatly daring; how could you venture to come alone to the ships of the
achaeans, and enter the presence of him who has slain so many of your
brave sons? you must have iron courage: sit now upon this seat, and for
a
 
 ___________________________
 
his prime would dare to come to our host; he
could neither pass our guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus
easily; therefore, provoke me no further, lest i sin against the word
of jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within my tents."

the old man feared him and obeyed. then the son of peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his
two squires automedon and alcimus who were closer to him than any
others of his comrades now that patroclus was no more. these unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. they lifted the ransom for hector's body from the
waggon, but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. then he
called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint it,
but he first took it to a place where priam should not see it, lest if
he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of h
 
 ___________________________
 
is grief, and
enrage achilles, who might then kill him and sin against the word of
jove. when the servants had washed the body and anointed it, and had
wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle, achilles himself lifted it on to
a bier, and he and his men then laid it on the waggon. he cried aloud
as he did so and called on the name of his dear comrade, "be not angry
with me, patroclus," he said, "if you hear even in the house of hades
that i have given hector to his father for a ransom. it has been no
unworthy one, and i will share it equitably with you."

achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right
angles to the one against which priam was sitting. "sir," he said,
"your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to
desire; you shall look upon him when you take him away