 of the achaeans left him, for he had been bitten by a poisonous
water snake. there he lay sick and sorry, and full soon did the argives
come to miss him. but his people, though they felt his loss were not
leaderless, for medon, the bastard son of oileus by rhene, set them in
array.

those, again, of tricca and the stony region of ithome, and they that
held oechalia, the city of oechalian eurytus, these were commanded by
the two sons of aesculapius, skilled in the art of healing, podalirius
and machaon. and with them there came thirty ships.

the men, moreover, of ormenius, and by the fountain of hypereia, with
those that held asterius, and the white crests of titanus, these were
led by eurypylus, the son of euaemon, and with them there came forty
ships.

those that held argissa and gyrtone, orthe, elone, and the white city
of oloosson, of these brave polypoetes was leader. he was son of
pirithous, who was son of jove himself, for hippodameia bore him to
pirithous on the day when he took his 
 
 ___________________________
 
, king of men, spoke,
saying, "hear me, trojans, dardanians, and allies. the victory has been
with menelaus; therefore give back helen with all her wealth, and pay
such fine as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among them that shall
be born hereafter."

thus spoke the son of atreus, and the achaeans shouted in applause.



book iv

  a quarrel in olympus--minerva goes down and persuades fandarus
  to violate the oaths by wounding menelaus with an arrow--agamemnon
  makes a speech and sends for machaon--he then
  goes about among his captains and upbraids ulysses and
  sthenelus, who each of them retort fiercely--diomed checks
  sthenelus, and the two hosts then engage, with great slaughter
  on either side.

now the gods were sitting with jove in council upon the golden floor
while hebe went round pouring out nectar for them to drink, and as they
pledged one another in their cups of gold they looked down upon the
town of troy. the son of saturn then began to tease juno, talking at
her so as 
 
 ___________________________
 
may the earth then swallow me."

but menelaus reassured him and said, "take heart, and do not alarm the
people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal part, for my outer belt
of burnished metal first stayed it, and under this my cuirass and the
belt of mail which the bronze-smiths made me."

and agamemnon answered, "i trust, dear menelaus, that it may be even
so, but the surgeon shall examine your wound and lay herbs upon it to
relieve your pain."

he then said to talthybius, "talthybius, tell machaon, son to the great
physician, aesculapius, to come and see menelaus immediately. some
trojan or lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our dismay,
and to his own great glory."

talthybius did as he was told, and went about the host trying to find
machaon. presently he found standing amid the brave warriors who had
followed him from tricca; thereon he went up to him and said, "son of
aesculapius, king agamemnon says you are to come and see menelaus
immediately. some trojan or lycian arche
 
 ___________________________
 
r has wounded him with an arrow
to our dismay and to his own great glory."

thus did he speak, and machaon was moved to go. they passed through the
spreading host of the achaeans and went on till they came to the place
where menelaus had been wounded and was lying with the chieftains
gathered in a circle round him. machaon passed into the middle of the
ring and at once drew the arrow from the belt, bending its barbs back
through the force with which he pulled it out. he undid the burnished
belt, and beneath this the cuirass and the belt of mail which the
bronze-smiths had made; then, when he had seen the wound, he wiped away
the blood and applied some soothing drugs which chiron had given to
aesculapius out of the good will he bore him.

while they were thus busy about menelaus, the trojans came forward
against t
 
 ___________________________
 
hed themselves. after they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

and now as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, jove sent fierce discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the achaeans. she took her
stand by the huge black hull of ulysses' ship which was m
 
 ___________________________
 
ing both men and horses.

hector did not yet know what ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river scamander, where
the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round nestor and brave
idomeneus. among these hector was making great slaughter with his spear
and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to
him; still the achaeans would have given no ground, had not alexandrus
husband of lovely helen stayed the prowess of machaon, shepherd of his
people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed
arrow. the achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned
against them the trojans might take him prisoner, and idomeneus said to
nestor, "nestor son of neleus, honour to the achaean name, mount your
chariot at once; take machaon with you and drive your horses to the
ships as fast as you can. a physician is worth more than several other
men put together, for he can cut out arrows and spread healing her
 
 ___________________________
 
bs."

nestor knight of gerene did as idomeneus had counselled; he at once
mounted his chariot, and machaon son of the famed physician
aesculapius, went with him. he lashed his horses and they flew onward
nothing loth towards the ships, as though of their own free will.

then cebriones seeing the trojans in confusion said to hector from his
place beside him, "hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme wing
of the battle, while the other trojans are in pell-mell rout, they and
their horses. ajax son of telamon is driving them before him; i know
him by the breadth of his shield: let us turn our ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ht alive. hither, then, to
the rescue of great ajax son of telamon."

even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near,
and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their
shoulders so as to give him cover. ajax then made towards them, and
turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the mares
of neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing nestor out of the
fight, and with him machaon shepherd of his people. achilles saw and
took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the
hard stress and struggle of the fight. he called from the ship to his
comrade patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking like
mars himself--here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently
befell him. "why," said he, "achilles, do you call me? what do you want
with me?" and achilles answered, "noble son of menoetius, man after my
own heart, i take it that i shall n
 
 ___________________________
 
ow have the achaeans praying at my
knees, for they are in great straits; go, patroclus, and ask nestor who
it is that he is bearing away wounded from the field; from his back i
should say it was machaon son of aesculapius, but i could not see his
face for the horses went by me at full speed."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running
by the ships and tents of the achaeans.

when nestor and machaon had reached the tents of the son of neleus,
they dismounted, and an esquire, eurymedon, took the horses from the
chariot. the pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the
sweat from their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside and
took their seats. fair hecamede, whom nestor had had awarded to him
from tenedos when achilles took it, mixed them a mess; she was daughter
of wise arsinous, and the achaeans had given her to nestor because he
excelled all of them in counsel. fi
 
 ___________________________
 
hirst, they fell talking with one another, and at
this moment patroclus appeared at the door.

when the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand, led
him into the tent, and bade him take his place among them; but
patroclus stood where he was and said, "noble sir, i may not stay, you
cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me is not one to be trifled
with, and he bade me ask who the wounded man was whom you were bearing
away from the field. i can now see for myself that he is machaon,
shepherd of his people. i must go back and tell achilles. you, sir,
know what a terrible man he is, and how ready to blame even where no
blame should lie."

and nestor answered, "why should achilles care to know how many of the
achaeans may be wounded? he recks not of the dismay that reigns in our
host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave diomed, son of
tydeus, is wounded; so are ulysses and agamemnon; eurypylus has been
hit with an arrow in the thigh, and i have just been bringing
 
 ___________________________
 
ans but they will perish at their ships. all they that
were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the hands of
the trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. but save me and take
me to your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash the black blood
from off it with warm water, and lay upon it those gracious herbs
which, so they say, have been shown you by achilles, who was himself
shown them by chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs. for of the
physicians podalirius and machaon, i hear that the one is lying wounded
in his tent and is himself in need of healing, while the other is
fighting the trojans upon the plain."

"hero eurypylus," replied the brave son of menoetius, "how may these
things be? what can i do? i am on my way to bear a message to noble
achilles from nestor of gerene, bulwark of the achaeans, but even so i
will not be unmindful of your distress."

with this he clasped him round the middle and led him into the tent,
and a servant, when he saw him, sprea
 
 ___________________________
 
n their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their
prowess, but stood firm against the onslaught of the trojan chieftains,
and the cry from both the hosts rose up to heaven and to the brightness
of jove's presence.



book xiv

  agamemnon proposes that the achaeans should sail home, and
  is rebuked by ulysses--juno beguiles jupiter--hector is
  wounded.

nestor was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not escape
him, and he said to the son of aesculapius, "what, noble machaon, is
the meaning of all this? the shouts of men fighting by our ships grow
stronger and stronger; stay here, therefore, and sit over your wine,
while fair hecamede heats you a bath and washes the clotted blood from
off you. i will go at once to the look-out station and see what it is
all about."

as he spoke he took up the shield of his son thrasymedes that was lying
in his tent, all gleaming with bronze, for thrasymedes had taken his
father's shield; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear