amely under my loss and
give up the girl at your bidding? let the achaeans find me a prize in
fair exchange to my liking, or i will come and take your own, or that
of ajax or of ulysses; and he to whomsoever i may come shall rue my
coming. but of this we will take thought hereafter; for the present,
let us draw a ship into the sea, and find a crew for her expressly; let
us put a hecatomb on board, and let us send chryseis also; further, let
some chief man among us be in command, either ajax, or idomeneus, or
yourself, son of peleus, mighty warrior that you are, that we may offer
sacrifice and appease the anger of the god."

achilles scowled at him and answered, "you are steeped in insolence and
lust of gain. with what heart can any of the achaeans do your bidding,
either on foray or in open fighting? i came not warring here for any
ill the trojans had done me. i have no quarrel with them. they have not
raided my cattle nor my horses, nor cut down my harvests on the rich
plains of phthia; for be
 
 ___________________________
 
t without ceasing, as the
storms from every quarter drive them, even so did the achaeans rise and
hurry in all directions to their ships. there they lighted their fires
at their tents and got dinner, offering sacrifice every man to one or
other of the gods, and praying each one of them that he might live to
come out of the fight. agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed a fat
five-year-old bull to the mighty son of saturn, and invited the princes
and elders of his host. first he asked nestor and king idomeneus, then
the two ajaxes and the son of tydeus, and sixthly ulysses, peer of gods
in counsel; but menelaus came of his own accord, for he knew how busy
his brother then was. they stood round the bull with the barley-meal in
their hands, and agamemnon prayed, saying, "jove, most glorious,
supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest upon the storm-cloud,
grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace
of priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed with fire. grant that
my s
 
 ___________________________
 
 with the
mainland also that was over against the islands. these were led by
ulysses, peer of jove in counsel, and with him there came twelve ships.

thoas, son of andraemon, commanded the aetolians, who dwelt in pleuron,
olenus, pylene, chalcis by the sea, and rocky calydon, for the great
king oeneus had now no sons living, and was himself dead, as was also
golden-haired meleager, who had been set over the aetolians to be their
king. and with thoas there came forty ships.

the famous spearsman idomeneus led the cretans, who held cnossus, and
the well-walled city of gortys; lyctus also, miletus and lycastus that
lies upon the chalk; the populous towns of phaestus and rhytium, with
the other peoples that dwelt in the hundred cities of crete. all these
were led by idomeneus, and by meriones, peer of murderous mars. and
with these there came eighty ships.

tlepolemus, son of hercules, a man both brave and large of stature,
brought nine ships of lordly warriors from rhodes. these dwelt in
rhodes wh
 
 ___________________________
 
for a mere churl or simpleton; but
when he raised his voice, and the words came driving from his deep
chest like winter snow before the wind, then there was none to touch
him, and no man thought further of what he looked like."

priam then caught sight of ajax and asked, "who is that great and
goodly warrior whose head and broad shoulders tower above the rest of
the argives?"

"that," answered helen, "is huge ajax, bulwark of the achaeans, and on
the other side of him, among the cretans, stands idomeneus looking like
a god, and with the captains of the cretans round him. often did
menelaus receive him as a guest in our house when he came visiting us
from crete. i see, moreover, many other achaeans whose names i could
tell you, but there are two whom i can nowhere find, castor, breaker of
horses, and pollux the mighty boxer; they are children of my mother,
and own brothers to myself. either they have not left lacedaemon, or
else, though they have brought their ships, they will not show
themselve
 
 ___________________________
 
 miserable creatures, have you no
shame to stand here like frightened fawns who, when they can no longer
scud over the plain, huddle together, but show no fight? you are as
dazed and spiritless as deer. would you wait till the trojans reach the
sterns of our ships as they lie on the shore, to see whether the son of
saturn will hold his hand over you to protect you?"

thus did he go about giving his orders among the ranks. passing through
the crowd, he came presently on the cretans, arming round idomeneus,
who was at their head, fierce as a wild boar, while meriones was
bringing up the battalions that were in the rear. agamemnon was glad
when he saw him, and spoke him fairly. "idomeneus," said he, "i treat
you with greater distinction than i do any others of the achaeans,
whether in war or in other things, or at table. when the princes are
mixing my choicest wines in the mixing-bowls, they have each of them a
fixed allowance, but your cup is kept always full like my own, that you
may drink whene
 
 ___________________________
 
ver you are minded. go, therefore, into battle, and show
yourself the man you have been always proud to be."

idomeneus answered, "i will be a trusty comrade, as i promised you from
the first i would be. urge on the other achaeans, that we may join
battle at once, for the trojans have trampled upon their covenants.
death and destruction shall be theirs, seeing they have been the first
to break their oaths and to attack us."

the son of atreus went on, glad at heart, till he came upon the two
ajaxes arming themselves amid a host of foot-soldiers. as when a
goat-herd from some high post watches a storm drive over 
 
 ___________________________
 
rs out of the battle, and set him down upon the
steep banks of the scamander. upon this the danaans drove the trojans
back, and each one of their chieftains killed his man. first king
agamemnon flung mighty odius, captain of the halizoni, from his
chariot. the spear of agamemnon caught him on the broad of his back,
just as he was turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders
and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground.

then idomeneus killed phaesus, son of borus the meonian, who had come
from varne. mighty idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as he
was mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshrouded him as
he fell heavily from the car.

the squires of idomeneus spoiled him of his armour, while menelaus, son
of atreus, killed scamandrius the son of strophius, a mighty huntsman
and keen lover of the chase. diana herself had taught him how to kill
every kind of wild creature that is bred in mountain forests, 
 
 ___________________________
 
us--he brought hither with the
spoil, and freed her for a great sum, but the archer-queen diana took
her in the house of your father. nay--hector--you who to me are father,
mother, brother, and dear husband--have mercy upon me; stay here upon
this wall; make not your child fatherless, and your wife a widow; as
for the host, place them near the fig-tree, where the city can be best
scaled, and the wall is weakest. thrice have the bravest of them come
thither and assailed it, under the two ajaxes, idomeneus, the sons of
atreus, and the brave son of tydeus, either of their own bidding, or
because some soothsayer had told them."

and hector answered, "wife, i too have thought upon all this, but with
what face should i look upon the trojans, men or women, if i shirked
battle like a coward? i cannot do so: i know nothing save to fight
bravely in the forefront of the trojan host and win renown alike for my
father and myself. well do i know that the day will surely come when
mighty ilius shall be destro
 
 ___________________________
 
 lay
sprawling upon the earth. would that i were still young and strong as i
then was, for the son of priam would then soon find one who would face
him. but you, foremost among the whole host though you be, have none of
you any stomach for fighting hector."

thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to
their feet. foremost of all uprose king agamemnon, and after him brave
diomed the son of tydeus. next were the two ajaxes, men clothed in
valour as with a garment, and then idomeneus, and meriones his brother
in arms. after these eurypylus son of euaemon, thoas the son of
andraemon, and ulysses also rose. then nestor knight of gerene again
spoke, saying: "cast lots among you to see who shall be chosen. if he
come alive out of this fight he will have done good service alike to
his own soul and to the achaeans."

thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown
it into the helmet of agamemnon son of atreus, the people lifted their
hands in prayer, and t
 
 ___________________________
 
e sire of all balanced his golden scales, and put
two fates of death within them, one for the trojans and the other for
the achaeans. he took the balance by the middle, and when he lifted it
up the day of the achaeans sank; the death-fraught scale of the
achaeans settled down upon the ground, while that of the trojans rose
heavenwards. then he thundered aloud from ida, and sent the glare of
his lightning upon the achaeans; when they saw this, pale fear fell
upon them and they were sore afraid.

idomeneus dared not stay nor yet agamemnon, nor did the two ajaxes,
servants of mars, hold their ground. nestor knight of gerene alone
stood firm, bulwark of the achaeans, not of his own will, but one of
his horses was disabled. alexandrus husband of lovely helen had hit it
with an arrow just on the top of its head where the mane begins to grow
away from the skull, a very deadly place. the horse bounded in his
anguish as the arrow pierced his brain, and his struggles threw others
into confusion. the old 
 
 ___________________________
 
s over the trench and gone forth to fight sooner
than the son of tydeus; long before any one else could do so he slew an
armed warrior of the trojans, agelaus the son of phradmon. he had
turned his horses in flight, but the spear struck him in the back
midway between his shoulders and went right through his chest, and his
armour rang rattling round him as he fell forward from his chariot.

after him came agamemnon and menelaus, sons of atreus, the two ajaxes
clothed in valour as with a garment, idomeneus and his companion in
arms meriones, peer of murderous mars, and eurypylus the brave son of
euaemon. ninth came teucer with his bow, and took his place under cover
of the shield of ajax son of telamon. when ajax lifted his shield
teucer would peer round, and when he had hit any one in the throng, the
man would fall dead; then teucer would hie back to ajax as a child to
its mother, and again duck down under his shield.

which of the trojans did brave teucer first kill? orsilochus, and then
ormenu
 
 ___________________________
 
nelaus, we both of us need shrewd
counsel to save the argives and our ships, for jove has changed his
mind, and inclines towards hector's sacrifices rather than ours. i
never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one
day as hector has now wrought against the sons of the achaeans--and
that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor
goddess. the argives will rue it long and deeply. run, therefore, with
all speed by the line of the ships, and call ajax and idomeneus.
meanwhile i will go to nestor, and bid him rise and go about among the
companies of our sentinels to give them their instructions; they will
listen to him sooner than to any man, for his own son, and meriones
brother in arms to idomeneus, are captains over them. it was to them
more particularly that we gave this charge."

menelaus replied, "how do i take your meaning? am i to stay with them
and wait your coming, or shall i return here as soon as i have given
your orders?" "wait," answered king
 
 ___________________________
 
nd sleeping to
the neglect of their duty. the enemy is encamped hard and we know not
but he may attack us by night."

nestor replied, "most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon, jove
will not do all for hector that hector thinks he will; he will have
troubles yet in plenty if achilles will lay aside his anger. i will go
with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of tydeus, or
ulysses, or fleet ajax and the valiant son of phyleus. some one had
also better go and call ajax and king idomeneus, for their ships are
not near at hand but the farthest of all. i cannot however refrain from
blaming menelaus, much as i love him and respect him--and i will say so
plainly, even at the risk of offending you--for sleeping and leaving
all this trouble to yourself. he ought to be going about imploring aid
from all the princes of the achaeans, for we are in extreme danger."

and agamemnon answered, "sir, you may sometimes blame him justly, for
he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself--not
 
 ___________________________
 
ed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. after they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

and now as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, jove sent fierce discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the achaeans. she took her
stand by the huge 
 
 ___________________________
 
mes rushing in full flood from
the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain of heaven--many a dry
oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much mud does it bring down and
cast into the sea--even so did brave ajax chase the foe furiously over
the plain, slaying both men and horses.

hector did not yet know what ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river scamander, where
the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round nestor and brave
idomeneus. among these hector was making great slaughter with his spear
and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to
him; still the achaeans would have given no ground, had not alexandrus
husband of lovely helen stayed the prowess of machaon, shepherd of his
people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed
arrow. the achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned
against them the trojans might take him prisoner, and idomeneus said to
nestor, "nestor s
 
 ___________________________
 
on of neleus, honour to the achaean name, mount your
chariot at once; take machaon with you and drive your horses to the
ships as fast as you can. a physician is worth more than several other
men put together, for he can cut out arrows and spread healing herbs."

nestor knight of gerene did as idomeneus had counselled; he at once
mounted his chariot, and machaon son of the famed physician
aesculapius, went with him. he lashed his horses and they flew onward
nothing loth towards the ships, as though of their own free will.

then cebriones seeing the trojans in confusion said to hector from his
place beside him, "hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme wing
of the battle, while the other trojans are in pell-mell rout, they and
their horses. ajax son of telamon is driving them before him;
 
 ___________________________
 
selves now fall upon the ships.

the rest of the trojans and their allies now followed the counsel of
polydamas but asius, son of hyrtacus, would not leave his horses and
his esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness he took them on with him
towards the ships, nor did he fail to come by his end in consequence.
nevermore was he to return to wind-beaten ilius, exulting in his
chariot and his horses; ere he could do so, death of ill-omened name
had overshadowed him and he had fallen by the spear of idomeneus the
noble son of deucalion. he had driven towards the left wing of the
ships, by which way the achaeans used to return with their chariots and
horses from the plain. hither he drove and found the gates with their
doors opened wide, and the great bar down--for the gatemen kept them
open so as to let those of their comrades enter who might be flying
towards the ships. hither of set purpose did he direct his horses, and
his men followed him with a loud cry, for they felt sure that the
achaeans wou
 
 ___________________________
 
bout his
body and he had two spears in his hand. none but a god could have
withstood him as he flung himself into the gateway, and his eyes glared
like fire. then he turned round towards the trojans and called on them
to scale the wall, and they did as he bade them--some of them at once
climbing over the wall, while others passed through the gates. the
danaans then fled panic-stricken towards their ships, and all was
uproar and confusion.



book xiii

  neptune helps the achaeans--the feats of idomeneus--hector at
  the ships.

now when jove had thus brought hector and the trojans to the ships, he
left them to their never-ending toil, and turned his keen eyes away,
looking elsewhither towards the horse-breeders of thrace, the mysians,
fighters at close quarters, the noble hippemolgi, who live on milk, and
the abians, justest of mankind. he no longer turned so much as a glance
towards troy, for he did not think that any of the immortals would go
and help either trojans or danaans.

but king nep
 
 ___________________________
 
 jaws,
thus did the ajaxes bear aloft the body of imbrius, and strip it of its
armour. then the son of oileus severed the head from the neck in
revenge for the death of amphimachus, and sent it whirling over the
crowd as though it had been a ball, till it fell in the dust at
hector's feet.

neptune was exceedingly angry that his grandson amphimachus should have
fallen; he therefore went to the tents and ships of the achaeans to
urge the danaans still further, and to devise evil for the trojans.
idomeneus met him, as he was taking leave of a comrade, who had just
come to him from the fight, wounded in the knee. his fellow-soldiers
bore him off the field, and idomeneus having given orders to the
physicians went on to his tent, for he was still thirsting for battle.
neptune spoke in the likeness and with the voice of thoas son of
andraemon who ruled the aetolians of all pleuron and high calydon, and
was honoured among his people as though he were a god. "idomeneus,"
said he, "lawgiver to the creta
 
 ___________________________
 
ns, what has now become of the threats
with which the sons of the achaeans used to threaten the trojans?"

and idomeneus chief among the cretans answered, "thoas, no one, so far
as i know, is in fault, for we can all fight. none are held back
neither by fear nor slackness, but it seems to be the will of almighty
jove that the achaeans should perish ingloriously here far from argos:
you, thoas, have been always staunch, and you keep others in heart if
you see any fail in duty; be not then remiss now, but exhort all to do
their utmost."

to this neptune lord of the earthquake made answer, "idomeneus, may he
never r
 
 ___________________________
 
eturn from troy, but remain here for dogs to batten upon, who is
this day wilfully slack in fighting. get your armour and go, we must
make all haste together if we may be of any use, though we are only
two. even cowards gain courage from companionship, and we two can hold
our own with the bravest."

therewith the god went back into the thick of the fight, and idomeneus
when he had reached his tent donned his armour, grasped his two spears,
and sallied forth. as the lightning which the son of saturn brandishes
from bright olympus when he would show a sign to mortals, and its gleam
flashes far and wide--even so did his armour gleam about him as he ran.
meriones his sturdy squire met him while he was still near his tent
(for he was going to fetch his spear) and idomeneus said:

"meriones, fleet son of molus, best of comrades, why have you left the
field? are you
 
 ___________________________
 
 wounded, and is the point of the weapon hurting you? or
have you been sent to fetch me? i want no fetching; i had far rather
fight than stay in my tent."

"idomeneus," answered meriones, "i come for a spear, if i can find one
in my tent; i have broken the one i had, in throwing it at the shield
of deiphobus."

and idomeneus captain of the cretans answered, "you will find one
spear, or twenty if you so please, standing up against the end wall of
my tent. i have taken them from trojans whom i have killed, for i am
not one to keep my enemy at arm's length; therefore i have spears,
bossed shields, helmets, and burnished corslets."

then meriones said, "i too in my tent and at my ship have spoils taken
from the trojans, but they are not at hand. i have been at all times
valorous, and wherever there has been hard fighti
 
 ___________________________
 
ng have held my own
among the foremost. there may be those among the achaeans who do not
know how i fight, but you know it well enough yourself."

idomeneus answered, "i know you for a brave man: you need not tell me.
if the best men at the ships were being chosen to go on an ambush--and
there is nothing like this for showing what a man is made of; it comes
out then who is cowardly and who brave; the coward will change colour
at every touch and turn; he is full of fears, and keeps shifting his
weight first on one knee and then on the other; his heart beats fast as
he thinks of death, and one can hear the chattering of his teeth;
whereas the brave m
 
 ___________________________
 
 make light of your courage nor feats of arms. if you were struck
by a dart or smitten in close combat, it would not be from behind, in
your neck nor back, but the weapon would hit you in the chest or belly
as you were pressing forward to a place in the front ranks. but let us
no longer stay here talking like children, lest we be ill spoken of;
go, fetch your spear from the tent at once."

on this meriones, peer of mars, went to the tent and got himself a
spear of bronze. he then followed after idomeneus, big with great deeds
of valour. as when baneful mars sallies forth to battle, and his son
panic so strong and dauntless goes with him, to strike terror even into
the heart of a hero--the pair have gone from thrace to arm themselves
among the ephyri or the brave phlegyans, but they will not listen to
both the contending hosts, and will give victory to one side or to the
other--even so did meriones and idomeneus, captains of men, go out to
battle clad in their bronze armour. meriones was first t
 
 ___________________________
 
o speak. "son
of deucalion," said he, "where would you have us begin fighting? on the
right wing of the host, in the centre, or on the left wing, where i
take it the achaeans will be weakest?"

idomeneus answered, "there are others to defend the centre--the two
ajaxes and teucer, who is the finest archer of all the achaeans, and is
good also in a hand-to-hand fight. these will give hector son of priam
enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish their
indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of saturn fling a
firebrand upon them with his own hand. great ajax son of telamon will
yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of ceres, if
bronze and great
 
 ___________________________
 
 stones can overthrow him. he would not yield even to
achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is none
to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing, that we may
know forthwith whether we are to give glory to some other, or he to us."

meriones, peer of fleet mars, then led the way till they came to the
part of the host which idomeneus had named.

now when the trojans saw idomeneus coming on like a flame of fire, him
and his squire clad in their richly wrought armour, they shouted and
made towards him all in a body, and a furious hand-to-hand fight raged
under the ships' sterns. fierce as the shrill winds that whistle upon a
day when dust lies deep on the roads, and the gusts raise it into a
thick cloud--even such was the fury of the combat, and might and main
did they hack at each other with spear and sword throughout the host.
the field bristled with the long and deadly
 
 ___________________________
 
in secret,
for he was grieved at seeing them vanquished by the trojans, and was
furiously angry with jove. both were of the same race and country, but
jove was elder born and knew more, therefore neptune feared to defend
the argives openly, but in the likeness of man, he kept on encouraging
them throughout their host. thus, then, did these two devise a knot of
war and battle, that none could unloose or break, and set both sides
tugging at it, to the failing of men's knees beneath them.

and now idomeneus, though his hair was already flecked with grey,
called loud on the danaans and spread panic among the trojans as he
leaped in among them. he slew othryoneus from cabesus, a sojourner, who
had but lately come to take part in the war. he sought cassandra, the
fairest of priam's daughters, in marriage, but offered no gifts of
wooing, for he promised a great thing, to wit, that he would drive the
sons of the achaeans willy nilly from troy; old king priam had given
his consent and promised her to hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m, whereon he fought on the strength
of the promises thus made to him. idomeneus aimed a spear, and hit him
as he came striding on. his cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and
the spear stuck in his belly, so that he fell heavily to the ground.
then idomeneus vaunted over him saying, "othryoneus, there is no one in
the world whom i shall admire more than i do you, if you indeed perform
what you have promised priam son of dardanus in return for his
daughter. we too will make you an offer; we will give you the loveliest
daughter of the son of atreus, and will bring her from argos for you to
marry, if you will sack the goodly city of ilius in company with
ourselves; so come along with me, that we may make a covenant at the
ships about the marriage, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 we will not be hard upon you about gifts
of wooing."

with this idomeneus began dragging him by the foot through the thick of
the fight, but asius came up to protect the body, on foot, in front of
his horses which his esquire drove so close behind him that he could
feel their breath upon his shoulder. he was longing to strike down
idomeneus, but ere he could do so idomeneus smote him with his spear in
the throat under the chin, and the bronze point went clean through it.
he fell as an oak, or poplar, or pine which shipwrights have felled for
ship's timber upon the mountains with whetted axes--even thus did he
lie full length in front of his chariot and horses, grinding his teeth
and clutching at the bloodstained dust. his charioteer was struck with
panic and did not dare turn his horses round and escape: thereupon
antilochus hit him in the middle of his body with 
 
 ___________________________
 
a spear; his cuirass
of bronze did not protect him, and the spear stuck in his belly. he
fell gasping from his chariot and antilochus, great nestor's son, drove
his horses from the trojans to the achaeans.

deiphobus then came close up to idomeneus to avenge asius, and took aim
at him with a spear, but idomeneus was on the look-out and avoided it,
for he was covered by the round shield he always bore--a shield of
oxhide and bronze with two arm-rods on the inside. he crouched under
cover of this, and the spear flew over him, but the shield rang out as
the spear grazed it, and the weapon sped not in vain from the strong
hand of deiphobus, for it struck hypsenor son of hippasus, shepherd of
his people, in the liver under the midriff, and his limbs failed
beneath him. deiphobus vaunted over him and cried w
 
 ___________________________
 
 he will be glad
even while passing into the house of hades, strong warden of the gate,
that i have sent some one to escort him."

thus did he vaunt, and the argives were stung by his saying. noble
antilochus was more angry than any one, but grief did not make him
forget his friend and comrade. he ran up to him, bestrode him, and
covered him with his shield; then two of his staunch comrades,
mecisteus son of echius, and alastor, stooped down, and bore him away
groaning heavily to the ships. but idomeneus ceased not his fury. he
kept on striving continually either to enshroud some trojan in the
darkness of death, or himself to fall while warding off the evil day
from the achaeans. then fell alcathous son of noble aesyetes; he was
son-in-law to anchises, having married his eldest daughter hippodameia,
who was the darling of her father and mother, and excelled all her
generation in beauty, accomplishments, and understanding, wherefore the
bravest man in all troy had taken her to wife--him did nept
 
 ___________________________
 
une lay low
by the hand of idomeneus, blinding his bright eyes and binding his
strong limbs in fetters so that he could neither go back nor to one
side, but stood stock still like pillar or lofty tree when idomeneus
struck him with a spear in the middle of his chest. the coat of mail
that had hitherto protected his body was now broken, and rang harshly
as the spear tore through it. he fell heavily to the ground, and the
spear stuck in his heart, which still beat, and made the butt-end of
the spear quiver till dread mars put an end to his life. idomeneus
vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice saying, "deiphobus, since
you are in a mood to vaunt, shall we cry quits now that we have killed
three men to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 end, he deemed it best to go and fetch aeneas,
whom he found standing in the rear, for he had long been aggrieved with
priam because in spite of his brave deeds he did not give him his due
share of honour. deiphobus went up to him and said, "aeneas, prince
among the trojans, if you know any ties of kinship, help me now to
defend the body of your sister's husband; come with me to the rescue of
alcathous, who being husband to your sister brought you up when you
were a child in his house, and now idomeneus has slain him."

with these words he moved the heart of aeneas, and he went in pursuit
of idomeneus, big with great deeds of valour; but idomeneus was not to
be thus daunted as though he were a mere child; he held his ground as a
wild boar at bay upon the mountains, who abides the coming of a great
crowd of men in some lonely place--the bristles stand upright on his
back, his eyes flash fire, and he whets his tusks in his eagerness to
defend himself against hounds and men--even so did famed ido
 
 ___________________________
 
ojans along
with himself, and the people followed them as sheep follow the ram when
they go down to drink after they have been feeding, and the heart of
the shepherd is glad--even so was the heart of aeneas gladdened when he
saw his people follow him.

then they fought furiously in close combat about the body of alcathous,
wielding their long spears; and the bronze armour about their bodies
rang fearfully as they took aim at one another in the press of the
fight, while the two heroes aeneas and idomeneus, peers of mars,
outvied everyone in their desire to hack at each other with sword and
spear. aeneas took aim first, but idomeneus was on the lookout and
avoided the spear, so that it sped from aeneas' strong hand in vain,
and fell quivering in the ground. idomeneus meanwhile smote oenomaus in
the middle of his belly, and broke the plate of his corslet, whereon
his bowels came gushing out and he clutched the earth in the palms of
his hands as he fell sprawling in the dust. idomeneus drew his spe
 
 ___________________________
 
refront of the battle. now, therefore, let us all do as i say;
let us order the main body of our forces to fall back upon the ships,
but let those of us who profess to be the flower of the army stand
firm, and see whether we cannot hold hector back at the point of our
spears as soon as he comes near us; i conceive that he will then think
better of it before he tries to charge into the press of the danaans."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. those who were
about ajax and king idomeneus, the followers moreover of teucer,
meriones, and meges peer of mars called all their best men about them
and sustained the fight against hector and the trojans, but the main
body fell back upon the ships of the achaeans.

the trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with hector striding on at
their head. before him went phoebus apollo shrouded in cloud about his
shoulders. he bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy fringe,
which vulcan the smith had given jove to strike terror into the he
 
 ___________________________
 
 now
they drew their swords. lycon struck the plumed crest of peneleos'
helmet but his sword broke at the hilt, while peneleos smote lycon on
the neck under the ear. the blade sank so deep that the head was held
on by nothing but the skin, and there was no more life left in him.
meriones gave chase to acamas on foot and caught him up just as he was
about to mount his chariot; he drove a spear through his right shoulder
so that he fell headlong from the car, and his eyes were closed in
darkness. idomeneus speared erymas in the mouth; the bronze point of
the spear went clean through it beneath the brain, crashing in among
the white bones and smashing them up. his teeth were all of them
knocked out and the blood came gushing in a stream from both his eyes;
it also came gurgling up from his mouth and nostrils, and the darkness
of death enfolded him round about.

thus did these chieftains of the danaans each of them kill his man. as
ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them when they
 
 ___________________________
 
, "princes and counsellors of the
argives, all you who with agamemnon and menelaus drink at the public
cost, and give orders each to his own people as jove vouchsafes him
power and glory, the fight is so thick about me that i cannot
distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and
think it shame that patroclus should become meat and morsel for trojan
hounds."

fleet ajax son of oileus heard him and was first to force his way
through the fight and run to help him. next came idomeneus and meriones
his esquire, peer of murderous mars. as for the others that came into
the fight after these, who of his own self could name them?

the trojans with hector at their head charged in a body. as a great
wave that comes thundering in at the mouth of some heaven-born river,
and the rocks that jut into the sea ring with the roar of the breakers
that beat and buffet them--even with such a roar did the trojans come
on; but the achaeans in singleness of heart stood firm about the son of
meno
 
 ___________________________
 
ace turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear on the
upper part of the shoulder; a spear thrown by polydamas had grazed the
top of the bone, for polydamas had come up to him and struck him from
close at hand. then hector in close combat struck leitus son of noble
alectryon in the hand by the wrist, and disabled him from fighting
further. he looked about him in dismay, knowing that never again should
he wield spear in battle with the trojans. while hector was in pursuit
of leitus, idomeneus struck him on the breastplate over his chest near
the nipple; but the spear broke in the shaft, and the trojans cheered
aloud. hector then aimed at idomeneus son of deucalion as he was
standing on his chariot, and very narrowly missed him, but the spear
hit coiranus, a follower and charioteer of meriones who had come with
him from lyctus. idomeneus had left the ships on foot and would have
afforded a great triumph to the trojans if coiranus had not driven
quickly up to him, he therefore brought
 
 ___________________________
 
 life and rescue to idomeneus,
but himself fell by the hand of murderous hector. for hector hit him on
the jaw under the ear; the end of the spear drove out his teeth and cut
his tongue in two pieces, so that he fell from his chariot and let the
reins fall to the ground. meriones gathered them up from the ground and
took them into his own hands, then he said to idomeneus, "lay on, till
you get back to the ships, for you must see that the day is no longer
ours."

on this idomeneus lashed the horses to the ships, for fear had taken
hold upon him.

ajax and menelaus noted how jove had turned the scale in favour of the
trojans, and ajax was first to speak. "alas," said he, "even a fool may
see that father jove is helping the trojans. all their weapons strike
home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that hurls them,
jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without
effect. what, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and
our return
 
 ___________________________
 
ined in her lament-making as
though their tears were for patroclus, but in truth each was weeping
for her own sorrows. the elders of the achaeans gathered round achilles
and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. "i
pray you," said he, "if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat
nor drink, for i am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to
the going down of the sun."

on this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of
atreus and ulysses, nestor, idomeneus, and the knight phoenix, who
stayed behind and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow:
but he would not be comforted till he should have flung himself into
the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of
patroclus. then he said--

"hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner
ready for me at once and without delay when the achaeans were hasting
to fight the trojans; now, therefore, though i have meat and drink in
my tents, yet will i fast f
 
 ___________________________
 
on saying, "of a truth even in
the house of hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life in
them; all night long the sad spirit of patroclus has hovered over head
making piteous moan, telling me what i am to do for him, and looking
wondrously like himself."

thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning about
the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. then king
agamemnon sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to bring wood,
and meriones, squire to idomeneus, was in charge over them. they went
out with woodmen's axes and strong ropes in their hands, and before
them went the mules. up hill and down dale did they go, by straight
ways and crooked, and when they reached the heights of many-fountained
ida, they laid their axes to the roots of many a tall branching oak
that came thundering down as they felled it. they split the trees and
bound them behind the mules, which then wended their way as they best
could through the thick brushwood on to the plai
 
 ___________________________
 
n. all who had been
cutting wood bore logs, for so meriones squire to idomeneus had bidden
them, and they threw them down in a line upon the seashore at the place
where achilles would make a mighty monument for patroclus and for
himself.

when they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole
ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but achilles ordered
his brave myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man his
horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted each
his chariot--they and their charioteers with them. the chariots w
 
 ___________________________
 

may you shall not bear away the prize without sworn protest on my part."

then he called on his horses and said to them, "keep your pace, and
slacken not; the limbs of the other horses will weary sooner than
yours, for they are neither of them young."

the horses feared the rebuke of their master, and went faster, so that
they were soon nearly up with the others.

meanwhile the achaeans from their seats were watching how the horses
went, as they scoured the plain amid clouds of their own dust.
idomeneus captain of the cretans was first to make out the running, for
he was not in the thick of the crowd, but stood on the most commanding
part of the ground. the driver was a long way off, but idomeneus could
hear him shouting, and could see the foremost horse quite plainly--a
chestnut with a round white star, like the moon, on its forehead. he
stood up and said among the argives, "my friends, princes and
counsellors of the argives, can you see the running as well as i can?
there seems to be another
 
 ___________________________
 
t find them. perhaps the
reins fell from the driver's hand so that he lost command of his horses
at the doubling-post, and could not turn it. i suppose he must have
been thrown out there, and broken his chariot, while his mares have
left the course and gone off wildly in a panic. come up and see for
yourselves, i cannot make out for certain, but the driver seems an
aetolian by descent, ruler over the argives, brave diomed the son of
tydeus."

ajax the son of oileus took him up rudely and said, "idomeneus, why
should you be in such a hurry to tell us all about it, when the mares
are still so far out upon the plain? you are none of the youngest, nor
your eyes none of the sharpest, but you are always laying down the law.
you have no right to do so, for there are better men here than you are.
eumelus's horses are in front now, as they always have been, and he is
on the chariot holding the reins."

the captain of the cretans was angry, and answered, "ajax you are an
excellent railer, but you have no
 
 ___________________________
 
 judgement, and are wanting in much
else as well, for you have a vile temper. i will wager you a tripod or
cauldron, and agamemnon son of atreus shall decide whose horses are
first. you will then know to your cost."

ajax son of oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there would
have been yet further brawling between them, had not achilles risen in
his place and said, "cease your railing, ajax and idomeneus; it is not
seemly; you would be scandalised if you saw any one else do the like:
sit down and keep your eyes on the horses; they are speeding towards
the winning-post and will be here directly. you will then both of you
know whose horses are first, and whose come after."

as he was speaking, the son of tydeus came driving in, plying his whip
lustily from his shoulder, and his horses stepping high as they flew
over the course. the sand and grit rained thick on the driver, and the
chariot inlaid 
 
 ___________________________
 
aws both the chariot and its master. the end hairs of a horse's tail
touch the tyre of the wheel, and there is never much space between
wheel and horse when the chariot is going; menelaus was no further than
this behind antilochus, though at first he had been a full disc's throw
behind him. he had soon caught him up again, for agamemnon's mare aethe
kept pulling stronger and stronger, so that if the course had been
longer he would have passed him, and there would not even have been a
dead heat. idomeneus's brave squire meriones was about a spear's cast
behind menelaus. his horses were slowest of all, and he was the worst
driver. last of them all came the son of admetus, dragging his chariot
and driving his horses on in front. when achilles saw him he was sorry,
and stood up among the argives saying, "the best man is coming in last.
let us give him a prize for it is reasonable. he shall have the second,
but the first must go to the son of tydeus."

thus did he speak and the others all of them ap
 
 ___________________________
 
ffered a prize of iron for archery--ten double-edged
axes and ten with single edges: he set up a ship's mast, some way off
upon the sands, and with a fine string tied a pigeon to it by the foot;
this was what they were to aim at. "whoever," he said, "can hit the
pigeon shall have all the axes and take them away with him; he who hits
the string without hitting the bird will have taken a worse aim and
shall have the single-edged axes."

then uprose king teucer, and meriones the stalwart squire of idomeneus
rose also, they cast lots in a bronze helmet and the lot of teucer fell
first. he let fly with his arrow forthwith, but he did not promise
hecatombs of firstling lambs to king apollo, and missed his bird, for
apollo foiled his aim; but he hit the string with which the bird was
tied, near its foot; the arrow cut the string clean through so that it
hung down towards the ground, while the bird flew up into the sky, and
the achaeans shouted applause. meriones, who had his arrow ready while
teucer w
 
 ___________________________
 
ing her head and with all her feathers drooping; the life went out
of her, and she fell heavily from the mast. meriones, therefore, took
all ten double-edged axes, while teucer bore off the single-edged ones
to his ships.

then the son of peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had never
been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a pattern of
flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up--to wit the son of
atreus, king of men agamemnon, and meriones, stalwart squire of
idomeneus. but achilles spoke saying, "son of atreus, we know how far
you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take
the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let
us give the spear to meriones; this at least is what i should myself
wish."

king agamemnon assented. so he gave the bronze spear to meriones, and
handed the goodly cauldron to talthybius his esquire.



book xxiv

  priam ransoms the body of hector--hector's funeral.

the assembly now broke up and