 sons of nomion. he came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to
save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant
of aeacus, and achilles bore away his gold.

sarpedon and glaucus led the lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the xanthus.



book iii

  alexandria, also called paris, challenges menelaus--helen and
  priam view the achaeans from the wall--the covenant--paris
  and menelaus fight, and paris is worsted--venus carries him
  off to save him--scene between him and helen.

when the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream
overhead when rain and winter drive them over the flowing waters of
oceanus to bring death and destruction on the pygmies, and they wrangle
in the air as they fly; but the achaeans marched silently, in high
heart, and minded to stand by one another.

as when the south wind spreads a cur
 
 ___________________________
 
then went back to ilius. hector and ulysses measured the ground, and
cast lots from a helmet of bronze to see which should take aim first.
meanwhile the two hosts lifted up their hands and prayed saying,
"father jove, that rulest from ida, most glorious in power, grant that
he who first brought about this war between us may die, and enter the
house of hades, while we others remain at peace and abide by our oaths."

great hector now turned his head aside while he shook the helmet, and
the lot of paris flew out first. the others took their several
stations, each by his horses and the place where his arms were lying,
while alexandrus, husband of lovely helen, put on his goodly armour.
first he greaved his legs with greaves of good make and fitted with
ancle-clasps of silver; after this he donned the cuirass of his brother
lycaon, and fitted it to his own body; he hung his silver-studded sword
of bronze about his shoulders, and then his mighty shield. on his
comely head he set his helmet, well-w
 
 ___________________________
 
exandrus. on this
helen, daughter of aegis-bearing jove, sat down, and with eyes askance
began to upbraid her husband.

"so you are come from the fight," said she; "would that you had fallen
rather by the hand of that brave man who was my husband. you used to
brag that you were a better man with hands and spear than menelaus. go,
then, and challenge him again--but i should advise you not to do so,
for if you are foolish enough to meet him in single combat, you will
soon fall by his spear."

and paris answered, "wife, do not vex me with your reproaches. this
time, with the help of minerva, menelaus has vanquished me; another
time i may myself be victor, for i too have gods that will stand by me.
come, let us lie down together and make friends. never yet was i so
passionately enamoured of you as at this moment--not even when i first
carried you off from lacedaemon and sailed away with you--not even when
i had converse with you upon the couch of love in the island of cranae
was i so enthralled 
 
 ___________________________
 
poil; there, upon the
knees of minerva, lay the largest and fairest robe you have in your
house--the one you set most store by; promise, moreover, to sacrifice
twelve yearling heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the
temple of the goddess if she will take pity on the town, with the wives
and little ones of the trojans, and keep the son of tydeus from off the
goodly city of ilius, for he fights with fury, and fills men's souls
with panic. go, then, to the temple of minerva, while i seek paris and
exhort him, if he will hear my words. would that the earth might open
her jaws and swallow him, for jove bred him to be the bane of the
trojans, and of priam and priam's sons. could i but see him go down
into the house of hades, my heart would forget its heaviness."

his mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who
gathered the matrons throughout the city. she then went down into her
fragrant store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept, the work of
sidonian women, whom a
 
 ___________________________
 
r is man's matter, and mine above all others of
them that have been born in ilius."

he took his plumed helmet from the ground, and his wife went back again
to her house, weeping bitterly and often looking back towards him. when
she reached her home she found her maidens within, and bade them all
join in her lament; so they mourned hector in his own house though he
was yet alive, for they deemed that they should never see him return
safe from battle, and from the furious hands of the achaeans.

paris did not remain long in his house. he donned his goodly armour
overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast as his feet
could take him. as a horse, stabled and fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to bathe in the
fair-flowing river--he holds his head high, and his mane streams upon
his shoulders as he exults in his strength and flies like the wind to
the haunts and feeding ground of the mares--even so went forth paris
from high pergamu
 
 ___________________________
 
e as i say."

he then sat down and alexandrus husband of lovely helen rose to speak.
"antenor," said he, "your words are not to my liking; you can find a
better saying than this if you will; if, however, you have spoken in
good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason. i will
speak plainly, and hereby notify to the trojans that i will not give up
the woman; but the wealth that i brought home with her from argos i
will restore, and will add yet further of my own."

on this, when paris had spoken and taken his seat, priam of the race of
dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: "hear me, trojans, dardanians, and
allies, that i may speak even as i am minded. get your suppers now as
hitherto throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful. at
daybreak let idaeus go to the ships, and tell agamemnon and menelaus
sons of atreus the saying of alexandrus through whom this quarrel has
come about; and let him also be inst
 
 ___________________________
 
all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. after they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

and now as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, jove sent fierce discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships o
 
 ___________________________
 
reafter, if there is any god who
will stand by me too and be my helper. for the present i must pursue
those i can lay hands on."

as he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of paeon, but
alexandrus husband of lovely helen aimed an arrow at him, leaning
against a pillar of the monument which men had raised to ilus son of
dardanus, a ruler in days of old. diomed had taken the cuirass from off
the breast of agastrophus, his heavy helmet also, and the shield from
off his shoulders, when paris drew his bow and let fly an arrow that
sped not from his hand in vain, but pierced the flat of diomed's right
foot, going right through it and fixing itself in the ground. thereon
paris with a hearty laugh sprang forward from his hiding-place, and
taunted him saying, "you are wounded--my arrow has not been shot in
vain; would that it had hit you in the belly and killed you, for thus
the trojans, who fear you as goats fear a lion, would have had a truce
from evil."

diomed all undaunted answered,
 
 ___________________________
 
 pierced the bone through and
through, and penetrated the bladder, so he sat down where he was and
breathed his last in the arms of his comrades, stretched like a worm
upon the ground and watering the earth with the blood that flowed from
his wound. the brave paphlagonians tended him with all due care; they
raised him into his chariot, and bore him sadly off to the city of
troy; his father went also with him weeping bitterly, but there was no
ransom that could bring his dead son to life again.

paris was deeply grieved by the death of harpalion, who was his host
when he went among the paphlagonians; he aimed an arrow, therefore, in
order to avenge him. now there was a certain man named euchenor, son of
polyidus the prophet, a brave man and wealthy, whose home was in
corinth. this euchenor had set sail for troy well knowing that it would
be the death of him, for his good old father polyidus had often told
him that he must either stay at home and die of a terrible disease, or
go with the achae
 
 ___________________________
 
ans and perish at the hands of the trojans; he chose,
therefore, to avoid incurring the heavy fine the achaeans would have
laid upon him, and at the same time to escape the pain and suffering of
disease. paris now smote him on the jaw under his ear, whereon the life
went out of him and he was enshrouded in the darkness of death.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. but hector had not
yet heard, and did not know that the argives were making havoc of his
men on the left wing of the battle, where the achaeans ere long would
have triumphed over them, so vigorously did neptune cheer them on and
help them. he therefore held on at the point where he had first forced
his way through the gates 
 
 ___________________________
 
fold ransom and weigh it out for me on the
spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. though priam son of dardanus
should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall
never lay you out and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and
vultures shall eat you utterly up."

hector with his dying breath then said, "i know you what you are, and
was sure that i should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron;
look to it that i bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day when
paris and phoebus apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the
scaean gates."

when he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his
soul went out of him and flew down to the house of hades, lamenting its
sad fate that it should enjoy youth and strength no longer. but
achilles said, speaking to the dead body, "die; for my part i will
accept my fate whensoever jove and the other gods see fit to send it."

as he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side;
then he