ach other on to
draw the ships into the sea; they cleared the channels in front of
them; they began taking away the stays from underneath them, and the
welkin rang with their glad cries, so eager were they to return.

then surely the argives would have returned after a fashion that was
not fated. but juno said to minerva, "alas, daughter of aegis-bearing
jove, unweariable, shall the argives fly home to their own land over
the broad sea, and leave priam and the trojans the glory of still
keeping helen, for whose sake so many of the achaeans have died at
troy, far from their homes? go about at once among the host, and speak
fairly to them, man by man, that they draw not their ships into the
sea."

minerva was not slack to do her bidding. down she darted from the
topmost summits of olympus, and in a moment she was at the ships of the
achaeans. there she found ulysses, peer of jove in counsel, standing
alone. he had not as yet laid a hand upon his ship, for he was grieved
and sorry; so she went
 
 ___________________________
 
 close up to him and said, "ulysses, noble son of
laertes, are you going to fling yourselves into your ships and be off
home to your own land in this way? will you leave priam and the trojans
the glory of still keeping helen, for whose sake so many of the
achaeans have died at troy, far from their homes? go about at once
among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by man, that they draw
not their ships into the sea."

ulysses knew the voice as that of the goddess: he flung his cloak from
him and set off to run. his servant eurybates, a man of ithaca, who
waited on him, took charge of the cloak, whereon ulysses went straight
up to agamemnon and received from him his ancestral, imperishable
staff. with this he went
 
 ___________________________
 
 of men to rot, who scheme, and scheme in vain, to get back to
argos ere they have learned whether jove be true or a liar. for the
mighty son of saturn surely promised that we should succeed, when we
argives set sail to bring death and destruction upon the trojans. he
showed us favourable signs by flashing his lightning on our right
hands; therefore let none make haste to go till he has first lain with
the wife of some trojan, and avenged the toil and sorrow that he has
suffered for the sake of helen. nevertheless, if any man is in such
haste to be at home again, let him lay his hand to his ship that he may
meet his doom in the sight of all. but, o king, consider and give ear
to my counsel, for the word that i say may not be neglected lightly.
divide your men, agamemnon, into their several tribes and clans, that
clans and tribes may stand by and help one another. if you do this, and
if the achaeans obey you, you will find out who, both chiefs and
peoples, are brave, and who are cowards; for
 
 ___________________________
 
n under him.

and those that dwelt in lacedaemon, lying low among the hills, pharis,
sparta, with messe the haunt of doves; bryseae, augeae, amyclae, and
helos upon the sea; laas, moreover, and oetylus; these were led by
menelaus of the loud battle-cry, brother to agamemnon, and of them
there were sixty ships, drawn up apart from the others. among them went
menelaus himself, strong in zeal, urging his men to fight; for he
longed to avenge the toil and sorrow that he had suffered for the sake
of helen.

the men of pylos and arene, and thryum where is the ford of the river
alpheus; strong aipy, cyparisseis, and amphigenea; pteleum, helos, and
dorium, where the muses met thamyris, and stilled his minstrelsy for
ever. he was returning from oechalia, where eurytus lived and reigned,
and boasted that he would surpass even the muses, daughters of
aegis-bearing jove, if they should sing against him; whereon they were
angry, and maimed him. they robbed him of his divine power of song, and
thencefort
 
 ___________________________
 
der
and the lofty crests of mt. mycale. these were commanded by nastes and
amphimachus, the brave sons of nomion. he came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to
save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant
of aeacus, and achilles bore away his gold.

sarpedon and glaucus led the lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the xanthus.



book iii

  alexandria, also called paris, challenges menelaus--helen and
  priam view the achaeans from the wall--the covenant--paris
  and menelaus fight, and paris is worsted--venus carries him
  off to save him--scene between him and helen.

when the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream
overhead when rain and winter drive them over the flowing waters of
oceanus to bring death and destruction on the pygmies, and they wrangle
in the air as they fly; but the achaeans marched 
 
 ___________________________
 
s just. you are hard as
the axe which a shipwright wields at his work, and cleaves the timber
to his liking. as the axe in his hand, so keen is the edge of your
scorn. still, taunt me not with the gifts that golden venus has given
me; they are precious; let not a man disdain them, for the gods give
them where they are minded, and none can have them for the asking. if
you would have me do battle with menelaus, bid the trojans and achaeans
take their seats, while he and i fight in their midst for helen and all
her wealth. let him who shall be victorious and prove to be the better
man take the woman and all she has, to bear them to his home, but let
the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace whereby you trojans shall
stay here in troy, while the others go home to argos and the land of
the achaeans."

when hector heard this he was glad, and went about among the trojan
ranks holding his spear by the middle to keep them back, and they all
sat down at his bidding: but the achaeans still aimed at
 
 ___________________________
 
 him with
stones and arrows, till agamemnon shouted to them saying, "hold,
argives, shoot not, sons of the achaeans; hector desires to speak."

they ceased taking aim and were still, whereon hector spoke. "hear from
my mouth," said he, "trojans and achaeans, the saying of alexandrus,
through whom this quarrel has come about. he bids the trojans and
achaeans lay their armour upon the ground, while he and menelaus fight
in the midst of you for helen and all her wealth. let him who shall be
victorious and prove to be the better man take the woman and all she
has, to bear them to his own home, but let the rest swear to a solemn
covenant of peace."

thus he spoke, and they all held their peace, till menelaus of the loud
battle-cry addressed them. "and now," he said, "hear me too, for it is
i who am the most aggrieved. i deem that the parting of achaeans and
trojans is at hand, as well it may be, seeing how much have suffered
for my quarrel wi
 
 ___________________________
 
s and achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they
thought that they should now have rest. they backed their chariots
toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying it
down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a
little space between them. hector sent two messengers to the city to
bring the lambs and to bid priam come, while agamemnon told talthybius
to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as agamemnon had
said.

meanwhile iris went to helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of
the son of antenor, for helicaon, son of antenor, had married laodice,
the fairest of priam's daughters. she found her in her own room,
working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering
the battles between trojans and achaeans, that mars had made them fight
for her sake. iris then came close up to her and said, "come hither,
child, and see the strange doings of the trojans and achaeans. till now
they have been warring upon the plain,
 
 ___________________________
 
 mad with lust of battle, but now
they have left off fighting, and are leaning upon their shields,
sitting still with their spears planted beside them. alexandrus and
menelaus are going to fight about yourself, and you are to be the wife
of him who is the victor."

thus spoke the goddess, and helen's heart yearned after her former
husband, her city, and her parents. she threw a white mantle over her
head, and hurried from her room, weeping as she went, not alone, but
attended by two of her handmaids, aethrae, daughter of pittheus, and
clymene. and straightway they were at the scaean gates.

the two sages, ucalegon and antenor, elders of the people, were seated
by the scaean gates, with priam, panthous, thymoetes, lampus, clytius,
and hiketaon of the race of mars. these were too old to fig
 
 ___________________________
 
ht, but they
were fluent orators, and sat on the tower like cicales that chirrup
delicately from the boughs of some high tree in a wood. when they saw
helen coming towards the tower, they said softly to one another, "small
wonder that trojans and achaeans should endure so much and so long, for
the sake of a woman so marvellously and divinely lovely. still, fair
though she be, let them take her and go, or she will breed sorrow for
us and for our children after us."

but priam bade her draw nigh. "my child," said he, "take your seat in
front of me that you may see your former husband, your kinsmen and your
friends. i lay no blame upon you, it is the 
 
 ___________________________
 
gods, not you who are to
blame. it is they that have brought about this terrible war with the
achaeans. tell me, then, who is yonder huge hero so great and goodly? i
have seen men taller by a head, but none so comely and so royal. surely
he must be a king."

"sir," answered helen, "father of my husband, dear and reverend in my
eyes, would that i had chosen death rather than to have come here with
your son, far from my bridal chamber, my friends, my darling daughter,
and all the companions of my girlhood. but it was not to be, and my lot
is one of tears and sorrow. as for your question, the hero of whom you
ask is agamemnon, son of atreus, a good king and a brave soldier,
brother-in-law as surely as that he lives, to my abhorred and miserable
self."

the old man marvelle
 
 ___________________________
 
otreus and of mygdon, who were camping upon the banks of the river
sangarius; i was their ally, and with them when the amazons, peers of
men, came up against them, but even they were not so many as the
achaeans."

the old man next looked upon ulysses; "tell me," he said, "who is that
other, shorter by a head than agamemnon, but broader across the chest
and shoulders? his armour is laid upon the ground, and he stalks in
front of the ranks as it were some great woolly ram ordering his ewes."

and helen answered, "he is ulysses, a man of great craft, son of
laertes. he was born in rugged ithaca, and excels in all manner of
stratagems and subtle cunning."

on this antenor said, "madam, you have spoken truly. ulysses once came
here as envoy about yourself, and menelaus with him. i received them in
my own house, and therefore know both of them by sight and
conversation. when they stood up in presence of the assembled trojans,
menelaus was the broader shouldered, but when both were seated ulysses

 
 ___________________________
 
his sceptre; he kept it straight and stiff like a man unpractised in
oratory--one might have taken him for a mere churl or simpleton; but
when he raised his voice, and the words came driving from his deep
chest like winter snow before the wind, then there was none to touch
him, and no man thought further of what he looked like."

priam then caught sight of ajax and asked, "who is that great and
goodly warrior whose head and broad shoulders tower above the rest of
the argives?"

"that," answered helen, "is huge ajax, bulwark of the achaeans, and on
the other side of him, among the cretans, stands idomeneus looking like
a god, and with the captains of the cretans round him. often did
menelaus receive him as a guest in our house when he came visiting us
from crete. i see, moreover, many other achaeans whose names i could
tell you, but there are two whom i can nowhere find, castor, breaker of
horses, and pollux the mighty boxer; they are children of my mother,
and own brothers to myself. either
 
 ___________________________
 
pon them."

she knew not that both these heroes were already lying under the earth
in their own land of lacedaemon.

meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy oath-offerings through the
city--two lambs and a goatskin of wine, the gift of earth; and idaeus
brought the mixing bowl and the cups of gold. he went up to priam and
said, "son of laomedon, the princes of the trojans and achaeans bid you
come down on to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant. alexandrus
and menelaus are to fight for helen in single combat, that she and all
her wealth may go with him who is the victor. we are to swear to a
solemn covenant of peace whereby we others shall dwell here in troy,
while the achaeans return to argos and the land of the achaeans."

the old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the
horses, and they made all haste to do so. he mounted the chariot,
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor took his seat beside him;
they then drove through the scaean gates on to the plain. w
 
 ___________________________
 
is sword, and cut wool from the lambs' heads; this
the men-servants gave about among the trojan and achaean princes, and
the son of atreus lifted up his hands in prayer. "father jove," he
cried, "that rulest in ida, most glorious in power, and thou oh sun,
that seest and givest ear to all things, earth and rivers, and ye who
in the realms below chastise the soul of him that has broken his oath,
witness these rites and guard them, that they be not vain. if
alexandrus kills menelaus, let him keep helen and all her wealth, while
we sail home with our ships; but if menelaus kills alexandrus, let the
trojans give back helen and all that she has; let them moreover pay
such fine to the achaeans as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among
those that shall be born hereafter. and if priam and his sons refuse
such fine when alexandrus has fallen, then will i stay here and fight
on till i have got satisfaction."

as he spoke he drew his knife across the throats of the victims, and
laid them down gaspin
 
 ___________________________
 
osts lifted up their hands and prayed saying,
"father jove, that rulest from ida, most glorious in power, grant that
he who first brought about this war between us may die, and enter the
house of hades, while we others remain at peace and abide by our oaths."

great hector now turned his head aside while he shook the helmet, and
the lot of paris flew out first. the others took their several
stations, each by his horses and the place where his arms were lying,
while alexandrus, husband of lovely helen, put on his goodly armour.
first he greaved his legs with greaves of good make and fitted with
ancle-clasps of silver; after this he donned the cuirass of his brother
lycaon, and fitted it to his own body; he hung his silver-studded sword
of bronze about his shoulders, and then his mighty shield. on his
comely head he set his helmet, well-wrought, with a crest of horse-hair
that nodded menacingly above it, and he grasped a redoubtable spear
that suited his hands. in like fashion menelaus also p
 
 ___________________________
 
r his chin was choking him, and menelaus would
have dragged him off to his own great glory had not jove's daughter
venus been quick to mark and to break the strap of oxhide, so that the
empty helmet came away in his hand. this he flung to his comrades among
the achaeans, and was again springing upon alexandrus to run him
through with a spear, but venus snatched him up in a moment (as a god
can do), hid him under a cloud of darkness, and conveyed him to his own
bedchamber.

then she went to call helen, and found her on a high tower with the
trojan women crowding round her. she took the form of an old woman who
used to dress wool for her when she was still in lacedaemon, and of
whom she was very fond. thus disguised she plucked her by perfumed robe
and said, "come hither; alexandrus says you are to go to the house; he
is on his bed in his own room, radiant with beauty and dressed in
gorgeous apparel. no one would think he had just come from fighting,
but rather that he was going to a dance, o
 
 ___________________________
 
r had done dancing and was
sitting down."

with these words she moved the heart of helen to anger. when she marked
the beautiful neck of the goddess, her lovely bosom, and sparkling
eyes, she marvelled at her and said, "goddess, why do you thus beguile
me? are you going to send me afield still further to some man whom you
have taken up in phrygia or fair meonia? menelaus has just vanquished
alexandrus, and is to take my hateful self back with him. you are come
here to betray me. go sit with alexandrus yourself; henceforth be
goddess no longer; never let your feet carry you back to 
 
 ___________________________
 
s; worry
about him and look after him till he make you his wife, or, for the
matter of that, his slave--but me? i shall not go; i can garnish his
bed no longer; i should be a by-word among all the women of troy.
besides, i have trouble on my mind."

venus was very angry, and said, "bold hussy, do not provoke me; if you
do, i shall leave you to your fate and hate you as much as i have loved
you. i will stir up fierce hatred between trojans and achaeans, and you
shall come to a bad end."

at this helen was frightened. she wrapped her mantle about her and went
in silence, following the goddess and unnoticed by the trojan women.

when they came to the house of alexandrus the maid-servants set about
their work, but helen went into her own room, and the laughter-loving
goddess took a seat and set it for her facing alexandrus. on this
helen, daughter of aegis-bearing jove, sat down, and with eyes askance
began to upbraid her husband.

"so you are come from the fight," said she; "would that you had
 
 ___________________________
 
towards the bed, and his wife went with him.

thus they laid themselves on the bed together; but the son of atreus
strode among the throng, looking everywhere for alexandrus, and no man,
neither of the trojans nor of the allies, could find him. if they had
seen him they were in no mind to hide him, for they all of them hated
him as they did death itself. then agamemnon, king of men, spoke,
saying, "hear me, trojans, dardanians, and allies. the victory has been
with menelaus; therefore give back helen with all her wealth, and pay
such fine as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among them that shall
be born hereafter."

thus spoke the son of atreus, and the achaeans shouted in applause.



book iv

  a quarrel in olympus--minerva goes down and persuades fandarus
  to violate the oaths by wounding menelaus with an arrow--agamemnon
  makes a speech and sends for machaon--he then
  goes about among his captains and upbraids ulysses and
  sthenelus, who each of them retort fiercely--diomed checks
 
 ___________________________
 
aus," said he, "has two good friends
among the goddesses, juno of argos, and minerva of alalcomene, but they
only sit still and look on, while venus keeps ever by alexandrus' side
to defend him in any danger; indeed she has just rescued him when he
made sure that it was all over with him--for the victory really did lie
with menelaus. we must consider what we shall do about all this; shall
we set them fighting anew or make peace between them? if you will agree
to this last menelaus can take back helen and the city of priam may
remain still inhabited."

minerva and juno muttered their discontent as they sat side by side
hatching mischief for the trojans. minerva scowled at her father, for
she was in a furious passion with him, and said nothing, but juno could
not contain herself. "dread son of saturn," said she, "what, pray, is
the meaning of all this? is my trouble, then, to go for nothing, and
the sweat that i have sweated, to say nothing of my horses, while
getting the people together agai
 
 ___________________________
 
heir lives and
with their wives and children. the day will surely come when mighty
ilius shall be laid low, with priam and priam's people, when the son of
saturn from his high throne shall overshadow them with his awful aegis
in punishment of their present treachery. this shall surely be; but
how, menelaus, shall i mourn you, if it be your lot now to die? i
should return to argos as a by-word, for the achaeans will at once go
home. we shall leave priam and the trojans the glory of still keeping
helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie here at troy with
your purpose not fulfilled. then shall some braggart trojan leap upon
your tomb and say, 'ever thus may agamemnon wreak his vengeance; he
brought his army in vain; he is gone home to his own land with empty
ships, and has left menelaus behind him.' thus will one of them say,
and may the earth then swallow me."

but menelaus reassured him and said, "take heart, and do not alarm the
people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal par
 
 ___________________________
 
 it played upon him gave him new life, and
brought him out of the deep swoon into which he had fallen.

meanwhile the argives were neither driven towards their ships by mars
and hector, nor yet did they attack them; when they knew that mars was
with the trojans they retreated, but kept their faces still turned
towards the foe. who, then, was first and who last to be slain by mars
and hector? they were valiant teuthras, and orestes the renowned
charioteer, trechus the aetolian warrior, oenomaus, helenus the son of
oenops, and oresbius of the gleaming girdle, who was possessed of great
wealth, and dwelt by the cephisian lake with the other boeotians who
lived near him, owners of a fertile country.

now when the goddess juno saw the argives thus falling, she said to
minerva, "alas, daughter of aegis-bearing jove, unweariable, the
promise we made menelaus that he should not return till he had sacked
the city of ilius will be of no effect if we let mars rage thus
furiously. let us go into the fr
 
 ___________________________
 
is foot upon his breast to draw his spear from the body.

meanwhile nestor shouted to the argives, saying, "my friends, danaan
warriors, servants of mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead,
and bring back much booty to the ships. let us kill as many as we can;
the bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them later at
your leisure."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. and now the
trojans would have been routed and driven back into ilius, had not
priam's son helenus, wisest of augurs, said to hector and aeneas,
"hector and aeneas, you two are the mainstays of the trojans and
lycians, for you are foremost at all times, alike in fight and counsel;
hold your ground here, and go about among the host to rally them in
front of the gates, or they will fling themselves into the arms of
their wives, to the great joy of our foes. then, when you have put
heart into all our companies, we will stand firm here and fight the
danaans however hard they press us, for ther
 
 ___________________________
 
e bred him to be the bane of the
trojans, and of priam and priam's sons. could i but see him go down
into the house of hades, my heart would forget its heaviness."

his mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who
gathered the matrons throughout the city. she then went down into her
fragrant store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept, the work of
sidonian women, whom alexandrus had brought over from sidon when he
sailed the seas upon that voyage during which he carried off helen.
hecuba took out the largest robe, and the one that was most beautifully
enriched with embroidery, as an offering to minerva: it glittered like
a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. with this she went on
her way and many matrons with her.

when they reached the temple of minerva, lovely theano, daughter of
cisseus and wife of antenor, opened the doors, for the trojans had made
her priestess of minerva. the women lifted up their hands to the
goddess with a loud cry, and theano took th
 
 ___________________________
 
house of alexandrus, which he had built for him by the
foremost builders in the land. they had built him his house,
storehouse, and courtyard near those of priam and hector on the
acropolis. here hector entered, with a spear eleven cubits long in his
hand; the bronze point gleamed in front of him, and was fastened to the
shaft of the spear by a ring of gold. he found alexandrus within the
house, busied about his armour, his shield and cuirass, and handling
his curved bow; there, too, sat argive helen with her women, setting
them their several tasks; and as hector saw him he rebuked him with
words of scorn. "sir," said he, "you do ill to nurse this rancour; the
people perish fighting round this our town; you would yourself chide
one whom you saw shirking his part in the combat. up then, or ere long
the city will be in a blaze."

and alexandrus answered, "hector, your rebuke is just; listen
therefore, and believe me when i tell you that i am not here so much
through rancour or ill-will toward
 
 ___________________________
 
s the trojans, as from a desire to
indulge my grief. my wife was even now gently urging me to battle, and
i hold it better that i should go, for victory is ever fickle. wait,
then, while i put on my armour, or go first and i will follow. i shall
be sure to overtake you."

hector made no answer, but helen tried to soothe him. "brother," said
she, "to my abhorred and sinful self, would that a whirlwind had caught
me up on the day my mother brought me forth, and had borne me to some
mountain or to the waves of the roaring sea that should have swept me
away ere this mischief had come about. but, since the gods have devised
these evils, would, at any rate, that i had been wife to a better
man--to one who could smart under dishonour and men's evil speeches.
this fellow was never yet to be depended up
 
 ___________________________
 
on, nor never will be, and
he will surely reap what he has sown. still, brother, come in and rest
upon this seat, for it is you who bear the brunt of that toil that has
been caused by my hateful self and by the sin of alexandrus--both of
whom jove has doomed to be a theme of song among those that shall be
born hereafter."

and hector answered, "bid me not be seated, helen, for all the goodwill
you bear me. i cannot stay. i am in haste to help the trojans, who miss
me greatly when i am not among them; but urge your husband, and of his
own self also let him make haste to overtake me before i am out of the
city. i must go home to see my household, my wife and my little son,
for i know not whether i shall ever again return to them, or whether
the gods will cause me to fill by the hands of the achaeans."

then hector left her, and forthwith was at his own house. he d
 
 ___________________________
 
hey compass the doom of ilius,
since you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city."

and minerva answered, "so be it, far-darter; it was in this mind that i
came down from olympus to the trojans and achaeans. tell me, then, how
do you propose to end this present fighting?"

apollo, son of jove, replied, "let us incite great hector to challenge
some one of the danaans in single combat; on this the achaeans will be
shamed into finding a man who will fight him."

minerva assented, and helenus son of priam divined the counsel of the
gods; he therefore went up to hector and said, "hector son of priam,
peer of gods in counsel, i am your brother, let me then persuade you.
bid the other trojans and achaeans all of them take their seats, and
challenge the best man among the achaeans to meet you in single combat.
i have heard the voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your
doom is not yet come."

hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the
trojans, grasping h
 
 ___________________________
 
ere may be a way through them for
our chariots. close outside we will dig a deep trench all round it to
keep off both horse and foot, that the trojan chieftains may not bear
hard upon us."

thus he spoke, and the princess shouted in applause. meanwhile the
trojans held a council, angry and full of discord, on the acropolis by
the gates of king priam's palace; and wise antenor spoke. "hear me," he
said, "trojans, dardanians, and allies, that i may speak even as i am
minded. let us give up argive helen and her wealth to the sons of
atreus, for we are now fighting in violation of our solemn covenants,
and shall not prosper till we have done as i say."

he then sat down and alexandrus husband of lovely helen rose to speak.
"antenor," said he, "your words are not to my liking; you can find a
better saying than this if you will; if, however, you have spoken in
good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason. i will
speak plainly, and hereby notify to the trojans that i will not giv
 
 ___________________________
 
would that he had sooner perished--he will restore, and will add
yet further of his own, but he will not give up the wedded wife of
menelaus, though the trojans would have him do so. priam bade me
inquire further if you will cease fighting till we burn our dead;
hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give
victory to one or to the other."

they all held their peace, but presently diomed of the loud war-cry
spoke, saying, "let there be no taking, neither treasure, nor yet
helen, for even a child may see that the doom of the trojans is at
hand."

the sons of the achaeans shouted applause at the words that diomed had
spoken, and thereon king agamemnon said to idaeus, "idaeus, you have
heard the answer the achaeans make you-and i with them. but as
concerning the dead, i give you leave to burn them, for when men are
once dead there should be no grudging them the rites of fire. let jove
the mighty husband of juno be witness to this covenant."

as he spoke he upheld his sce
 
 ___________________________
 
aeans settled down upon the ground, while that of the trojans rose
heavenwards. then he thundered aloud from ida, and sent the glare of
his lightning upon the achaeans; when they saw this, pale fear fell
upon them and they were sore afraid.

idomeneus dared not stay nor yet agamemnon, nor did the two ajaxes,
servants of mars, hold their ground. nestor knight of gerene alone
stood firm, bulwark of the achaeans, not of his own will, but one of
his horses was disabled. alexandrus husband of lovely helen had hit it
with an arrow just on the top of its head where the mane begins to grow
away from the skull, a very deadly place. the horse bounded in his
anguish as the arrow pierced his brain, and his struggles threw others
into confusion. the old man instantly began cutting the traces with his
sword, but hector's fleet horses bore down upon him through the rout
with their bold charioteer, even hector himself, and the old man would
have perished there and then had not diomed been quick to mark, an
 
 ___________________________
 
y. i will
give him these, and with them her whom i erewhile took from him, the
daughter of briseus; and i swear a great oath that i never went up into
her couch, nor have been with her after the manner of men and women.

"all these things will i give him now, and if hereafter the gods
vouchsafe me to sack the city of priam, let him come when we achaeans
are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to his
liking; furthermore let him take twenty trojan women, the loveliest
after helen herself. then, when we reach achaean argos, wealthiest of
all lands, he shall be my son-in-law and i will show him like honour
with my own dear son orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. i
have three daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa, let him
take the one of his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the
house of peleus; i will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave
his daughter, and will give him seven well established cities,
cardamyle, enope, and hire
 
 ___________________________
 
uty. he will give you these, and with them
her whom he erewhile took from you, the daughter of briseus, and he
will swear a great oath, he has never gone up into her couch nor been
with her after the manner of men and women. all these things will he
give you now down, and if hereafter the gods vouchsafe him to sack the
city of priam, you can come when we achaeans are dividing the spoil,
and load your ship with gold and bronze to your liking. you can take
twenty trojan women, the loveliest after helen herself. then, when we
reach achaean argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his
son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear son
orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. agamemnon has three
daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa; you may take the one
of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of
peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his
daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities, cardamyle,
e
 
 ___________________________
 
e all up to agamemnon son of atreus. he stayed where he was by his
ships, yet of what came to him he gave little, and kept much himself.

"nevertheless he did distribute some meeds of honour among the
chieftains and kings, and these have them still; from me alone of the
achaeans did he take the woman in whom i delighted--let him keep her
and sleep with her. why, pray, must the argives needs fight the
trojans? what made the son of atreus gather the host and bring them?
was it not for the sake of helen? are the sons of atreus the only men
in the world who love their wives? any man of common right feeling will
love and cherish her who is his own, as i this woman, with my whole
heart, though she was but a fruitling of my spear. agamemnon has taken
her from me; he has played me false; i know him; let him tempt me no
further, for he shall not move me. let him look to you, ulysses, and to
the other princes to save his ships from burning. he has done much
without me already. he has built a wall; he
 
 ___________________________
 
r tender life while he on his way back to his lair--the hind can do
nothing for them even though she be close by, for she is in an agony of
fear, and flies through the thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost
speed before the mighty monster--so, no man of the trojans could help
isus and antiphus, for they were themselves flying in panic before the
argives.

then king agamemnon took the two sons of antimachus, pisander and brave
hippolochus. it was antimachus who had been foremost in preventing
helen's being restored to menelaus, for he was largely bribed by
alexandrus; and now agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same
chariot, trying to bring their horses to a stand--for they had lost
hold of the reins and the horses were mad with fear. the son of atreus
sprang upon them like a lion, and the pair besought him from their
chariot. "take us alive," they cried, "son of atreus, and you shall
receive a great ransom for us. our father antimachus has great store of
gold, bronze, and wrought ir
 
 ___________________________
 
 saved his life. but diomed
made at him with his spear and said, "dog, you have again got away
though death was close on your heels. phoebus apollo, to whom i ween
you pray ere you go into battle, has again saved you, nevertheless i
will meet you and make an end of you hereafter, if there is any god who
will stand by me too and be my helper. for the present i must pursue
those i can lay hands on."

as he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of paeon, but
alexandrus husband of lovely helen aimed an arrow at him, leaning
against a pillar of the monument which men had raised to ilus son of
dardanus, a ruler in days of old. diomed had taken the cuirass from off
the breast of agastrophus, his heavy helmet also, and the shield from
off his shoulders, when paris drew his bow and let fly an arrow that
sped not from his hand in vain, but pierced the flat of diomed's right
foot, going right through it and fixing itself in the ground. thereon
paris with a hearty laugh sprang forward from h
 
 ___________________________
 
riously over
the plain, slaying both men and horses.

hector did not yet know what ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river scamander, where
the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round nestor and brave
idomeneus. among these hector was making great slaughter with his spear
and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to
him; still the achaeans would have given no ground, had not alexandrus
husband of lovely helen stayed the prowess of machaon, shepherd of his
people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed
arrow. the achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned
against them the trojans might take him prisoner, and idomeneus said to
nestor, "nestor son of neleus, honour to the achaean name, mount your
chariot at once; take machaon with you and drive your horses to the
ships as fast as you can. a physician is worth more than several other
men put together, for he can cut out
 
 ___________________________
 
 hold them ready for him at the trench. then
they formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in
five bodies followed their leaders. those that went with hector and
polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined
to break through the wall and fight at the ships. cebriones was also
joined with them as third in command, for hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man 
 
 ___________________________
 
ut meriones followed after and hit him with a spear midway between the
private parts and the navel, where a wound is particularly painful to
wretched mortals. there did meriones transfix him, and he writhed
convulsively about the spear as some bull whom mountain herdsmen have
bound with ropes of withes and are taking away perforce. even so did he
move convulsively for a while, but not for very long, till meriones
came up and drew the spear out of his body, and his eyes were veiled in
darkness.

helenus then struck deipyrus with a great thracian sword, hitting him
on the temple in close combat and tearing the helmet from his head; the
helmet fell to the ground, and one of those who were fighting on the
achaean side took charge of it as it rolled at his feet, but the eyes
of deipyrus were closed in the darkness of death.

on this menelaus was grieved, and made menacingly towards helenus,
brandishing his spear; but helenus drew his bow, and the two attacked
one another at one and the same mome
 
 ___________________________
 
nt, the one with his spear, and the
other with his bow and arrow. the son of priam hit the breastplate of
menelaus's corslet, but the arrow glanced from off it. as black beans
or pulse come pattering down on to a threshing-floor from the broad
winnowing-shovel, blown by shrill winds and shaken by the shovel--even
so did the arrow glance off and recoil from the shield of menelaus, who
in his turn wounded the hand with which helenus carried his bow; the
spear went right through his hand and stuck in the bow itself, so that
to his life he retreated under cover of his men, with his hand dragging
by his side--for the spear weighed it down till agenor drew it out and
bound the hand carefully up in a woollen sling which his esquire had
with him.

pisander then made straight at menelaus--his evil destiny luring him on
to his doom, for he was to fall in fight with you, o menelaus. when the
two were hard by one another the spear
 
 ___________________________
 
ang in
full armour from his chariot and said, "polydamas, gather the
chieftains here; i will go yonder into the fight, but will return at
once when i have given them their orders."

he then sped onward, towering like a snowy mountain, and with a loud
cry flew through the ranks of the trojans and their allies. when they
heard his voice they all hastened to gather round polydamas, the
excellent son of panthous, but hector kept on among the foremost,
looking everywhere to find deiphobus and prince helenus, adamas son of
asius, and asius son of hyrtacus; living, indeed, and scatheless he
could no longer find them, for the two last were lying by the sterns of
the achaean ships, slain by the argives, while the others had been also
stricken and wounded by them; but upon the left wing of the dread
battle he found alexandrus, husband of lovely helen, cheering his men
and urging them on to fight. he went up to him and upbraided him.
"paris," said he, "evil-hearted paris, fair to see but woman-mad and
 
 ___________________________
 

false of tongue, where are deiphobus and king helenus? where are adamas
son of asius, and asius son of hyrtacus? where too is othryoneus? ilius
is undone and will now surely fall!"

alexandrus answered, "hector, why find fault when there is no one to
find fault with? i should hold aloof from battle on any day rather than
this, for my mother bore me with nothing of the coward about me. from
the moment when you set our men fighting about the ships we have been
staying here and doing battle with the danaans. our comrades about whom
you ask me are d
 
 ___________________________
 
ead; deiphobus and king helenus alone have left the
field, wounded both of them in the hand, but the son of saturn saved
them alive. now, therefore, lead on where you would have us go, and we
will follow with right goodwill; you shall not find us fail you in so
far as our strength holds out, but no man can do more than in him lies,
no matter how willing he may be."

with these words he satisfied his brother, and the two went towards the
part of the battle where the fight was thickest, about cebriones, brave
polydamas, phalc
 
 ___________________________
 
us. then he said--

"hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner
ready for me at once and without delay when the achaeans were hasting
to fight the trojans; now, therefore, though i have meat and drink in
my tents, yet will i fast for sorrow. grief greater than this i could
not know, not even though i were to hear of the death of my father, who
is now in phthia weeping for the loss of me his son, who am here
fighting the trojans in a strange land for the accursed sake of helen,
nor yet though i should hear that my son is no more--he who is being
brought up in scyros--if indeed neoptolemus is still living. till now i
made sure that i alone was to fall here at troy away from argos, while
you were to return to phthia, bring back my son with you in your own
ship, and show him all my property, my bondsmen, and the greatness of
my house--for peleus must surely be either dead, or what little life
remains to him is oppressed alike with the infirmities of age and ever
present
 
 ___________________________
 
indeed better if i had done so. now that
my folly has destroyed the host, i dare not look trojan men and trojan
women in the face, lest a worse man should say, 'hector has ruined us
by his self-confidence.' surely it would be better for me to return
after having fought achilles and slain him, or to die gloriously here
before the city. what, again, if i were to lay down my shield and
helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight up to noble
achilles? what if i were to promise to give up helen, who was the
fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure that alexandrus
brought with him in his ships to troy, aye, and to let the achaeans
divide the half of everything that the city contains among themselves?
i might make the trojans, by the mouths of their princes, take a solemn
oath that they would hide nothing, but would divide into two shares all
that is within the city--but why argue with myself in this way? were i
to go up to him he would show me no kind of mercy; he would kill 
 
 ___________________________
 
omes that you are come to plague me
here? is it a small thing, think you, that the son of saturn has sent
this sorrow upon me, to lose the bravest of my sons? nay, you shall
prove it in person, for now he is gone the achaeans will have easier
work in killing you. as for me, let me go down within the house of
hades, ere mine eyes behold the sacking and wasting of the city."

he drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the old
man sped them. then he called to his sons, upbraiding helenus, paris,
noble agathon, pammon, antiphonus, polites of the loud battle-cry,
deiphobus, hippothous, and dius. these nine did the old man call near
him. "come to me at once," he cried, "worthless sons who do me shame;
would that you had all been killed at the ships rather than hector.
miserable man that i am, i have had the bravest sons in all troy--noble
nestor, troilus the dauntless charioteer, and hector who was a god
among men, so that one would have thought he was son to an
immortal--yet th
 
 ___________________________
 
ell, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful
of you; for when achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him
beyond the seas, to samos imbrus or rugged lemnos; and when he had
slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the
sepulchre of his comrade--though this could not give him life--yet here
you lie all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom apollo has slain with
his painless shafts."

thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then
helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "hector,"
said she, "dearest of all my brothers-in-law--for i am wife to
alexandrus who brought me hither to troy--would that i had died ere he
did so--twenty years are come and gone since i left my home and came
from over the sea, but i have never heard one word of insult or
unkindness from you. when another would chide with me, as it might be
one of your brothers or sisters or of your brothers' wives, or my
mother-in-law--for priam was as ki