the iliad of homer


book i

  the quarrel between agamemnon and achilles--achilles withdraws
  from the war, and sends his mother thetis to ask jove to help
  the trojans--scene between jove and juno on olympus.

sing, o goddess, the anger of achilles son of peleus, that brought
countless ills upon the achaeans. many a brave soul did it send
hurrying down to hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and
vultures, for so were the counsels of jove fulfilled from the day on
which the son of atreus, king of men, and great achilles, first fell
out wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ection. a plain man cannot stand against the anger of a
king, who if he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge
till he has wreaked it. consider, therefore, whether or no you will
protect me."

and achilles answered, "fear not, but speak as it is borne in upon you
from heaven, for by apollo, calchas, to whom you pray, and whose
oracles you reveal to us, not a danaan at our ships shall lay his hand
upon you, while i yet live to look upon the face of the earth--no, not
though you name agamemnon himself, who is by far the foremost of the
achaeans."

thereon the seer spoke boldly. "the god," he said, "is angry neither
about vow nor hecatomb, but for his priest's sake, whom agamemnon has
dishonoured, in that he would not free his daughter nor take a ransom
for her; therefore has he sent these evils upon us, and will yet send
others. he will not deliver the danaans from this pestilence till
agamemnon has restored the girl without fee or ransom to her father,
and has sent a holy hecatomb to
 
 ___________________________
 
 chryse. thus we may perhaps appease
him."

with these words he sat down, and agamemnon rose in anger. his heart
was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he scowled on calchas
and said, "seer of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth things
concerning me, but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. you
have brought me neither comfort nor performance; and now you come
seeing among danaans, and saying that apollo has plagued us because i
would not take a ransom for this girl, the daughter of chryses. i have
set my heart on keeping her in my own house, for i love her 
 
 ___________________________
 
 is not well; for you behold, all of you, that my prize is to go
elsewhither."

and achilles answered, "most noble son of atreus, covetous beyond all
mankind, how shall the achaeans find you another prize? we have no
common store from which to take one. those we took from the cities have
been awarded; we cannot disallow the awards that have been made
already. give this girl, therefore, to the god, and if ever jove grants
us to sack the city of troy we will requite you three and fourfold."

then agamemnon said, "achilles, valiant though you be, you shall not
thus outwit me. you shall not overreach and you shall not persuade me.
are you to keep your own prize, while i sit tamely under my loss and
give up the girl at your bidding? let the achaeans find me a prize in
fair exchange to my liking, or i will come and take your own, or that
of ajax or of ulysses; and he to whomsoever i may come shall rue my
coming. but of this we will take thought hereafter; for the present,
let us draw a ship into the s
 
 ___________________________
 
chaeans sack any rich city of
the trojans do i receive so good a prize as you do, though it is my
hands that do the better part of the fighting. when the sharing comes,
your share is far the largest, and i, forsooth, must go back to my
ships, take what i can get and be thankful, when my labour of fighting
is done. now, therefore, i shall go back to phthia; it will be much
better for me to return home with my ships, for i will not stay here
dishonoured to gather gold and substance for you."

and agamemnon answered, "fly if you will, i shall make you no prayers
to stay you. i have others here who will do me honour, and above all
jove, the lord of counsel. there is no king here so hateful to me as
you are, for you are ever quarrelsome and ill-affected. what though you
be brave? was it not heaven that made you so? go home, then, with your
ships and comrades to lord it over the myrmidons. i care neither for
you nor for your anger; and thus will i do: since phoebus apollo is
taking chryseis from me, i
 
 ___________________________
 
e to do. not a man now living could
withstand them, but they heard my words, and were persuaded by them. so
be it also with yourselves, for this is the more excellent way.
therefore, agamemnon, though you be strong, take not this girl away,
for the sons of the achaeans have already given her to achilles; and
you, achilles, strive not further with the king, for no man who by the
grace of jove wields a sceptre has like honour with agamemnon. you are
strong, and have a goddess for your mother; but agamemnon is stronger
than you, for he has more people under him. son of atreus, check your
anger, i implore you; end this quarrel with achilles, who in the day of
battle is a tower of strength to the achaeans."

and agamemnon answered, "sir, all that you have said is true, but this
fellow must needs become our lord and master: he must be lord of all,
king of all, and captain of all, and this shall hardly be. granted that
the gods have made him a great warrior, have they also given him the
right to speak 
 
 ___________________________
 
--and lay my saying to
your heart--i shall fight neither you nor any man about this girl, for
those that take were those also that gave. but of all else that is at
my ship you shall carry away nothing by force. try, that others may
see; if you do, my spear shall be reddened with your blood."

when they had quarrelled thus angrily, they rose, and broke up the
assembly at the ships of the achaeans. the son of peleus went back to
his tents and ships with the son of menoetius and his company, while
agamemnon drew a vessel into the water and chose a crew of twenty
oarsmen. he escorted chryseis on board and sent moreover a hecatomb for
the god. and ulysses went as captain.

these, then, went on board and sailed their ways over the sea. but the
son of atreus bade the people purify themselves; so they purified
themselves and cast their filth into the sea. then they offered
hecatombs of bulls and goats without blemish on the sea-shore, and the
smoke with the savour of their sacrifice rose curling up towa
 
 ___________________________
 
rds heaven.

thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. but agamemnon did
not forget the threat that he had made achilles, and called his trusty
messengers and squires talthybius and eurybates. "go," said he, "to the
tent of achilles, son of peleus; take briseis by the hand and bring her
hither; if he will not give her i shall come with others and take
her--which will press him harder."

he charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the myrmidons. they found a
 
 ___________________________
 
chilles sitting by his tent and
his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. they stood
fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak,
but he knew them and said, "welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and
men; draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with agamemnon who has
sent you for the girl briseis. therefore, patroclus, bring her and give
her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by mortal
men, and by the fierceness of agamemnon's anger, that if ever again
there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they shall seek and
they shall not find. agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to
look before and after that the achaeans may fight by their ships in
safety."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. he brought bris
 
 ___________________________
 
tomb.
when they had come inside the harbour they furled the sails and laid
them in the ship's hold; they slackened the forestays, lowered the mast
into its place, and rowed the ship to the place where they would have
her lie; there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast the
hawsers. they then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb
for apollo; chryseis also left the ship, and ulysses led her to the
altar to deliver her into the hands of her father. "chryses," said he,
"king agamemnon has sent me to bring you back your child, and to offer
sacrifice to apollo on behalf of the danaans, that we may propitiate
the god, who has now brought sorrow upon the argives."

so saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly,
and they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the
god. they washed their hands and took up the barley-meal to sprinkle
over the victims, while chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud on
their behalf. "hear me," he cried, "o 
 
 ___________________________
 
 her, so she rose from under the sea and went through
great heaven with early morning to olympus, where she found the mighty
son of saturn sitting all alone upon its topmost ridges. she sat
herself down before him, and with her left hand seized his knees, while
with her right she caught him under the chin, and besought him,
saying:--

"father jove, if i ever did you service in word or deed among the
immortals, hear my prayer, and do honour to my son, whose life is to be
cut short so early. king agamemnon has dishonoured him by taking his
prize and keeping her. honour him then yourself, olympian lord of
counsel, and grant victory to the trojans, till the achaeans give my
son his due and load him with riches in requital."

jove sat for a while silent, and without a word, but thetis still kept
firm hold of his knees, and besought him a second time. "incline your
head," said she, "and promise me surely, or else deny me--for you have
nothing to fear--that i may learn how greatly you disdain me."

at 
 
 ___________________________
 
o send a lying dream to king agamemnon; so he
called one to him and said to it, "lying dream, go to the ships of the
achaeans, into the tent of agamemnon, and say to him word for word as i
now bid you. tell him to get the achaeans instantly under arms, for he
shall take troy. there are no longer divided counsels among the gods;
juno has brought them to her own mind, and woe betides the trojans."

the dream went when it had heard its message, and soon reached the
ships of the achaeans. it sought agamemnon son of atreus and found him
in his tent, wrapped in a profound slumber. it hovered over his head in
the likeness of nestor, son of neleus, whom agamemnon honoured above
all his councillors, and said:--

"you are sleeping, son of atreus; one who has the welfare of his host
and so much other care upon his shoulders should dock his sleep. hear
me at once, for i come as a messenger from jove, who, though he be not
near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. he bids you get the
achaeans instantly
 
 ___________________________
 
 and trojans.
then presently he woke, with the divine message still ringing in his
ears; so he sat upright, and put on his soft shirt so fair and new, and
over this his heavy cloak. he bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
and slung his silver-studded sword about his shoulders; then he took
the imperishable staff of his father, and sallied forth to the ships of
the achaeans.

the goddess dawn now wended her way to vast olympus that she might
herald day to jove and to the other immortals, and agamemnon sent the
criers round to call the people in assembly; so they called them and
the people gathered thereon. but first he summoned a meeting of the
elders at the ship of nestor king of pylos, and when they were
assembled he laid a cunning counsel before them.

"my friends," said he, "i have had a dream from heaven in the dead of
night, and its face and figure resembled none but nestor's. it hovered
over my head and said, 'you are sleeping, son of atreus; one who has
the welfare of his host and so 
 
 ___________________________
 
e pour
from ships and tents to the assembly, and range themselves upon the
wide-watered shore, while among them ran wildfire rumour, messenger of
jove, urging them ever to the fore. thus they gathered in a pell-mell
of mad confusion, and the earth groaned under the tramp of men as the
people sought their places. nine heralds went crying about among them
to stay their tumult and bid them listen to the kings, till at last
they were got into their several places and ceased their clamour. then
king agamemnon rose, holding his sceptre. this was the work of vulcan,
who gave it to jove the son of saturn. jove gave it to mercury, slayer
of argus, guide and guardian. king mercury gave it to pelops, the
mighty charioteer, and pelops to atreus, shepherd of his people.
atreus, when he died, left it to thyestes, rich in flocks, and thyestes
in his turn left it to be borne by agamemnon, that he might be lord of
all argos and of the isles. leaning, then, on his sceptre, he addressed
the argives.

"my friends,"
 
 ___________________________
 
d in this way? will you leave priam and the trojans
the glory of still keeping helen, for whose sake so many of the
achaeans have died at troy, far from their homes? go about at once
among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by man, that they draw
not their ships into the sea."

ulysses knew the voice as that of the goddess: he flung his cloak from
him and set off to run. his servant eurybates, a man of ithaca, who
waited on him, took charge of the cloak, whereon ulysses went straight
up to agamemnon and received from him his ancestral, imperishable
staff. with this he went about among the ships of the achaeans.

whenever he met a king or chieftain, he stood by him and spoke him
fairly. "sir," said he, "this flight is cowardly and unworthy. stand to
your post, and bid your people also keep their places. you do not yet
know the full mind of agamemnon; he was sounding us, and ere long will
visit the achaeans with his displeasure. we were not all of us at the
council to hear what he then said; 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed thersites, but ulysses at once went up to him and rebuked
him sternly. "check your glib tongue, thersites," said be, "and babble
not a word further. chide not with princes when you have none to back
you. there is no viler creature come before troy with the sons of
atreus. drop this chatter about kings, and neither revile them nor keep
harping about going home. we do not yet know how things are going to
be, nor whether the achaeans are to return with good success or evil.
how dare you gibe at agamemnon because the danaans have awarded him so
many prizes? i tell you, therefore--and it shall surely be--that if i
again catch you talking such nonsense, i will either forfeit my own
head and be no more called father of telemachus, or i will take you,
strip you stark naked, and whip you out of the assembly till you go
blubbering back to the ships."

on this he beat him with his staff about the back and shoulders till he
dropped and fell a-weeping. the golden sceptre raised a bloody weal on
his back, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ive ear
to my counsel, for the word that i say may not be neglected lightly.
divide your men, agamemnon, into their several tribes and clans, that
clans and tribes may stand by and help one another. if you do this, and
if the achaeans obey you, you will find out who, both chiefs and
peoples, are brave, and who are cowards; for they will vie against the
other. thus you shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of
heaven or the cowardice of man that you shall fail to take the town."

and agamemnon answered, "nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the
achaeans in counsel. would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that i
had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of king priam
would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. but the
son of saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife. achilles
and i are quarrelling about this girl, in which matter i was the first
to offend; if we can be of one mind again, the trojans will not stave
off destruction f
 
 ___________________________
 
 the gods, and praying each one of them that he might live to
come out of the fight. agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed a fat
five-year-old bull to the mighty son of saturn, and invited the princes
and elders of his host. first he asked nestor and king idomeneus, then
the two ajaxes and the son of tydeus, and sixthly ulysses, peer of gods
in counsel; but menelaus came of his own accord, for he knew how busy
his brother then was. they stood round the bull with the barley-meal in
their hands, and agamemnon prayed, saying, "jove, most glorious,
supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest upon the storm-cloud,
grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace
of priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed with fire. grant that
my sword may pierce the shirt of hector about his heart, and that full
many of his comrades may bite the dust as they fall dying round him."

thus he prayed, but the son of saturn would not fulfil his prayer. he
accepted the sacrifice, yet none the les
 
 ___________________________
 
ad finished their work and the feast was ready, they
ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied.
as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, nestor, knight of
gerene, began to speak. "king agamemnon," said he, "let us not stay
talking here, nor be slack in the work that heaven has put into our
hands. let the heralds summon the people to gather at their several
ships; we will then go about among the host, that we may begin fighting
at once."

thus did he speak, and agamemnon heeded his words. he at once sent the
criers round to call the people in assembly. so they called them, and
the people gathered thereon. the chiefs about the son of atreus chose
their men and marshalled them, while minerva went among them holding
her priceless aegis that knows neither age nor death. from it there
waved a hundred tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven, and each one of
them worth a hundred oxen. with this she darted furiously everywhere
among the hosts of the achaeans, urging them
 
 ___________________________
 
re commanded by
nestor, knight of gerene, and with him there came ninety ships.

and those that held arcadia, under the high mountain of cyllene, near
the tomb of aepytus, where the people fight hand to hand; the men of
pheneus also, and orchomenus rich in flocks; of rhipae, stratie, and
bleak enispe; of tegea and fair mantinea; of stymphelus and parrhasia;
of these king agapenor son of ancaeus was commander, and they had sixty
ships. many arcadians, good soldiers, came in each one of them, but
agamemnon found them the ships in which to cross the sea, for they were
not a people that occupied their business upon the waters.

the men, moreover, of buprasium and of elis, so much of it as is
enclosed between hyrmine, myrsinus upon the sea-shore, the rock olene
and alesium. these had four leaders, and each of them had ten ships,
with many epeans on board. their captains were amphimachus and
thalpius--the one, son of cteatus, and the other, of eurytus--both of
the race of actor. the two others were di
 
 ___________________________
 
hall be victorious and prove to be the better
man take the woman and all she has, to bear them to his home, but let
the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace whereby you trojans shall
stay here in troy, while the others go home to argos and the land of
the achaeans."

when hector heard this he was glad, and went about among the trojan
ranks holding his spear by the middle to keep them back, and they all
sat down at his bidding: but the achaeans still aimed at him with
stones and arrows, till agamemnon shouted to them saying, "hold,
argives, shoot not, sons of the achaeans; hector desires to speak."

they ceased taking aim and were still, whereon hector spoke. "hear from
my mouth," said he, "trojans and achaeans, the saying of alexandrus,
through whom this quarrel has come about. he bids the trojans and
achaeans lay their armour upon the ground, while he and menelaus fight
in the midst of you for helen and all her wealth. let him who shall be
victorious and prove to be the better man take the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 air, but when an old man comes he looks
before and after, deeming that which shall be fairest upon both sides."

the trojans and achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they
thought that they should now have rest. they backed their chariots
toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying it
down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a
little space between them. hector sent two messengers to the city to
bring the lambs and to bid priam come, while agamemnon told talthybius
to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as agamemnon had
said.

meanwhile iris went to helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of
the son of antenor, for helicaon, son of antenor, had married laodice,
the fairest of priam's daughters. she found her in her own room,
working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering
the battles between trojans and achaeans, that mars had made them fight
for her sake. iris then came close up to her and said, "come
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall dwell here in troy,
while the achaeans return to argos and the land of the achaeans."

the old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the
horses, and they made all haste to do so. he mounted the chariot,
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor took his seat beside him;
they then drove through the scaean gates on to the plain. when they
reached the ranks of the trojans and achaeans they left the chariot,
and with measured pace advanced into the space between the hosts.

agamemnon and ulysses both rose to meet them. the attendants brought on
the oath-offerings and mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls; they poured
water over the hands of the chieftains, and the son of atreus drew the
dagger that hung by his sword, and cut wool from the lambs' heads; this
the men-servants gave about among the trojan and achaean princes, and
the son of atreus lifted up his hands in prayer. "father jove," he
cried, "that rulest in ida, most glorious in power, and thou oh sun,
that seest and giv
 
 ___________________________
 
 the arrow went through
it and grazed the top of the skin, so that blood began flowing from the
wound.

as when some woman of meonia or caria strains purple dye on to a piece
of ivory that is to be the cheek-piece of a horse, and is to be laid up
in a treasure house--many a knight is fain to bear it, but the king
keeps it as an ornament of which both horse and driver may be
proud--even so, o menelaus, were your shapely thighs and your legs down
to your fair ancles stained with blood.

when king agamemnon saw the blood flowing from the wound he was afraid,
and so was brave menelaus himself till he saw that the barbs of the
arrow and the thread that bound the arrow-head to the shaft were still
outside the wound. then he took heart, but agamemnon heaved a deep sigh
as he held menelaus's hand in his own, and his comrades made moan in
concert. "dear brother," he cried, "i have been the death of you in
pledging this covenant and letting you come forward as our champion.
the trojans have trampled on th
 
 ___________________________
 
h throne shall overshadow them with his awful aegis
in punishment of their present treachery. this shall surely be; but
how, menelaus, shall i mourn you, if it be your lot now to die? i
should return to argos as a by-word, for the achaeans will at once go
home. we shall leave priam and the trojans the glory of still keeping
helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie here at troy with
your purpose not fulfilled. then shall some braggart trojan leap upon
your tomb and say, 'ever thus may agamemnon wreak his vengeance; he
brought his army in vain; he is gone home to his own land with empty
ships, and has left menelaus behind him.' thus will one of them say,
and may the earth then swallow me."

but menelaus reassured him and said, "take heart, and do not alarm the
people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal part, for my outer belt
of burnished metal first stayed it, and under this my cuirass and the
belt of mail which the bronze-smiths made me."

and agamemnon answered, "i trust, dear m
 
 ___________________________
 
bs upon it to
relieve your pain."

he then said to talthybius, "talthybius, tell machaon, son to the great
physician, aesculapius, to come and see menelaus immediately. some
trojan or lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our dismay,
and to his own great glory."

talthybius did as he was told, and went about the host trying to find
machaon. presently he found standing amid the brave warriors who had
followed him from tricca; thereon he went up to him and said, "son of
aesculapius, king agamemnon says you are to come and see menelaus
immediately. some trojan or lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow
to our dismay and to his own great glory."

thus did he speak, and machaon was moved to go. they passed through the
spreading host of the achaeans and went on till they came to the place
where menelaus had been wounded and was lying with the chieftains
gathered in a circle round him. machaon passed into the middle of the
ring and at once drew the arrow from the belt, bending its barbs ba
 
 ___________________________
 
ck
through the force with which he pulled it out. he undid the burnished
belt, and beneath this the cuirass and the belt of mail which the
bronze-smiths had made; then, when he had seen the wound, he wiped away
the blood and applied some soothing drugs which chiron had given to
aesculapius out of the good will he bore him.

while they were thus busy about menelaus, the trojans came forward
against them, for they had put on their armour, and now renewed the
fight.

you would not have then found agamemnon asleep nor cowardly and
unwilling to fight, but eager rather for the fray. he left his chariot
rich with bronze and his panting steeds in charge of eurymedon, son of
ptolemaeus the son of peiraeus, and bade him hold them in readiness
against the time his limbs should weary of going about and giving
orders to so many, for he went among the ranks on foot. when he saw men
hasting to the front he stood by them and cheered them on. "argives,"
said he, "slacken not one whit in your onset; father jove 
 
 ___________________________
 
huddle together, but show no fight? you are as
dazed and spiritless as deer. would you wait till the trojans reach the
sterns of our ships as they lie on the shore, to see whether the son of
saturn will hold his hand over you to protect you?"

thus did he go about giving his orders among the ranks. passing through
the crowd, he came presently on the cretans, arming round idomeneus,
who was at their head, fierce as a wild boar, while meriones was
bringing up the battalions that were in the rear. agamemnon was glad
when he saw him, and spoke him fairly. "idomeneus," said he, "i treat
you with greater distinction than i do any others of the achaeans,
whether in war or in other things, or at table. when the princes are
mixing my choicest wines in the mixing-bowls, they have each of them a
fixed allowance, but your cup is kept always full like my own, that you
may drink whenever you are minded. go, therefore, into battle, and show
yourself the man you have been always proud to be."

idomeneus answere
 
 ___________________________
 
d to attack us."

the son of atreus went on, glad at heart, till he came upon the two
ajaxes arming themselves amid a host of foot-soldiers. as when a
goat-herd from some high post watches a storm drive over the deep
before the west wind--black as pitch is the offing and a mighty
whirlwind draws towards him, so that he is afraid and drives his flock
into a cave--even thus did the ranks of stalwart youths move in a dark
mass to battle under the ajaxes, horrid with shield and spear. glad was
king agamemnon when he saw them. "no need," he cried, "to give orders
to such leaders of the argives as you are, for of your own selves you
spur your men on to fight with might and main. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo that all were so minded as you are, for the city of
priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it."

with this he left them and went onward to nestor, the facile speaker of
the pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in company
with pelagon, alas
 
 ___________________________
 
d their horses well in hand, so as to
avoid confusion. "let no man," he said, "relying on his strength or
horsemanship, get before the others and engage singly with the trojans,
nor yet let him lag behind or you will weaken your attack; but let each
when he meets an enemy's chariot throw his spear from his own; this be
much the best; this is how the men of old took towns and strongholds;
in this wise were they minded."

thus did the old man charge them, for he had been in many a fight, and
king agamemnon was glad. "i wish," he said to him, "that your limbs
were as supple and your strength as sure as your judgment is; but age,
the common enemy of mankind, has laid his hand upon you; would that it
had fallen upon some other, and that you were still young."

and nestor, knight of gerene, answered, "son of atreus, i too would
gladly be the man i was when i slew mighty ereuthalion; but the gods
will not give us everything at one and the same time. i was then young,
and now i am old; still i can go wi
 
 ___________________________
 
th my knights and give them that
counsel which old men have a right to give. the wielding of the spear i
leave to those who are younger and stronger than myself."

agamemnon went his way rejoicing, and presently found menestheus, son
of peteos, tarrying in his place, and with him were the athenians loud
of tongue in battle. near him also tarried cunning ulysses, with his
sturdy cephallenians round him; they had not yet heard the battle-cry,
for the ranks of trojans and achaeans had only just begun to move, so
they were standing still, waiting for some other columns of the
achaeans to attack the trojans and begin the fighting. when he saw this
agamemnon rebuked them 
 
 ___________________________
 
nough then to take your fill of roast meats and to drink wine as long
as you please, whereas now you would not care though you saw ten
columns of achaeans engage the enemy in front of you."

ulysses glared at him and answered, "son of atreus, what are you
talking about? how can you say that we are slack? when the achaeans are
in full fight with the trojans, you shall see, if you care to do so,
that the father of telemachus will join battle with the foremost of
them. you are talking idly."

when agamemnon saw that ulysses was angry, he smiled pleasantly at him
and withdrew his words. "ulysses," said he, "noble son of laertes,
excellent in all good counsel, i have neither fault to find nor orders
to give you, for i know your heart is right, and that you and i are of
a mind. enough; i will make you amends for what i have said, and if any
ill has now been spoken may the gods bring it to nothing."

he then left them and went on to others. presently he saw the son of
tydeus, noble diomed, standing by 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and said, "son of atreus,
tell no lies, for you can speak truth if you will. we boast ourselves
as even better men than our fathers; we took seven-gated thebes, though
the wall was stronger and our men were fewer in number, for we trusted
in the omens of the gods and in the help of jove, whereas they perished
through their own sheer folly; hold not, then, our fathers in like
honour with us."

diomed looked sternly at him and said, "hold your peace, my friend, as
i bid you. it is not amiss that agamemnon should urge the achaeans
forward, for the glory will be his if we take the city, and his the
shame if we are vanquished. therefore let us acquit ourselves with
valour."

as he spoke he sprang from his chariot, and his armour rang so fiercely
about his body that even a brave man might well have been scared to
hear it.

as when some mighty wave that thunders on the beach when the west wind
has lashed it into fury--it has reared its head afar and now comes
crashing down on the shore; it bows its ar
 
 ___________________________
 
by his chariot. minerva, therefore, took mars by
the hand and said, "mars, mars, bane of men, bloodstained stormer of
cities, may we not now leave the trojans and achaeans to fight it out,
and see to which of the two jove will vouchsafe the victory? let us go
away, and thus avoid his anger."

so saying, she drew mars out of the battle, and set him down upon the
steep banks of the scamander. upon this the danaans drove the trojans
back, and each one of their chieftains killed his man. first king
agamemnon flung mighty odius, captain of the halizoni, from his
chariot. the spear of agamemnon caught him on the broad of his back,
just as he was turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders
and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground.

then idomeneus killed phaesus, son of borus the meonian, who had come
from varne. mighty idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as he
was mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshroud
 
 ___________________________
 
eneas killed two champions of the danaans, crethon and
orsilochus. their father was a rich man who lived in the strong city of
phere and was descended from the river alpheus, whose broad stream
flows through the land of the pylians. the river begat orsilochus, who
ruled over much people and was father to diocles, who in his turn begat
twin sons, crethon and orsilochus, well skilled in all the arts of war.
these, when they grew up, went to ilius with the argive fleet in the
cause of menelaus and agamemnon sons of atreus, and there they both of
them fell. as two lions whom their dam has reared in the depths of some
mountain forest to plunder homesteads and carry off sheep and cattle
till they get killed by the hand of man, so were these two vanquished
by aeneas, and fell like high pine-trees to the ground.

brave menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the
front, clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for mars
egged him on to do so with intent that he should be killed b
 
 ___________________________
 
 up
to him spear in hand, but adrestus caught him by the knees begging for
his life. "take me alive," he cried, "son of atreus, and you shall have
a full ransom for me: my father is rich and has much treasure of gold,
bronze, and wrought iron laid by in his house. from this store he will
give you a large ransom should he hear of my being alive and at the
ships of the achaeans."

thus did he plead, and menelaus was for yielding and giving him to a
squire to take to the ships of the achaeans, but agamemnon came running
up to him and rebuked him. "my good menelaus," said he, "this is no
time for giving quarter. has, then, your house fared so well at the
hands of the trojans? let us not spare a single one of them--not even
the child unborn and in its mother's womb; let not a man of them be
left alive, but let all in ilius perish, unheeded and forgotten."

thus did he speak, and his brother was persuaded by him, for his words
were just. menelaus, therefore, thrust adrestus from him, whereon king
agam
 
 ___________________________
 
 have suffered much on
your account. let us be going, and we will make things right hereafter,
should jove vouchsafe us to set the cup of our deliverance before
ever-living gods of heaven in our own homes, when we have chased the
achaeans from troy."



book vii

  hector and ajax fight--hector is getting worsted when night
  comes on and parts them--they exchange presents--the
  burial of the dead, and the building of a wall round their
  ships by the achaeans--the achaeans buy their wine of
  agamemnon and menelaus.

with these words hector passed through the gates, and his brother
alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. as when heaven sends a
breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have
laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome
was the sight of these two heroes to the trojans.

thereon alexandrus killed menesthius the son of areithous; he lived in
arne, and was son of areithous the mace-man, and of phylomedusa. hector
threw a spear at eion
 
 ___________________________
 
t up to hector and said, "hector son of priam,
peer of gods in counsel, i am your brother, let me then persuade you.
bid the other trojans and achaeans all of them take their seats, and
challenge the best man among the achaeans to meet you in single combat.
i have heard the voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your
doom is not yet come."

hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the
trojans, grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and they
all sat down. agamemnon also bade the achaeans be seated. but minerva
and apollo, in the likeness of vultures, perched on father jove's high
oak tree, proud of their men; and the ranks sat close ranged together,
bristling with shield and helmet and spear. as when the rising west
wind furs the face of the sea and the waters grow dark beneath it, so
sat the companies of trojans and achaeans upon the plain. and hector
spoke thus:--

"hear me, trojans and achaeans, that i may speak even as i am minded;
jove on his high thr
 
 ___________________________
 
 danaans will now face hector. may you be turned every man
of you into earth and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious in
your places. i will myself go out against this man, but the upshot of
the fight will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods."

with these words he put on his armour; and then, o menelaus, your life
would have come to an end at the hands of hands of hector, for he was
far better the man, had not the princes of the achaeans sprung upon you
and checked you. king agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said,
"menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. be patient in spite of
passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself
as hector son of priam, who is feared by many another as well as you.
even achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from
meeting him in battle. sit down your own people, and the achaeans will
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gla
 
 ___________________________
 
two ajaxes, men clothed in
valour as with a garment, and then idomeneus, and meriones his brother
in arms. after these eurypylus son of euaemon, thoas the son of
andraemon, and ulysses also rose. then nestor knight of gerene again
spoke, saying: "cast lots among you to see who shall be chosen. if he
come alive out of this fight he will have done good service alike to
his own soul and to the achaeans."

thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown
it into the helmet of agamemnon son of atreus, the people lifted their
hands in prayer, and thus would one of them say as he looked into the
vault of heaven, "father jove, grant that the lot fall on ajax, or on
the son of tydeus, or upon the king of rich mycene himself."

as they were speaking, nestor knight of gerene shook the helmet, and
from it there fell the very lot which they wanted--the lot of ajax. the
herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the
achaeans, going from left to right; but they none of t
 
 ___________________________
 
of oxhide--the work of tychius, who lived in hyle and was by far the
best worker in leather. he had made it with the hides of seven full-fed
bulls, and over these he had set an eighth layer of bronze. holding
this shield before him, ajax son of telamon came close up to hector,
and menaced him saying, "hector, you shall now learn, man to man, what
kind of champions the danaans have among them even besides lion-hearted
achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. he now abides at the ships in
anger with agamemnon shepherd of his people, but there are many of us
who are well able to face you; therefore begin the fight."

and hector answered, "noble ajax, son of telamon, captain of the host,
treat me not as though i were some puny boy or woman that cannot fight.
i have been long used to the blood and butcheries of battle. i am quick
to turn my leathern shield either to right or left, for this i deem the
main thing in battle. i can charge among the chariots and horsemen, and
in hand to hand fighting can del
 
 ___________________________
 
amemnon.

when they reached the quarters of the son of atreus, agamemnon
sacrificed for them a five-year-old bull in honour of jove the son of
saturn. they flayed the carcass, made it ready, and divided it into
joints; these they cut carefully up into smaller pieces, putting them
on the spits, roasting them sufficiently, and then drawing them off.
when they had done all this and had prepared the feast, they ate it,
and every man had his full and equal share, so that all were satisfied,
and king agamemnon gave ajax some slices cut lengthways down the loin,
as a mark of special honour. as soon as they had had enough to eat and
drink, old nestor whose counsel was ever truest began to speak; with
all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:--

"son of atreus, and other chieftains, inasmuch as many of the achaeans
are now dead, whose blood mars has shed by the banks of the scamander,
and their souls have gone down to the house of hades, it will be well
when morning comes that we sho
 
 ___________________________
 
but the wealth that i brought home with her from argos i
will restore, and will add yet further of my own."

on this, when paris had spoken and taken his seat, priam of the race of
dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: "hear me, trojans, dardanians, and
allies, that i may speak even as i am minded. get your suppers now as
hitherto throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful. at
daybreak let idaeus go to the ships, and tell agamemnon and menelaus
sons of atreus the saying of alexandrus through whom this quarrel has
come about; and let him also be instant with them that they now cease
fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till
heaven decide between us and give victory to one or to the other."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. they took supper
in their companies and at daybreak idaeus went his way to the ships. he
found the danaans, servants of mars, in council at the stern of
agamem
 
 ___________________________
 
 him do so. priam bade me
inquire further if you will cease fighting till we burn our dead;
hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give
victory to one or to the other."

they all held their peace, but presently diomed of the loud war-cry
spoke, saying, "let there be no taking, neither treasure, nor yet
helen, for even a child may see that the doom of the trojans is at
hand."

the sons of the achaeans shouted applause at the words that diomed had
spoken, and thereon king agamemnon said to idaeus, "idaeus, you have
heard the answer the achaeans make you-and i with them. but as
concerning the dead, i give you leave to burn them, for when men are
once dead there should be no grudging them the rites of fire. let jove
the mighty husband of juno be witness to this covenant."

as he spoke he upheld his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and
idaeus went back to the strong city of ilius. the trojans and
dardanians were gathered in council waiting his return; when he came,
he st
 
 ___________________________
 
 wall and fling it into the sea; you can cover the beach
with sand again, and the great wall of the achaeans will then be
utterly effaced."

thus did they converse, and by sunset the work of the achaeans was
completed; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got their
supper. many ships had come with wine from lemnos, sent by euneus the
son of jason, born to him by hypsipyle. the son of jason freighted them
with ten thousand measures of wine, which he sent specially to the sons
of atreus, agamemnon and menelaus. from this supply the achaeans bought
their wine, some with bronze, some with iron, some with hides, some
with whole heifers, and some again with captives. they spread a goodly
banquet and feasted the whole night through, as also did the trojans
and their allies in the city. but all the time jove boded them ill and
roared with his portentous thunder. pale fear got hold upon them, and
they spilled the wine from their cups on to the ground, nor did any
dare drink till he had made offe
 
 ___________________________
 


there was no man of all the many danaans who could then boast that he
had driven his horses over the trench and gone forth to fight sooner
than the son of tydeus; long before any one else could do so he slew an
armed warrior of the trojans, agelaus the son of phradmon. he had
turned his horses in flight, but the spear struck him in the back
midway between his shoulders and went right through his chest, and his
armour rang rattling round him as he fell forward from his chariot.

after him came agamemnon and menelaus, sons of atreus, the two ajaxes
clothed in valour as with a garment, idomeneus and his companion in
arms meriones, peer of murderous mars, and eurypylus the brave son of
euaemon. ninth came teucer with his bow, and took his place under cover
of the shield of ajax son of telamon. when ajax lifted his shield
teucer would peer round, and when he had hit any one in the throng, the
man would fall dead; then teucer would hie back to ajax as a child to
its mother, and again duck down under
 
 ___________________________
 
 his shield.

which of the trojans did brave teucer first kill? orsilochus, and then
ormenus and ophelestes, daetor, chromius, and godlike lycophontes,
amopaon son of polyaemon, and melanippus. all these in turn did he lay
low upon the earth, and king agamemnon was glad when he saw him making
havoc of the trojans with his mighty bow. he went up to him and said,
"teucer, man after my own heart, son of telamon, captain among the
host, shoot on, and be at once the saving of the danaans and the glory
of your father telamon, who brought you up and took care of you in his
own house when you were a child, bastard though you were. cover him
with glory though he is far off; i will promise and i will assuredly
perform; if aegis-bearing jove and minerva grant me 
 
 ___________________________
 
f them
in despair. as when the two winds that blow from thrace--the north and
the northwest--spring up of a sudden and rouse the fury of the main--in
a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter their sea-wrack
in all directions--even thus troubled were the hearts of the achaeans.

the son of atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a
council man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made haste also
himself to call them, and they sat sorry at heart in their assembly.
agamemnon shed tears as it were a running stream or cataract on the
side of some sheer cliff; and thus, with many a heavy sigh he spoke to
the achaeans. "my friends," said he, "princes and councillors of the
argives, the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. cruel jove
gave me his solemn promise that i should sack the city of troy before
returning, but he has played me false, and is now bidding me go
ingloriously back to argos with the loss of much people. such is the
will of jove, who has laid ma
 
 ___________________________
 
say what i think will be best. no man will be of a truer mind than that
which has been mine from the hour when you, sir, angered achilles by
taking the girl briseis from his tent against my judgment. i urged you
not to do so, but you yielded to your own pride, and dishonoured a hero
whom heaven itself had honoured--for you still hold the prize that had
been awarded to him. now, however, let us think how we may appease him,
both with presents and fair speeches that may conciliate him."

and king agamemnon answered, "sir, you have reproved my folly justly. i
was wrong. i own it. one whom heaven befriends is in himself a host,
and jove has shown that he befriends this man by destroying much people
of the achaeans. i was blinded with passion and yielded to my worser
mind; therefore i will make amends, and will give him great gifts by
way of atonement. i will tell them in the presence of you all. i will
give him seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire, and ten
talents of gold. i will give 
 
 ___________________________
 
h them. now bring water for our hands, and
bid all keep silence while we pray to jove the son of saturn, if so be
that he may have mercy upon us."

thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings,
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from
the tent of agamemnon son of atreus; and nestor, looking first to one
and then to another, but most especially at ulysses, was instant with
them that they should prevail with the noble son of peleus.

they went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed
earnestly to earth-encircling neptune that the high spirit of the son
of aeacus might incline favourably towards them. when they reached the
ships and tents of the myrmidons, they found achilles playing on a
lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cros
 
 ___________________________
 
ere it be too late,
and save the danaans from destruction.

"my good friend, when your father peleus sent you from phthia to
agamemnon, did he not charge you saying, 'son, minerva and juno will
make you strong if they choose, but check your high temper, for the
better part is in goodwill. eschew vain quarrelling, and the achaeans
old and young will respect you more for doing so.' these were his
words, but you have forgotten them. even now, however, be appeased, and
put away your anger from you. agamemnon will make you great amends if
you will forgive him; listen, and i will tell you what he has said in
his tent that he will give you. he will give you seven tripods that
have never yet been on the fire, and ten talents of gold; twenty iron
cauldrons, and twelve strong horses that have won races and carried off
prizes. rich indeed both in land and gold is he who has as many prizes
as these horses have won for agamemnon. moreover he will give you seven
excellent workwomen, lesbians, whom he chose fo
 
 ___________________________
 
f men and women. all these things will he
give you now down, and if hereafter the gods vouchsafe him to sack the
city of priam, you can come when we achaeans are dividing the spoil,
and load your ship with gold and bronze to your liking. you can take
twenty trojan women, the loveliest after helen herself. then, when we
reach achaean argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his
son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear son
orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. agamemnon has three
daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa; you may take the one
of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of
peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his
daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities, cardamyle,
enope, and hire where there is grass; holy pheras and the rich meadows
of anthea; aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of pedasus, all near
the sea, and on the borders of sandy pylos. the men that dwell there
are r
 
 ___________________________
 
 will come within your reach, for he is infatuated, and
declares that not a danaan whom the ships have brought can hold his own
against him."

achilles answered, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, i should give you
formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no
more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. him do i
hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides
another in his heart; therefore i will say what i mean. i will be
appeased neither by agamemnon son of atreus nor by any other of the
danaans, for i see that i have no thanks for all my fighting. he that
fights fares no better than he that does not; coward and hero are held
in equal honour, and death deals like measure to him who works and him
who is idle. i have taken nothing by all my hardships--with my life
ever in my hand; as a bird when she has found a morsel takes it to her
nestlings, and herself fares hardly, even so many a long night have i
been wakeful, and many a bloody battle ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve i waged by day against
those who were fighting for their women. with my ships i have taken
twelve cities, and eleven round about troy have i stormed with my men
by land; i took great store of wealth from every one of them, but i
gave all up to agamemnon son of atreus. he stayed where he was by his
ships, yet of what came to him he gave little, and kept much himself.

"nevertheless he did distribute some meeds of honour among the
chieftains and kings, and these have them still; from me alone of the
achaeans did he take the woman in whom i delighted--let him keep her
and sleep with her. why, pray, must the argives needs fight the
trojans? what made the son of atreus gather the host and bring them?
was it not for the sake of helen? are the sons of
 
 ___________________________
 
 atreus the only men
in the world who love their wives? any man of common right feeling will
love and cherish her who is his own, as i this woman, with my whole
heart, though she was but a fruitling of my spear. agamemnon has taken
her from me; he has played me false; i know him; let him tempt me no
further, for he shall not move me. let him look to you, ulysses, and to
the other princes to save his ships from burning. he has done much
without me already. he has built a wall; he has dug a trench deep and
wide all round it, and he has planted it within with stakes; but even
so he stays not the murderous might of hector. so long as i fought the
achaeans hector suffered not the battle range far from the city walls;

 
 ___________________________
 
g, and a sheet of
fine linen. the old man then laid himself down and waited till morning
came. but achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter
of phorbas lovely diomede, whom he had carried off from lesbos.
patroclus lay on the other side of the room, and with him fair iphis
whom achilles had given him when he took scyros the city of enyeus.

when the envoys reached the tents of the son of atreus, the achaeans
rose, pledged them in cups of gold, and began to question them. king
agamemnon was the first to do so. "tell me, ulysses," said he, "will he
save the ships from burning, or did he refuse, and is he still furious?"

ulysses answered, "most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon,
achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely angry than ever, and
spurns both you and your gifts. he bids you take counsel with the
achaeans to save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself, he
said that at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water. he said
further that he
 
 ___________________________
 
oremost."

thus he spoke, and the other chieftains approved his words. they then
made their drink-offerings and went every man to his own tent, where
they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.



book x

  ulysses and diomed go out as spies, and meet dolon, who gives
  them information: they then kill him, and profiting by what
  he had told them, kill rhesus king of the thracians and take
  his horses.

now the other princes of the achaeans slept soundly the whole night
through, but agamemnon son of atreus was troubled, so that he could get
no rest. as when fair juno's lord flashes his lightning in token of
great rain or hail or snow when the snow-flakes whiten the ground, or
again as a sign that he will open the wide jaws of hungry war, even so
did agamemnon heave many a heavy sigh, for his soul trembled within
him. when he looked upon the plain of troy he marvelled at the many
watchfires burning in front of ilius, and at the sound of pipes and
flutes and of the hum of men, but when
 
 ___________________________
 
chaeans, and was honoured by the people as though he
were a god. he found him by the stern of his ship already putting his
goodly array about his shoulders, and right glad was he that his
brother had come.

menelaus spoke first. "why," said he, "my dear brother, are you thus
arming? are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit the
trojans? i greatly fear that no one will do you this service, and spy
upon the enemy alone in the dead of night. it will be a deed of great
daring."

and king agamemnon answered, "menelaus, we both of us need shrewd
counsel to save the argives and our ships, for jove has changed his
mind, and inclines towards hector's sacrifices rather than ours. i
never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one
day as hector has now wrought against the sons of the achaeans--and
that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor
goddess. the argives will rue it long and deeply. run, therefore, with
all speed by the line of the ships, and c
 
 ___________________________
 
 his two
spears and his helmet; beside him also lay the gleaming girdle with
which the old man girded himself when he armed to lead his people into
battle--for his age stayed him not. he raised himself on his elbow and
looked up at agamemnon. "who is it," said he, "that goes thus about the
host and the ships alone and in the dead of night, when men are
sleeping? are you looking for one of your mules or for some comrade? do
not stand there and say nothing, but speak. what is your business?"

and agamemnon answered, "nestor, son of neleus, honour to the achaean
name, it is i, agamemnon son of atreus, on whom jove has laid labour
and sorrow so long as there is breath in my body and my limbs carry me.
i am thus abroad because sleep sits not upon my eyelids, but my heart
is big with war and with the jeopardy of the achaeans. i am in great
fear for the danaans. i am at sea, and without sure counsel; my heart
beats as though it would leap out of my body, and my limbs fail me. if
then you can do anythin
 
 ___________________________
 
, or
ulysses, or fleet ajax and the valiant son of phyleus. some one had
also better go and call ajax and king idomeneus, for their ships are
not near at hand but the farthest of all. i cannot however refrain from
blaming menelaus, much as i love him and respect him--and i will say so
plainly, even at the risk of offending you--for sleeping and leaving
all this trouble to yourself. he ought to be going about imploring aid
from all the princes of the achaeans, for we are in extreme danger."

and agamemnon answered, "sir, you may sometimes blame him justly, for
he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself--not indeed from
sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and expects me
to take the lead. on this occasion, however, he was awake before i was,
and came to me of his own accord. i have already sent him to call the
very men whom you have named. and now let us be going. we shall find
them with the watch outside the gates, for it was there i said that we
would meet them."

"in t
 
 ___________________________
 
ill go with me i shall do so in greater confidence and
comfort. when two men are together, one of them may see some
opportunity which the other has not caught sight of; if a man is alone
he is less full of resource, and his wit is weaker."

on this several offered to go with diomed. the two ajaxes, servants of
mars, meriones, and the son of nestor all wanted to go, so did menelaus
son of atreus; ulysses also wished to go among the host of the trojans,
for he was ever full of daring, and thereon agamemnon king of men spoke
thus: "diomed," said he, "son of tydeus, man after my own heart, choose
your comrade for yourself--take the best man of those that have
offered, for many would now go with you. do not through delicacy reject
the better man, and take the worst out of respect for his lineage,
because he is of more royal blood."

he said this because he feared for menelaus. diomed answered, "if you
bid me take the man of my own choice, how in that case can i fail to
think of ulysses, than whom the
 
 ___________________________
 
repare a sacred offering to
minerva. as for themselves, they went into the sea and washed the sweat
from their bodies, and from their necks and thighs. when the sea-water
had taken all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. after they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

an
 
 ___________________________
 
ered his body when he was in
battle--fair to see, with ten circles of bronze running all round it.
on the body of the shield there were twenty bosses of white tin, with
another of dark cyanus in the middle: this last was made to show a
gorgon's head, fierce and grim, with rout and panic on either side. the
band for the arm to go through was of silver, on which there was a
writhing snake of cyanus with three heads that sprang from a single
neck, and went in and out among one another. on his head agamemnon set
a helmet, with a peak before and behind, and four plumes of horse-hair
that nodded menacingly above it; then he grasped two redoubtable
bronze-shod spears, and the gleam of his armour shot from him as a
flame into the firmament, while juno and minerva thundered in honour of
the king of rich mycene.

every man now left his horses in charge of his charioteer to hold them
in readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in
full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the
 
 ___________________________
 
another and the people perished, but as the hour
drew nigh when a woodman working in some mountain forest will get his
midday meal--for he has felled till his hands are weary; he is tired
out, and must now have food--then the danaans with a cry that rang
through all their ranks, broke the battalions of the enemy. agamemnon
led them on, and slew first bienor, a leader of his people, and
afterwards his comrade and charioteer oileus, who sprang from his
chariot and was coming full towards him; but agamemnon struck him on
the forehead with his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against
the weapon, which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were
battered in and he was killed in full fight.

agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their
breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. he then went on to kill
isus and antiphus two sons of priam, the one a bastard, the other born
in wedlock; they were in the same chariot--the bastard driving, while
noble antiphus 
 
 ___________________________
 
fought beside him. achilles had once taken both of them
prisoners in the glades of ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as
they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now,
however, agamemnon son of atreus smote isus in the chest above the
nipple with his spear, while he struck antiphus hard by the ear and
threw him from his chariot. forthwith he stripped their goodly armour
from off them and recognized them, for he had already seen them at
ships when achilles brought them in from ida. as a lion fastens on the
fawns of a hind and crushes them in his great jaws, robbing them of
their tender life while he on his way back to his lair--the hind can do
nothing for them even though she be 
 
 ___________________________
 
close by, for she is in an agony of
fear, and flies through the thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost
speed before the mighty monster--so, no man of the trojans could help
isus and antiphus, for they were themselves flying in panic before the
argives.

then king agamemnon took the two sons of antimachus, pisander and brave
hippolochus. it was antimachus who had been foremost in preventing
helen's being restored to menelaus, for he was largely bribed by
alexandrus; and now agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same
chariot, trying to bring their horses to a stand--for they had lost
hold of the reins and the horses were mad with fear. the son of atreus
sprang upon them like a lion, and the pair besought him from their
chariot. "take us alive," they cried, "son of atreus, and you shall
receive a great ransom for us. our father antimachus has great store of
gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this he will satisfy you with
a very large ransom should he hear of our being
 
 ___________________________
 
beseech the king, but they
heard no pitiful answer in return. "if," said agamemnon, "you are sons
of antimachus, who once at a council of trojans proposed that menelaus
and ulysses, who had come to you as envoys, should be killed and not
suffered to return, you shall now pay for the foul iniquity of your
father."

as he spoke he felled pisander from his chariot to the earth, smiting
him on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face uppermost upon the
ground. hippolochus fled, but him too did agamemnon smite; he cut off
his hands and his head--which he sent rolling in among the crowd as
though it were a ball. there he let them both lie, and wherever the
ranks were thickest thither he flew, while the other achaeans followed.
foot soldiers drove the foot soldiers of the foe in rout before them,
and slew them; horsemen did the like by horsemen, and the thundering
tramp of the horses raised a cloud of dust from off the plain. king
agamemnon followed after, ever slaying them and cheering on the
ach
 
 ___________________________
 
aeans. as when some mighty forest is all ablaze--the eddying gusts
whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and are consumed
before the blast of the flame--even so fell the heads of the flying
trojans before agamemnon son of atreus, and many a noble pair of steeds
drew an empty chariot along the highways of war, for lack of drivers
who were lying on the plain, more useful now to vultures than to their
wives.

jove drew hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage and din
of battle; but the son of atreus sped onwards, calling out lustily to
the danaans. they flew on by the tomb of old ilus, son of dardanus, in
the middle of the plain, and past the place of the wild fig-tree making
always for the city-
 
 ___________________________
 
n of atreus still shouting, and with hands
all bedrabbled in gore; but when they had reached the scaean gates and
the oak tree, there they halted and waited for the others to come up.
meanwhile the trojans kept on flying over the middle of the plain like
a herd of cows maddened with fright when a lion has attacked them in
the dead of night--he springs on one of them, seizes her neck in the
grip of his strong teeth and then laps up her blood and gorges himself
upon her entrails--even so did king agamemnon son of atreus pursue the
foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell before him.
many a man was flung headlong from his chariot by the hand of the son
of atreus, for he wielded his spear with fury.

but when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the
father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat,
thunderbolt in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained ida. he then
told iris of the golden wings to carry a message for him. "go," said
he, "fleet iris, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and speak thus to hector--say that so long as he sees
agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the trojan ranks, he is
to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when
agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his
chariot, then will i vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the
ships and night falls at the going down of the sun."

iris hearkened and obeyed. down she went to strong ilius from the
crests of ida, and found hector son of priam standing by his chariot
and horses. then she said, "hector son of priam, peer of gods in
counsel, father jove has sent me to bear you this message--so long as
you see agamemnon heading his men and making havoc o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the trojan ranks,
you are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle,
but when agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to
his chariot, then will jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you
reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of the sun."

when she had thus spoken iris left him, and hector sprang full armed
from his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he went about
everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to fight, and stirring
the dread strife of battle. the trojans then wheeled round, and again
met the achaeans, while the argi
 
 ___________________________
 
ves on their part strengthened their
battalions. the battle was now in array and they stood face to face
with one another, agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness to
be ahead of all others.

tell me now ye muses that dwell in the mansions of olympus, who,
whether of the trojans or of their allies, was first to face agamemnon?
it was iphidamas son of antenor, a man both brave and of great stature,
who was brought up in fertile thrace, the mother of sheep. cisses, his
mother's father, brought him up in his own house when he was a
child--cisses, father to fair theano. when he reached manhood, cisses
would have kept him 
 
 ___________________________
 
there, and was for giving him his daughter in
marriage, but as soon as he had married he set out to fight the
achaeans with twelve ships that followed him: these he had left at
percote and had come on by land to ilius. he it was that now met
agamemnon son of atreus. when they were close up with one another, the
son of atreus missed his aim, and iphidamas hit him on the girdle below
the cuirass and then flung himself upon him, trusting to his strength
of arm; the girdle, however, was not pierced, nor nearly so, for the
point of the spear struck against the silver and was turned aside as
though it had been lead: king agamemnon caught it from his hand, and
drew it towards him with the fury of a lion; he then drew his sword,
and killed iphidamas 
 
 ___________________________
 
by striking him on the neck. so there the poor
fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were of bronze, killed in the
defence of his fellow-citizens, far from his wedded wife, of whom he
had had no joy though he had given much for her: he had given a
hundred-head of cattle down, and had promised later on to give a
thousand sheep and goats mixed, from the countless flocks of which he
was possessed. agamemnon son of atreus then despoiled him, and carried
off his armour into the host of the achaeans.

when noble coon, antenor's eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were his
eyes at the sight of his fallen brother. unseen by agamemnon he got
beside him, spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle of his arm
below the elbow, the point of the spear going right through the arm.
agamemnon was convulsed with pain, but still not even for this did he
leave off struggling and fighting, but grasped his spear that 
 
 ___________________________
 
flew as
fleet as the wind, and sprang upon coon who was trying to drag off the
body of his brother--his father's son--by the foot, and was crying for
help to all the bravest of his comrades; but agamemnon struck him with
a bronze-shod spear and killed him as he was dragging the dead body
through the press of men under cover of his shield: he then cut off his
head, standing over the body of iphidamas. thus did the sons of antenor
meet their fate at the hands of the son of atreus, and go down into the
house of hades.

as long as the blood still welled warm from his wound agamemnon went
about attacking the ranks of the enemy with spear and sword and with
great handfuls of stone, but when the blood h
 
 ___________________________
 
harioteer drive to the ships, for he was in great agony. with
a loud clear voice he shouted to the danaans, "my friends, princes and
counsellors of the argives, defend the ships yourselves, for jove has
not suffered me to fight the whole day through against the trojans."

with this the charioteer turned his horses towards the ships, and they
flew forward nothing loth. their chests were white with foam and their
bellies with dust, as they drew the wounded king out of the battle.

when hector saw agamemnon quit the field, he shouted to the trojans and
lycians saying, "trojans, lycians, and dardanian warriors, be men, my
friends, and acquit yourselves in battle bravely; their best man has
left them, and jove has vouchsafed me a great triumph; charge the foe
with your chariots that you may win still greater glory."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a huntsman
hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so did hector,
peer of mars, hound the proud trojans on again
 
 ___________________________
 
ofore like
panic-stricken hinds, the prey of jackals and wolves in a forest, with
no strength but in flight for they cannot defend themselves. hitherto
the trojans dared not for one moment face the attack of the achaeans,
but now they have sallied far from their city and are fighting at our
very ships through the cowardice of our leader and the disaffection of
the people themselves, who in their discontent care not to fight in
defence of the ships but are being slaughtered near them. true, king
agamemnon son of atreus is the cause of our disaster by having insulted
the son of peleus, still this is no reason why we should leave off
fighting. let us be quick to heal, for the hearts of the brave heal
quickly. you do ill to be thus remiss, you, who are the finest soldiers
in our whole army. i blame no man for keeping out of battle if he is a
weakling, but i am indignant with such men as you are. my good friends,
matters will soon become even worse through this slackness; think, each
one of you, of h
 
 ___________________________
 
bid you glut our hounds and birds of prey
with your fat and your flesh, as you fall by the ships of the achaeans."

with these words he led the way and the others followed after with a
cry that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them. the argives
on their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their
prowess, but stood firm against the onslaught of the trojan chieftains,
and the cry from both the hosts rose up to heaven and to the brightness
of jove's presence.



book xiv

  agamemnon proposes that the achaeans should sail home, and
  is rebuked by ulysses--juno beguiles jupiter--hector is
  wounded.

nestor was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not escape
him, and he said to the son of aesculapius, "what, noble machaon, is
the meaning of all this? the shouts of men fighting by our ships grow
stronger and stronger; stay here, therefore, and sit over your wine,
while fair hecamede heats you a bath and washes the clotted blood from
off you. i will go at once to t
 
 ___________________________
 
 where they are and set
neither this way nor that, till some particular wind sweeps down from
heaven to determine them--even so did the old man ponder whether to
make for the crowd of danaans, or go in search of agamemnon. in the end
he deemed it best to go to the son of atreus; but meanwhile the hosts
were fighting and killing one another, and the hard bronze rattled on
their bodies, as they thrust at one another with their swords and
spears.

the wounded kings, the son of tydeus, ulysses, and agamemnon son of
atreus, fell in with nestor as they were coming up from their
ships--for theirs were drawn up some way from where the fighting was
going on, being on the shore itself inasmuch as they had been beached
first, while the wall had been built behind the hindermost. the stretch
of the shore, wide though it was, did not afford room for all the
ships, and the host was cramped for space, therefore they had placed
the ships in rows one behind the other, and had filled the whole
opening of the bay b
 
 ___________________________
 
etween the two points that formed it. the kings,
leaning on their spears, were coming out to survey the fight, being in
great anxiety, and when old nestor met them they were filled with
dismay. then king agamemnon said to him, "nestor son of neleus, honour
to the achaean name, why have you left the battle to come hither? i
fear that what dread hector said will come true, when he vaunted among
the trojans saying that he would not return to ilius till he had fired
our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it is all coming
true. alas! others of the achaeans, like achilles, are in such anger with
me that they refuse to fight by the sterns of our ships."

then nestor knight of gerene, answered, "i
 
 ___________________________
 
llen is the wall on which we relied as an
impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet. the trojans are fighting
stubbornly and without ceasing at the ships; look where you may you
cannot see from what quarter the rout of the achaeans is coming; they
are being killed in a confused mass and the battle-cry ascends to
heaven; let us think, if counsel can be of any use, what we had better
do; but i do not advise our going into battle ourselves, for a man
cannot fight when he is wounded."

and king agamemnon answered, "nestor, if the trojans are indeed
fighting at the rear of our ships, and neither the wall nor the trench
has served us--over which the danaans toiled so hard, and which they
deemed would be an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet--i see
it must be the will of jove that the achaeans should perish
ingloriously here, far from argos. i knew when jove was willing to
defend us, and i know now that he is raising the trojans to like honour
with the gods, while us, on the other hand, 
 
 ___________________________
 
es should ever have
let fall from his lips. i despise your judgement utterly for what you
have been saying. would you, then, have us draw down our ships into the
water while the battle is raging, and thus play further into the hands
of the conquering trojans? it would be ruin; the achaeans will not go
on fighting when they see the ships being drawn into the water, but
will cease attacking and keep turning their eyes towards them; your
counsel, therefore, sir captain, would be our destruction."

agamemnon answered, "ulysses, your rebuke has stung me to the heart. i
am not, however, ordering the achaeans to draw their ships into the sea
whether they will or no. someone, it may be, old or young, can offer us
better counsel which i shall rejoice to hear."

then said diomed, "such an one is at hand; he is not far to seek, if
you will listen to me and not resent my speaking though i am younger
than any of you. i am by lineage son to a noble sire, tydeus, who lies
buried at thebes. for portheus had thr
 
 ___________________________
 
rue or no; therefore when i say well despise not my words as though i
were a coward or of ignoble birth. i say, then, let us go to the fight
as we needs must, wounded though we be. when there, we may keep out of
the battle and beyond the range of the spears lest we get fresh wounds
in addition to what we have already, but we can spur on others, who
have been indulging their spleen and holding aloof from battle
hitherto."

thus did he speak; whereon they did even as he had said and set out,
king agamemnon leading the way.

meanwhile neptune had kept no blind look-out, and came up to them in
the semblance of an old man. he took agamemnon's right hand in his own
and said, "son of atreus, i take it achilles is glad now that he sees
the achaeans routed and slain, for he is utterly without remorse--may
he come to a bad end and heaven confound him. as for yourself, the
blessed gods are not yet so bitterly angry with you but that the
princes and counsellors of the trojans shall again raise the dust upon
 
 ___________________________
 
he ships, through their own high-handed
doings? do not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may
know about it."

then, o knight patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "achilles, son
of peleus, foremost champion of the achaeans, do not be angry, but i
weep for the disaster that has now befallen the argives. all those who
have been their champions so far are lying at the ships, wounded by
sword or spear. brave diomed son of tydeus has been hit with a spear,
while famed ulysses and agamemnon have received sword-wounds; eurypylus
again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries
are attending to these heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are
you still, o achilles, so inexorable? may it never be my lot to nurse
such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good name.
who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the
argives from ruin? you know no pity; knight peleus was not your father
nor thetis your mother, but the grey sea bor
 
 ___________________________
 
tion. achilles was deeply moved and answered, "what, noble
patroclus, are you saying? i know no prophesyings which i am heeding,
nor has my mother told me anything from the mouth of jove, but i am cut
to the very heart that one of my own rank should dare to rob me because
he is more powerful than i am. this, after all that i have gone
through, is more than i can endure. the girl whom the sons of the
achaeans chose for me, whom i won as the fruit of my spear on having
sacked a city--her has king agamemnon taken from me as though i were
some common vagrant. still, let bygones be bygones: no man may keep his
anger for ever; i said i would not relent till battle and the cry of
war had reached my own ships; nevertheless, now gird my armour about
your shoulders, and lead the myrmidons to battle, for the dark cloud of
trojans has burst furiously over our fleet; the argives are driven back
on to the beach, cooped within a narrow space, and the whole people of
troy has taken heart to sally out against th
 
 ___________________________
 
em, because they see not
the visor of my helmet gleaming near them. had they seen this, there
would not have been a creek nor grip that had not been filled with
their dead as they fled back again. and so it would have been, if only
king agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. as it is the trojans have beset
our host. diomed son of tydeus no longer wields his spear to defend the
danaans, neither have i heard the voice of the son of atreus coming
from his hated head, whereas that of murderous hector rings in my cars
as he gives orders to the trojans, who triumph over the achaeans and
fill the whole plain with their cry of battle. but even so, patroclus,
fall upon them and save the fleet, lest the trojans fire it and prevent
us from being able to
 
 ___________________________
 
 wasp will
come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones--even with such
rage and courage did the myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their
cry of battle rose heavenwards. patroclus called out to his men at the
top of his voice, "myrmidons, followers of achilles son of peleus, be
men my friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory
for the son of peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the
argives--he, and his close fighting followers. the son of atreus king
agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the
bravest of the achaeans."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell in
a body upon the trojans. the ships rang again with the cry which the
achaeans raised, and when the trojans saw the brave son of menoetius
and his squire all gleaming in their armour, they were daunted and
their battalions were thrown into confusion, for they thought the fleet
son of peleus must now have put aside his anger, and have been
reconci
 
 ___________________________
 
concerned for the body of patroclus, who
will shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures of troy, than for
the safety of my own head and yours. hector has wrapped us round in a
storm of battle from every quarter, and our destruction seems now
certain. call then upon the princes of the danaans if there is any who
can hear us."

menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the danaans for help at the top
of his voice. "my friends," he cried, "princes and counsellors of the
argives, all you who with agamemnon and menelaus drink at the public
cost, and give orders each to his own people as jove vouchsafes him
power and glory, the fight is so thick about me that i cannot
distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and
think it shame that patroclus should become meat and morsel for trojan
hounds."

fleet ajax son of oileus heard him and was first to force his way
through the fight and run to help him. next came idomeneus and meriones
his esquire, peer of murderous mars. as for the
 
 ___________________________
 
lf after having held
aloof so long from battle. polydamas son of panthous was first to
speak, a man of judgement, who alone among them could look both before
and after. he was comrade to hector, and they had been born upon the
same night; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed
them thus:--

"look to it well, my friends; i would urge you to go back now to your
city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from
our walls. so long as this man was at enmity with agamemnon the
achaeans were easier to deal with, and i would have gladly camped by
the ships in the hope of taking them; but now i go in great fear of the
fleet son of peleus; he is so daring that he will never bide here on
the plain whereon the trojans and achaeans fight with equal valour, but
he will try to storm our city and carry off our women. do then as i
say, and let us retreat. for this is what will happen. the darkness of
night will for a time stay the son of peleus, but if he find us here in
the
 
 ___________________________
 
ly against my will did i
submit to the embraces of one who was but mortal, and who now stays at
home worn out with age. neither is this all. heaven vouchsafed me a
son, hero among heroes, and he shot up as a sapling. i tended him as a
plant in a goodly garden and sent him with his ships to ilius to fight
the trojans, but never shall i welcome him back to the house of peleus.
so long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun, he is in
heaviness, and though i go to him i cannot help him; king agamemnon has
made him give up the maiden whom the sons of the achaeans had awarded
him, and he wastes with sorrow for her sake. then the trojans hemmed
the achaeans in at their ships' sterns and would not let them come
forth; the elders, therefore, of the argives besought achilles and
offered him great treasure, whereon he refused to bring deliverance to
them himself, but put his own armour on patroclus and sent him into the
fight with much people after him. all day long they fought by the
scaean gates a
 
 ___________________________
 
long
indeed remember our quarrel. now, however, let it be, for it is over.
if we have been angry, necessity has schooled our anger. i put it from
me: i dare not nurse it for ever; therefore, bid the achaeans arm
forthwith that i may go out against the trojans, and learn whether they
will be in a mind to sleep by the ships or no. glad, i ween, will he be
to rest his knees who may fly my spear when i wield it."

thus did he speak, and the achaeans rejoiced in that he had put away
his anger.

then agamemnon spoke, rising in his place, and not going into the
middle of the assembly. "danaan heroes," said he, "servants of mars, it
is well to listen when a man stands up to speak, and it is not seemly
to interrupt him, or it will go hard even with a practised speaker. who
can either hear or speak in an uproar? even the finest orator will be
disconcerted by it. i will expound to the son of peleus, and do you
other achaeans heed me and mark me well. often have the achaeans spoken
to me of this matter and 
 
 ___________________________
 
this there is strength and stay. no man can do battle the
livelong day to the going down of the sun if he is without food;
however much he may want to fight his strength will fail him before he
knows it; hunger and thirst will find him out, and his limbs will grow
weary under him. but a man can fight all day if he is full fed with
meat and wine; his heart beats high, and his strength will stay till he
has routed all his foes; therefore, send the people away and bid them
prepare their meal; king agamemnon will bring out the gifts in presence
of the assembly, that all may see them and you may be satisfied.
moreover let him swear an oath before the argives that he has never
gone up into the couch of briseis, nor been with her after the manner
of men and women; and do you, too, show yourself of a gracious mind;
let agamemnon entertain you in his tents with a feast of
reconciliation, that so you may have had your dues in full. as for you,
son of atreus, treat people more righteously in future; it is 
 
 ___________________________
 
no
disgrace even to a king that he should make amends if he was wrong in
the first instance."

and king agamemnon answered, "son of laertes, your words please me
well, for throughout you have spoken wisely. i will swear as you would
have me do; i do so of my own free will, neither shall i take the name
of heaven in vain. let, then, achilles wait, though he would fain fight
at once, and do you others wait also, till the gifts come from my tent
and we ratify the oath with sacrifice. thus, then, do i charge you:
take some noble young achaeans with you, and bring from my tents the
gifts that i promised yesterda
 
 ___________________________
 
 and mind, but
let those of us who are left eat and drink that we may arm and fight
our foes more fiercely. in that hour let no man hold back, waiting for
a second summons; such summons shall bode ill for him who is found
lagging behind at our ships; let us rather sally as one man and loose
the fury of war upon the trojans."

when he had thus spoken he took with him the sons of nestor, with meges
son of phyleus, thoas, meriones, lycomedes son of creontes, and
melanippus, and went to the tent of agamemnon son of atreus. the word
was not sooner said than the deed was done: they brought out the seven
tripods which agamemnon had promised, with the twenty metal cauldrons
and the twelve horses; they also brought the women skilled in useful
arts, seven in number, with briseis, which made eight. ulysses weighed
out the ten talents of gold and then led the way back, while the young
achaeans brought the rest of the gifts, and laid them in the middle of
the assembly.

agamemnon then rose, and talthybius wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ose voice was like that of a god
came to him with the boar. the son of atreus drew the knife which he
wore by the scabbard of his mighty sword, and began by cutting off some
bristles from the boar, lifting up his hands in prayer as he did so.
the other achaeans sat where they were all silent and orderly to hear
the king, and agamemnon looked into the vault of heaven and prayed
saying, "i call jove the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, i
call also earth and sun and the erinyes who dwell below and take
vengeance on him who shall swear falsely, that i have laid no hand upon
the girl briseis, neither to take her to my bed nor otherwise, but that
she has remained in my tents inviolate. if i swear falsely may heaven
visit me with all the penalties which it metes out to those who perjure
themselves."

he cut the boar's thr
 
 ___________________________
 
and whining into the earth. achilles sprang to his feet,
smote his two hands, and made lamentation saying, "of a truth even in
the house of hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life in
them; all night long the sad spirit of patroclus has hovered over head
making piteous moan, telling me what i am to do for him, and looking
wondrously like himself."

thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning about
the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. then king
agamemnon sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to bring wood,
and meriones, squire to idomeneus, was in charge over them. they went
out with woodmen's axes and strong ropes in their hands, and before
them went the mules. up hill and down dale did they go, by straight
ways and crooked, and when they reached the heights of many-fountained
ida, they laid their axes to the roots of many a tall branching oak
that came thundering down as they felled it. they split the trees and
bound them behind the m
 
 ___________________________
 
nds of his dear comrade, and
all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. the sun
would have gone down upon their mourning had not achilles presently
said to agamemnon, "son of atreus, for it is to you that the people
will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from
mourning; bid the people now leave the pyre and set about getting their
dinners: we, to whom the dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted
here, and let the other princes also stay by me."

when king agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their ships,
but those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built a pyre a
hundred feet this way and that; then they laid the dead all sorrowfully
upon the top of it. they flayed and dressed many fat sheep and oxen
before the pyre, and achilles took fat from all of them and wrapped the
body therein from head to foot, heaping the flayed carcases all round
it. against the bier he leaned two-handled jars of honey and unguents;
four proud horses did he the
 
 ___________________________
 
 his chariot."

thus spoke the son of peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred
themselves. first among them all uprose eumelus, king of men, son of
admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. next to him rose mighty
diomed son of tydeus; he yoked the trojan horses which he had taken
from aeneas, when apollo bore him out of the fight. next to him,
yellow-haired menelaus son of atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses,
agamemnon's mare aethe, and his own horse podargus. the mare had been
given to agamemnon by echepolus son of anchises, that he might not have
to follow him to ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for
jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious sicyon.
this mare, all eager for the race, did menelaus put under the yoke.

fourth in order antilochus, son to noble nestor son of neleus, made
ready his horses. these were bred in pylos, and his father came up to
him to give him good advice of which, however, he stood in but little
need. "antilochus," said nes
 
 ___________________________
 
none of the youngest, nor
your eyes none of the sharpest, but you are always laying down the law.
you have no right to do so, for there are better men here than you are.
eumelus's horses are in front now, as they always have been, and he is
on the chariot holding the reins."

the captain of the cretans was angry, and answered, "ajax you are an
excellent railer, but you have no judgement, and are wanting in much
else as well, for you have a vile temper. i will wager you a tripod or
cauldron, and agamemnon son of atreus shall decide whose horses are
first. you will then know to your cost."

ajax son of oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there would
have been yet further brawling between them, had not achilles risen in
his place and said, "cease your railing, ajax and idomeneus; it is not
seemly; you would be scandalised if you saw any one else do the like:
sit down and keep your eyes on the horses; they are speeding towards
the winning-post and will be here directly. you will then both
 
 ___________________________
 
er
been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a pattern of
flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up--to wit the son of
atreus, king of men agamemnon, and meriones, stalwart squire of
idomeneus. but achilles spoke saying, "son of atreus, we know how far
you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take
the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let
us give the spear to meriones; this at least is what i should myself
wish."

king agamemnon assented. so he gave the bronze spear to meriones, and
handed the goodly cauldron to talthybius his esquire.



book xxiv

  priam ransoms the body of hector--hector's funeral.

the assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to his
own ship. there they made ready their supper, and then bethought them
of the blessed boon of sleep; but achilles still wept for thinking of
his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could take no
hold upon him. this way and that did he tu
 
 ___________________________
 
 thinking all the time how to get king priam
away from the ships without his being seen by the strong force of
sentinels. he hovered therefore over priam's head and said, "sir, now
that achilles has spared your life, you seem to have no fear about
sleeping in the thick of your foes. you have paid a great ransom, and
have received the body of your son; were you still alive and a prisoner
the sons whom you have left at home would have to give three times as
much to free you; and so it would be if agamemnon and the other
achaeans were to know of your being here."

when he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant.
mercury then yoked their horses and mules, and drove them quickly
through the host so that no man perceived them. when they came to the
ford of eddying xanthus, begotten of immortal jove, mercury went back
to high olympus, and dawn in robe of saffron began to break over all
the land. priam and idaeus then drove on toward the city lamenting and
making moan, and the mules dre