er mt.
tmolus.

nastes led the carians, men of a strange speech. these held miletus and
the wooded mountain of phthires, with the water of the river maeander
and the lofty crests of mt. mycale. these were commanded by nastes and
amphimachus, the brave sons of nomion. he came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to
save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant
of aeacus, and achilles bore away his gold.

sarpedon and glaucus led the lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the xanthus.



book iii

  alexandria, also called paris, challenges menelaus--helen and
  priam view the achaeans from the wall--the covenant--paris
  and menelaus fight, and paris is worsted--venus carries him
  off to save him--scene between him and helen.

when the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream
overhead when rain and winter drive t
 
 ___________________________
 
ain-killing herbs
upon his wound and cured him, for he was not of mortal mould. as the
juice of the fig-tree curdles milk, and thickens it in a moment though
it is liquid, even so instantly did paeeon cure fierce mars. then hebe
washed him, and clothed him in goodly raiment, and he took his seat by
his father jove all glorious to behold.

but juno of argos and minerva of alalcomene, now that they had put a
stop to the murderous doings of mars, went back again to the house of
jove.



book vi

  glaucus and diomed--the story of bellerophon--hector
  and andromache.

the fight between trojans and achaeans was now left to rage as it
would, and the tide of war surged hither and thither over the plain as
they aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another between the streams
of simois and xanthus.

first, ajax son of telamon, tower of strength to the achaeans, broke a
phalanx of the trojans, and came to the assistance of his comrades by
killing acamas son of eussorus, the best man among the thracia
 
 ___________________________
 
us onset, for they deemed that some one of the immortals had
come down from starry heaven to help the trojans, so strangely had they
rallied. and hector shouted to the trojans, "trojans and allies, be
men, my friends, and fight with might and main, while i go to ilius and
tell the old men of our council and our wives to pray to the gods and
vow hecatombs in their honour."

with this he went his way, and the black rim of hide that went round
his shield beat against his neck and his ancles.

then glaucus son of hippolochus, and the son of tydeus went into the
open space between the hosts to fight in single combat. when they were
close up to one another diomed of the loud war-cry was the first to
speak. "who, my good sir," said he, "who are you among men? i have
never seen you in battle until now, but you are daring beyond all
others if you abide my onset. woe to those fathers whose sons face my
might. if, however, you are one of the immortals and have come down
from heaven, i will not fight you
 
 ___________________________
 
aves year by year upon the trees. those
of autumn the wind sheds upon the ground, but when spring returns the
forest buds forth with fresh vines. even so is it with the generations
of mankind, the new spring up as the old are passing away. if, then,
you would learn my descent, it is one that is well known to many. there
is a city in the heart of argos, pasture land of horses, called ephyra,
where sisyphus lived, who was the craftiest of all mankind. he was the
son of aeolus, and had a son named glaucus, who was father to
bellerophon, whom heaven endowed with the most surpassing comeliness
and beauty. but proetus devised his ruin, and being stronger than he,
drove him from the land of the argives, over which jove had made him
ruler. for antea, wife of proetus, lusted after him, and would have had
him lie with her in secret; but bellerophon was an honourable man and
would not, so she told lies about him to proteus. 'proetus,' said she,
'kill bellerophon or die, for he would have had converse wi
 
 ___________________________
 
us avoid one another's spears even during a general
engagement; there are many noble trojans and allies whom i can kill, if
i overtake them and heaven delivers them into my hand; so again with
yourself, there are many achaeans whose lives you may take if you can;
we two, then, will exchange armour, that all present may know of the
old ties that subsist between us."

with these words they sprang from their chariots, grasped one another's
hands, and plighted friendship. but the son of saturn made glaucus take
leave of his wits, for he exchanged golden armour for bronze, the worth
of a hundred head of cattle for the worth of nine.

now when hector reached the scaean gates and the oak tree, the wives
and daughters of the trojans came running towards him to ask after
their sons, brothers, kinsmen, and husbands: he told them to set about
praying to the gods, and many were made sorrowful as they heard him.

presently he reached the splendid palace of king priam, adorned with
colonnades of hewn stone
 
 ___________________________
 
andrus with him, both eager for the fray. as when heaven sends a
breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have
laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome
was the sight of these two heroes to the trojans.

thereon alexandrus killed menesthius the son of areithous; he lived in
arne, and was son of areithous the mace-man, and of phylomedusa. hector
threw a spear at eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in the neck
under the bronze rim of his helmet. glaucus, moreover, son of
hippolochus, captain of the lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight smote
iphinous son of dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing on to his
chariot behind his fleet mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and
there was no life left in him.

when, therefore, minerva saw these men making havoc of the argives, she
darted down to ilius from the summits of olympus, and apollo, who was
looking on from pergamus, went out to meet her; for he wanted the
trojans to be victorious. the p
 
 ___________________________
 
s valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man of them all. these
helped to array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged
straight at the danaans, for they felt sure that they would not hold
out longer and that they should themselves now fall upon the ships.

the rest of the trojans and their allies now followed the counsel of
polydamas but asius, son of hyrtacus, would not leave his horses and
his esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness h
 
 ___________________________
 
me lion of the wilderness,
who has been long famished for want of meat and will dare break even
into a well-fenced homestead to try and get at the sheep. he may find
the shepherds keeping watch over their flocks with dogs and spears, but
he is in no mind to be driven from the fold till he has had a try for
it; he will either spring on a sheep and carry it off, or be hit by a
spear from some strong hand--even so was sarpedon fain to attack the
wall and break down its battlements. then he said to glaucus son of
hippolochus, "glaucus, why in lycia do we receive especial honour as
regards our place at table? why are the choicest portions served us and
our cups kept brimming, and why do men look up to us as though we were
gods? moreover we hold a large estate by the banks of the river
xanthus, fair with orchard lawns and wheat-growing land; it becomes us,
therefore, to take our stand at the head of all the lycians and bear
the brunt of the fight, that one may say to another, 'our princes in
lycia 
 
 ___________________________
 
eat the fat of the land and drink best of wine, but they are fine
fellows; they fight well and are ever at the front in battle.' my good
friend, if, when we were once out of this fight, we could escape old
age and death thenceforward and forever, i should neither press forward
myself nor bid you do so, but death in ten thousand shapes hangs ever
over our heads, and no man can elude him; therefore let us go forward
and either win glory for ourselves, or yield it to another."

glaucus heeded his saying, and the pair forthwith led on the host of
lycians. menestheus son of peteos was dismayed when he saw them, for it
was against his part of the wall that they came--bringing destruction
with them; he looked along the wall for some chieftain to support his
comrades and saw the two ajaxes, men ever eager for the fray, and
teucer, who had just come from his tent, standing near them; but he
could not make his voice heard by shouting to them, so great an uproar
was there from crashi
 
 ___________________________
 
, ajax son of telamon killed brave epicles, a comrade of sarpedon,
hitting him with a jagged stone that lay by the battlements at the very
top of the wall. as men now are, even one who is in the bloom of youth
could hardly lift it with his two hands, but ajax raised it high aloft
and flung it down, smashing epicles' four-crested helmet so that the
bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell from the high
wall as though he were diving, with no more life left in him. then
teucer wounded glaucus the brave son of hippolochus as he was coming on
to attack the wall. he saw his shoulder bare and aimed an arrow at it,
which made glaucus leave off fighting. thereon he sprang covertly down
for fear some of the achaeans might see that he was wounded and taunt
him. sarpedon was stung with grief when he saw glaucus leave him, still
he did not leave off fighting, but aimed his spear at alcmaon the son
of thestor and hit him. he drew his spear back again and alcmaon came
down headlong after it wit
 
 ___________________________
 
rbolt is a very awful thing--even so did hector
fall to earth and bite the dust. his spear fell from his hand, but his
shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze armour
rang about him.

the sons of the achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him,
hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the trojans,
but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered
by the princes polydamas, aeneas, agenor, sarpedon captain of the
lycians, and noble glaucus. of the others, too, there was not one who
was unmindful of him, and they held their round shields over him to
cover him. his comrades then lifted him off the ground and bore him
away from the battle to the place where his horses stood waiting for
him at the rear of the fight with their driver and the chariot; these
then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. when they
reached the ford of the fair stream of xanthus, begotten of immortal
jove, they took him from off his chariot an
 
 ___________________________
 
 pine
to which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains to make timber
for ship-building--even so did he lie stretched at full length in front
of his chariot and horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained
dust. as when a lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and
fastens on a great black bull which dies bellowing in its
clutches--even so did the leader of the lycian warriors struggle in
death as he fell by the hand of patroclus. he called on his trusty
comrade and said, "glaucus, my brother, hero among heroes, put forth
all your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit yourself
like a valiant soldier. first go about among the lycian captains and
bid them fight for sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save my
armour from being taken. my name will haunt you henceforth and for ever
if the achaeans rob me of my armour now that i have fallen at their
ships. do your very utmost and call all my people together."

death closed his eyes as he spoke. patroclus 
 
 ___________________________
 
planted his heel on his
breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out
along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and sarpedon's soul at
the same time. hard by the myrmidons held his snorting steeds, who were
wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.

glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what sarpedon said, for
he could not help him. he had to support his arm with his other hand,
being in great pain through the wound which teucer's arrow had given
him when teucer was defending the wall as he, glaucus, was assailing
it. therefore he prayed to far-darting apollo saying, "hear me o king
from your seat, may be in the rich land of lycia, or may be in troy,
for in all places you can hear the prayer of one who is in distress, as
i now am. i have a
 
 ___________________________
 
whole arm drags by reason of my
hurt, so that i cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and fight
them, though our prince, jove's son sarpedon, is slain. jove defended
not his son, do you, therefore, o king, heal me of my wound, ease my
pain and grant me strength both to cheer on the lycians and to fight
along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the lycian
captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them.
 
 ___________________________
 
 swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. even so swiftly,
o noble knight patroclus, did you make straight for the lycians and
trojans to avenge your comrade. forthwith he struck sthenelaus the son
of ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join
it to the head and spine. on this hector and the front rank of his men
gave ground. as far as a man can throw a javelin when competing for
some prize, or even in battle--so far did the trojans now retreat
before the achaeans. glaucus, captain of the lycians, was the first to
rally them, by killing bathycles son of chalcon who lived in hellas and
was the richest man among the myrmidons. glaucus turned round suddenly,
just as bathycles who was pursuing him was about to lay hold of him,
and drove his spear right into the middle of his chest, whereon he fell
heavily to the ground, and the fall of so good a man filled the
achaeans with dismay, while the trojans were exultant, and came up in a
body round the corpse. nevertheless 
 
 ___________________________
 
er to the
trojans to take to the city, as a great trophy for himself; ajax,
therefore, covered the body of patroclus with his broad shield and
bestrode him; as a lion stands over his whelps if hunters have come
upon him in a forest when he is with his little ones--in the pride and
fierceness of his strength he draws his knit brows down till they cover
his eyes--even so did ajax bestride the body of patroclus, and by his
side stood menelaus son of atreus, nursing great sorrow in his heart.

then glaucus son of hippolochus looked fiercely at hector and rebuked
him sternly. "hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight
you are sadly wanting. a runaway like yourself has no claim to so great
a reputation. think how you may now save your town and citadel by the
hands of your own people born in ilius; for you will get no lycians to
fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incessant
hardships. are you likely, sir, to do anything to help a man of less
note, after leaving sar
 
 ___________________________
 
off patroclus into ilius. could we get this dead man away and
bring him into the city of priam, the argives would readily give up the
armour of sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. for he whose
squire has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the
achaeans--he and his close-fighting followers. nevertheless you dared
not make a stand against ajax, nor face him, eye to eye, with battle
all round you, for he is a braver man than you are."

hector scowled at him and answered, "glaucus, you should know better. i
have held you so far as a man of more understanding than any in all
lycia, but now i despise you for saying that i am afraid of ajax. i
fear neither battle nor the din of chariots, but jove's will is
stronger than ours; jove at one time makes even a strong man draw back
and snatches victory from his grasp, while at another he will set him
on to fight. come hither then, my friend, stand by me and see indeed
whether i shall play the coward the whole day through as you s
 
 ___________________________
 
ht
now, but as against this you shall not return from battle to lay the
armour of the son of peleus before andromache."

the son of saturn bowed his portentous brows, and hector fitted the
armour to his body, while terrible mars entered into him, and filled
his whole body with might and valour. with a shout he strode in among
the allies, and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to all
of them like the great son of peleus himself. he went about among them
and cheered them on--mesthles, glaucus, medon, thersilochus,
asteropaeus, deisenor and hippothous, phorcys, chromius and ennomus the
augur. all these did he exhort saying, "hear me, allies from other
cities who are here in your thousands, it was not in order to have a
crowd about me that i called you hither each from his several city, but
that with heart and soul you might defend the wives and little ones of
the trojans from the fierce achaeans. for this do i oppress my people
with your food and the presents that make you rich. ther