me to return home with my ships, for i will not stay here
dishonoured to gather gold and substance for you."

and agamemnon answered, "fly if you will, i shall make you no prayers
to stay you. i have others here who will do me honour, and above all
jove, the lord of counsel. there is no king here so hateful to me as
you are, for you are ever quarrelsome and ill-affected. what though you
be brave? was it not heaven that made you so? go home, then, with your
ships and comrades to lord it over the myrmidons. i care neither for
you nor for your anger; and thus will i do: since phoebus apollo is
taking chryseis from me, i shall send her with my ship and my
followers, but i shall come to your tent and take your own prize
briseis, that you may learn how much stronger i am than you are, and
that another may fear to set himself up as equal or comparable with me."

the son of peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast
was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill

 
 ___________________________
 
he host. but agamemnon did
not forget the threat that he had made achilles, and called his trusty
messengers and squires talthybius and eurybates. "go," said he, "to the
tent of achilles, son of peleus; take briseis by the hand and bring her
hither; if he will not give her i shall come with others and take
her--which will press him harder."

he charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the myrmidons. they found achilles sitting by his tent and
his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. they stood
fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak,
but he knew them and said, "welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and
men; draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with agamemnon who has
sent you for the girl briseis. therefore, patroclus, bring her and give
her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by mortal
men, and by the fierceness of agamemn
 
 ___________________________
 
r ilius of all the danaans after the
son of peleus--but he was a man of no substance, and had but a small
following.

and those that held nisyrus, crapathus, and casus, with cos, the city
of eurypylus, and the calydnian islands, these were commanded by
pheidippus and antiphus, two sons of king thessalus the son of
hercules. and with them there came thirty ships.

those again who held pelasgic argos, alos, alope, and trachis; and
those of phthia and hellas the land of fair women, who were called
myrmidons, hellenes, and achaeans; these had fifty ships, over which
achilles was in command. but they now took no part in the war, inasmuch
as there was no one to marshal them; for achilles stayed by his ships,
furious about the loss of the girl briseis, whom he had taken from
lyrnessus at his own great peril, when he had sacked lyrnessus and
thebe, and had overthrown mynes and epistrophus, sons of king evenor,
son of selepus. for her sake achilles was still grieving, but ere long
he was again to join t
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and the achaeans will
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

with these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,
whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders.
then nestor rose and spoke, "of a truth," said he, "the achaean land is
fallen upon evil times. the old knight peleus, counsellor and orator
among the myrmidons, loved when i was in his house to question me
concerning the race and lineage of all the argives. how would it not
grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before hector? many a
time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave his
body and go down within the house of hades. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo, that i were still young and strong as when the
pylians and arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river celadon
under the walls of pheia, and round a
 
 ___________________________
 

and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from
the tent of agamemnon son of atreus; and nestor, looking first to one
and then to another, but most especially at ulysses, was instant with
them that they should prevail with the noble son of peleus.

they went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed
earnestly to earth-encircling neptune that the high spirit of the son
of aeacus might incline favourably towards them. when they reached the
ships and tents of the myrmidons, they found achilles playing on a
lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. it
was part of the spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city of
eetion, and he was now diverting himself with it and singing the feats
of heroes. he was alone with patroclus, who sat opposite to him and
said nothing, waiting till he should cease singing. ulysses and ajax
now came in--ulysses leading the way--and stood before him. achilles
sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his
 
 ___________________________
 
the danaans, and would
fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the achaeans."

"ajax," replied achilles, "noble son of telamon, you have spoken much
to my liking, but my blood boils when i think it all over, and remember
how the son of atreus treated me with contumely as though i were some
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the argives. go, then, and
deliver your message; say that i will have no concern with fighting
till hector, son of noble priam, reaches the tents of the myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. for all his
lust of battle, i take it he will be held in check when he is at my own
tent and ship."

on this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, ulysses leading the way. but patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for
phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of
fine linen. the old man then laid himself down and waited t
 
 ___________________________
 
 is far the better man of the two. counsel him
wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will follow you to his own
profit.' thus did your father charge you, but you have forgotten;
nevertheless, even now, say all this to achilles if he will listen to
you. who knows but with heaven's help you may talk him over, for it is
good to take a friend's advice. if, however, he is fearful about some
oracle, or if his mother has told him something from jove, then let him
send you, and let the rest of the myrmidons follow with you, if
perchance you may bring light and saving to the danaans. and let him
send you into battle clad in his own armour, that the trojans may
mistake you for him and leave off fighting; the sons of the achaeans
may thus have time to get their breath, for they are hard pressed and
there is little breathing time in battle. you, who are fresh, might
easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls and away from the tents
and ships."

with these words he moved the heart of patroclus, who s
 
 ___________________________
 
 as from some spring
whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high precipice. when
achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said, "why,
patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes
running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried--she catches
hold of her mother's dress to stay her though she is in a hurry, and
looks tearfully up until her mother carries her--even such tears,
patroclus, are you now shedding. have you anything to say to the
myrmidons or to myself? or have you had news from phthia which you
alone know? they tell me menoetius son of actor is still alive, as also
peleus son of aeacus, among the myrmidons--men whose loss we two should
bitterly deplore; or are you grieving about the argives and the way in
which they are being killed at the ships, through their own high-handed
doings? do not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may
know about it."

then, o knight patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "achilles, s
 
 ___________________________
 
my lot to nurse
such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good name.
who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the
argives from ruin? you know no pity; knight peleus was not your father
nor thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore you and the sheer cliffs
begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you. if however you are kept
back through knowledge of some oracle, or if your mother thetis has
told you something from the mouth of jove, at least send me and the
myrmidons with me, if i may bring deliverance to the danaans. let me
moreover wear your armour; the trojans may thus mistake me for you and
quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the achaeans may have
breathing time--which while they are fighting may hardly be. we who are
fresh might soon drive tired men back from our ships and tents to their
own city."

he knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own
destruction. achilles was deeply moved and answered, "what, noble
patroclus,
 
 ___________________________
 
ore powerful than i am. this, after all that i have gone
through, is more than i can endure. the girl whom the sons of the
achaeans chose for me, whom i won as the fruit of my spear on having
sacked a city--her has king agamemnon taken from me as though i were
some common vagrant. still, let bygones be bygones: no man may keep his
anger for ever; i said i would not relent till battle and the cry of
war had reached my own ships; nevertheless, now gird my armour about
your shoulders, and lead the myrmidons to battle, for the dark cloud of
trojans has burst furiously over our fleet; the argives are driven back
on to the beach, cooped within a narrow space, and the whole people of
troy has taken heart to sally out against them, because they see not
the visor of my helmet gleaming near them. had they seen this, there
would not have been a creek nor grip that had not been filled with
their dead as they fled back again. and so it would have been, if only
king agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. as it is
 
 ___________________________
 
ked the fleet horses xanthus and balius, steeds that could fly like
the wind: these were they whom the harpy podarge bore to the west wind,
as she was grazing in a meadow by the waters of the river oceanus. in
the side traces he set the noble horse pedasus, whom achilles had
brought away with him when he sacked the city of eetion, and who,
mortal steed though he was, could take his place along with those that
were immortal.

meanwhile achilles went about everywhere among the tents, and bade his
myrmidons put on their armour. even as fierce ravening wolves that are
feasting upon a homed stag which they have killed upon the mountains,
and their jaws are red with blood--they go in a pack to lap water from
the clear spring with their long thin tongues; and they reek of blood
and slaughter; they know not what fear is, for it is hunger drives
them--even so did the leaders and counsellors of the myrmidons gather
round the good squire of the fleet descendant of aeacus, and among them
stood achilles him
 
 ___________________________
 
on she bore him a noble
son eudorus, singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. when
ilithuia goddess of the pains of child-birth brought him to the light
of day, and he saw the face of the sun, mighty echecles son of actor
took the mother to wife, and gave great wealth to gain her, but her
father phylas brought the child up, and took care of him, doting as
fondly upon him as though he were his own son. the third company was
led by pisander son of maemalus, the finest spearman among all the
myrmidons next to achilles' own comrade patroclus. the old knight
phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and alcimedon, noble son of
laerceus of the fifth.

when achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, "myrmidons, remember your
threats against the trojans while you were at the ships in the time of
my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'cruel son of peleus,'
you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthle
 
 ___________________________
 
f their
king. as the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high house
which is to give shelter from the winds--even so closely were the
helmets and bossed shields set against one another. shield pressed on
shield, helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the
horse-hair plumes on the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each
other as they bent their heads.

in front of them all two men put on their armour--patroclus and
automedon--two men, with but one mind to lead the myrmidons. then
achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest
which silver-footed thetis had given him to take on board ship, and
which she had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good
thick rugs. in this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which
no man but himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to
any other god save only to father jove. he took the cup from the chest
and cleansed it with sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and
af
 
 ___________________________
 
ng jove," he cried, "lord of dodona, god of the pelasgi,
who dwellest afar, you who hold wintry dodona in your sway, where your
prophets the selli dwell around you with their feet unwashed and their
couches made upon the ground--if you heard me when i prayed to you
aforetime, and did me honour while you sent disaster on the achaeans,
vouchsafe me now the fulfilment of yet this further prayer. i shall
stay here where my ships are lying, but i shall send my comrade into
battle at the head of many myrmidons. grant, o all-seeing jove, that
victory may go with him; put your courage into his heart that hector
may learn whether my squire is man enough to fight alone, or whether
his might is only then so indomitable when i myself enter the turmoil
of war. afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of battle
from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armour and
his comrades, fighters in close combat."

thus did he pray, and all-counselling jove heard his prayer. part of it
he d
 
 ___________________________
 
ght that raged between the trojans and achaeans.

meanwhile the armed band that was about patroclus marched on till they
sprang high in hope upon the trojans. they came swarming out like wasps
whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly children love to tease,
whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung--or again, if a
wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident, every wasp will
come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones--even with such
rage and courage did the myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their
cry of battle rose heavenwards. patroclus called out to his men at the
top of his voice, "myrmidons, followers of achilles son of peleus, be
men my friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory
for the son of peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the
argives--he, and his close fighting followers. the son of atreus king
agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the
bravest of the achaeans."

with these words he p
 
 ___________________________
 
m fight for sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save my
armour from being taken. my name will haunt you henceforth and for ever
if the achaeans rob me of my armour now that i have fallen at their
ships. do your very utmost and call all my people together."

death closed his eyes as he spoke. patroclus planted his heel on his
breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out
along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and sarpedon's soul at
the same time. hard by the myrmidons held his snorting steeds, who were
wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.

glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what sarpedon said, for
he could not help him. he had to support his arm with his other hand,
being in great pain through the wound which teucer's arrow had given
him when teucer was defending the wall as he, glaucus, was assailing
it. therefore he prayed to far-darting apollo saying, "hear me o king
from your seat, may be in the rich land of lycia, or
 
 ___________________________
 
m
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. sarpedon leader of the lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of lycia; mars has laid
him low by the spear of patroclus. stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body
with contumely in revenge for all the danaans whom we have speared at
the ships."

as he spoke the trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief;
for sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of
their city, both as having much people with him, and himself the
foremost among them all. led by hector, who was infuriated by the fall
of sarpedon, they made instantly for the danaans with all their might,
while the undaunte
 
 ___________________________
 
st he spoke to the two ajaxes, men who needed no bidding.
"ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show yourselves the men
you have always been, or even better--sarpedon is fallen--he who was
first to overleap the wall of the achaeans; let us take the body and
outrage it; let us strip the armour from his shoulders, and kill his
comrades if they try to rescue his body."

he spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides,
therefore, the trojans and lycians on the one hand, and the myrmidons
and achaeans on the other, strengthened their battalions, and fought
desperately about the body of sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while.
mighty was the din of their armour as they came together, and jove shed
a thick darkness over the fight, to increase the toil of the battle
over the body of his son.

at first the trojans made some headway against the achaeans, for one of
the best men among the myrmidons was killed, epeigeus, son of noble
agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of
 
 ___________________________
 
r comrade. forthwith he struck sthenelaus the son
of ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join
it to the head and spine. on this hector and the front rank of his men
gave ground. as far as a man can throw a javelin when competing for
some prize, or even in battle--so far did the trojans now retreat
before the achaeans. glaucus, captain of the lycians, was the first to
rally them, by killing bathycles son of chalcon who lived in hellas and
was the richest man among the myrmidons. glaucus turned round suddenly,
just as bathycles who was pursuing him was about to lay hold of him,
and drove his spear right into the middle of his chest, whereon he fell
heavily to the ground, and the fall of so good a man filled the
achaeans with dismay, while the trojans were exultant, and came up in a
body round the corpse. nevertheless the achaeans, mindful of their
prowess, bore straight down upon them.

meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the trojans, laogonus son of
onetor, who w
 
 ___________________________
 
ey fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the fleet
runner antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached achilles,
and found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that which was
indeed too surely true. "alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of
his heart, "why are the achaeans again scouring the plain and flocking
towards the ships? heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that
sorrow upon me of which my mother thetis spoke, saying that while i was
yet alive the bravest of the myrmidons should fall before the trojans,
and see the light of the sun no longer. i fear the brave son of
menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet i bade him return
to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing
fire against them, and not join battle with hector."

as he was thus pondering, the son of nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "alas," he cried, "son of noble
peleus, i bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue.

 
 ___________________________
 
g as he lives to look upon the light of the sun he is in heaviness,
and though i go to him i cannot help him. nevertheless i will go, that
i may see my dear son and learn what sorrow has befallen him though he
is still holding aloof from battle."

she left the cave as she spoke, while the others followed weeping
after, and the waves opened a path before them. when they reached the
rich plain of troy, they came up out of the sea in a long line on to
the sands, at the place where the ships of the myrmidons were drawn up
in close order round the tents of achilles. his mother went up to him
as he lay groaning; she laid her hand upon his head and spoke
piteously, saying, "my son, why are you thus weeping? what sorrow has
now befallen you? tell me; hide it not from me. surely jove has granted
you the prayer you made him, when you lifted up your hands and besought
him that the achaeans might all of them be pent up at their ships, and
rue it bitterly in that you were no longer with them."

achilles gro
 
 ___________________________
 
he
host, and meanwhile through the whole night the achaeans mourned
patroclus, and the son of peleus led them in their lament. he laid his
murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again and
again as a bearded lion when a man who was chasing deer has robbed him
of his young in some dense forest; when the lion comes back he is
furious, and searches dingle and dell to track the hunter if he can
find him, for he is mad with rage--even so with many a sigh did
achilles speak among the myrmidons saying, "alas! vain were the words
with which i cheered the hero menoetius in his own house; i said that i
would bring his brave son back again to opoeis after he had sacked
ilius and taken his share of the spoils--but jove does not give all men
their heart's desire. the same soil shall be reddened here at troy by
the blood of us both, for i too shall never be welcomed home by the old
knight peleus, nor by my mother thetis, but even in this place shall
the earth cover me. nevertheless, o patroc
 
 ___________________________
 
roclus. thereon they set a
tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire: they threw sticks on to
it to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played about
the belly of the tripod. when the water in the cauldron was boiling
they washed the body, anointed it with oil, and closed its wounds with
ointment that had been kept nine years. then they laid it on a bier and
covered it with a linen cloth from head to foot, and over this they
laid a fair white robe. thus all night long did the myrmidons gather
round achilles to mourn patroclus.

then jove said to juno his sister-wife, "so, queen juno, you have
gained your end, and have roused fleet achilles. one would think that
the achaeans were of your own flesh and blood."

and juno answered, "dread son of saturn, why should you say this thing?
may not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than we do, do
what he can for another person? and shall not i--foremost of all
goddesses both by descent and as wife to you who reign in
heaven-
 
 ___________________________
 
 son
fallen about the body of patroclus and weeping bitterly. many also of
his followers were weeping round him, but when the goddess came among
them she clasped his hand in her own, saying, "my son, grieve as we may
we must let this man lie, for it is by heaven's will that he has
fallen; now, therefore, accept from vulcan this rich and goodly armour,
which no man has ever yet borne upon his shoulders."

as she spoke she set the armour before achilles, and it rang out
bravely as she did so. the myrmidons were struck with awe, and none
dared look full at it, for they were afraid; but achilles was roused to
still greater fury, and his eyes gleamed with a fierce light, for he
was glad when he handled the splendid present which the god had made
him. then, as soon as he had satisfied himself with looking at it, he
said to his mother, "mother, the god has given me armour, meet
handiwork for an immortal and such as no-one living could have
fashioned; i will now arm, but i much fear that flies will set
 
 ___________________________
 
d his head, and flung it into the wide sea to feed the fishes. then
achilles also rose and said to the argives, "father jove, of a truth
you blind men's eyes and bane them. the son of atreus had not else
stirred me to so fierce an anger, nor so stubbornly taken briseis from
me against my will. surely jove must have counselled the destruction of
many an argive. go, now, and take your food that we may begin fighting."

on this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
ship. the myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to the
ship of achilles. they placed them in his tents, while the stable-men
drove the horses in among the others.

briseis, fair as venus, when she saw the mangled body of patroclus,
flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck,
and her lovely face with both her hands. beautiful as a goddess she
wept and said, "patroclus, dearest friend, when i went hence i left you
living; i return, o prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh so
 
 ___________________________
 
rrows
multiply upon me one after the other. i saw him to whom my father and
mother married me, cut down before our city, and my three own dear
brothers perished with him on the self-same day; but you, patroclus,
even when achilles slew my husband and sacked the city of noble mynes,
told me that i was not to weep, for you said you would make achilles
marry me, and take me back with him to phthia, we should have a wedding
feast among the myrmidons. you were always kind to me and i shall never
cease to grieve for you."

she wept as she spoke, and the women joined in her lament-making as
though their tears were for patroclus, but in truth each was weeping
for her own sorrows. the elders of the achaeans gathered round achilles
and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. "i
pray you," said he, "if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat
nor drink, for i am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to
the going 
 
 ___________________________
 
 near the
navel, so that all his bowels came gushing out on to the ground, and
the darkness of death came over him as he lay gasping. then achilles
set his foot on his chest and spoiled him of his armour, vaunting over
him and saying, "lie there--begotten of a river though you be, it is
hard for you to strive with the offspring of saturn's son. you declare
yourself sprung from the blood of a broad river, but i am of the seed
of mighty jove. my father is peleus, son of aeacus ruler over the many
myrmidons, and aeacus was the son of jove. therefore as jove is
mightier than any river that flows into the sea, so are his children
stronger than those of any river whatsoever. moreover you have a great
river hard by if he can be of any use to you, but there is no fighting
against jove the son of saturn, with whom not even king achelous can
compare, nor the mighty stream of deep-flowing oceanus, from whom all
rivers and seas with all springs and deep wells proceed; even oceanus
fears the lightnings of g
 
 ___________________________
 
de by hands of women. this will i now burn; it is of
no use to you, for you can never again wear it, and thus you will have
respect shown you by the trojans both men and women."

in such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women joined in
her lament.



book xxiii

  the funeral of patroclus, and the funeral games.

thus did they make their moan throughout the city, while the achaeans
when they reached the hellespont went back every man to his own ship.
but achilles would not let the myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave
comrades saying, "myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends,
not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw near
to the body and mourn patroclus, in due honour to the dead. when we
have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take
supper all of us here."

on this they all joined in a cry of wailing and achilles led them in
their lament. thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round
the body, and thetis sti
 
 ___________________________
 
, and provide all else that the dead
may duly take into the realm of darkness; the fire shall thus burn him
out of our sight the sooner, and the people shall turn again to their
own labours."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. they made haste to
prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full share so that
all were satisfied. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
the others went to their rest each in his own tent, but the son of
peleus lay grieving among his myrmidons by the shore of the sounding
sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in one after
another. here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and eased the
burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing hector
round windy ilius. presently the sad spirit of patroclus drew near him,
like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of his beaming
eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. the spirit hovered over
his head and said--

"you sleep, achilles, and have forgott
 
 ___________________________
 
nd them behind the mules, which then wended their way as they best
could through the thick brushwood on to the plain. all who had been
cutting wood bore logs, for so meriones squire to idomeneus had bidden
them, and they threw them down in a line upon the seashore at the place
where achilles would make a mighty monument for patroclus and for
himself.

when they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole
ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but achilles ordered
his brave myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man his
horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted each
his chariot--they and their charioteers with them. the chariots went
before, and they that were on foot followed as a cloud in their tens of
thousands after. in the midst of them his comrades bore patroclus and
covered him with the locks of their hair which they cut off and threw
upon his body. last came achilles with his head bowed for sorrow, so
noble a comrade was he taking 
 
 ___________________________
 
 good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing the
whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses. when
they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships, those
who were on guard had just been getting their suppers, and the slayer
of argus threw them all into a deep sleep. then he drew back the bolts
to open the gates, and took priam inside with the treasure he had upon
his waggon. ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of
peleus for which the myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built
for their king; when they had built it they thatched it with coarse
tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and all round it
they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes set close
together. the gate was barred with a single bolt of pine which it took
three men to force into its place, and three to draw back so as to open
the gate, but achilles could draw it by himself. mercury opened the
gate for the old man, and brought in the trea
 
 ___________________________
 
 and the other with good ones. he for
whom jove the lord of thunder mixes the gifts he sends, will meet now
with good and now with evil fortune; but he to whom jove sends none but
evil gifts will be pointed at by the finger of scorn, the hand of
famine will pursue him to the ends of the world, and he will go up and
down the face of the earth, respected neither by gods nor men. even so
did it befall peleus; the gods endowed him with all good things from
his birth upwards, for he reigned over the myrmidons excelling all men
in prosperity and wealth, and mortal though he was they gave him a
goddess for his bride. but even on him too did heaven send misfortune,
for there is no race of royal children born to him in his house, save
one son who is doomed to die all untimely; nor may i take care of him
now that he is growing old, for i must stay here at troy to be the bane
of you and your children. and you too, o priam, i have heard that you
were aforetime happy. they say that in wealth and plenitude o