the iliad of homer


book i

  the quarrel between agamemnon and achilles--achilles withdraws
  from the war, and sends his mother thetis to ask jove to help
  the trojans--scene between jove and juno on olympus.

sing, o goddess, the anger of achilles son of peleus, that brought
countless ills upon the achaeans. many a brave soul did it send
hurrying down to hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and
vultures, for so were the counsels of jove fulfilled from the day on
which the son of atreus, king of men, and great achilles, first fell
out with one another.

and which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? it was the
son of jove and leto; for he was angry with the king and sent a
pestilence upon the host to plague the people, because 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the girl at your bidding? let the achaeans find me a prize in
fair exchange to my liking, or i will come and take your own, or that
of ajax or of ulysses; and he to whomsoever i may come shall rue my
coming. but of this we will take thought hereafter; for the present,
let us draw a ship into the sea, and find a crew for her expressly; let
us put a hecatomb on board, and let us send chryseis also; further, let
some chief man among us be in command, either ajax, or idomeneus, or
yourself, son of peleus, mighty warrior that you are, that we may offer
sacrifice and appease the anger of the god."

achilles scowled at him and answered, "you are steeped in insolence and
lust of gain. with what heart can any of the achaeans do your bidding,
either on foray or in open fighting? i came not warring here for any
ill the trojans had done me. i have no quarrel with them. they have not
raided my cattle nor my horses, nor cut down my harvests on the rich
plains of phthia; for between me and them there is a
 
 ___________________________
 
though you
be brave? was it not heaven that made you so? go home, then, with your
ships and comrades to lord it over the myrmidons. i care neither for
you nor for your anger; and thus will i do: since phoebus apollo is
taking chryseis from me, i shall send her with my ship and my
followers, but i shall come to your tent and take your own prize
briseis, that you may learn how much stronger i am than you are, and
that another may fear to set himself up as equal or comparable with me."

the son of peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast
was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill
the son of atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger. while he
was thus in two minds, and was drawing his mighty sword from its
scabbard, minerva came down from heaven (for juno had sent her in the
love she bore to them both), and seized the son of peleus by his yellow
hair, visible to him alone, for of the others no man could see her.
achilles turned in amaze, and
 
 ___________________________
 
er receive gifts three times as
splendid by reason of this present insult. hold, therefore, and obey."

"goddess," answered achilles, "however angry a man may be, he must do
as you two command him. this will be best, for the gods ever hear the
prayers of him who has obeyed them."

he stayed his hand on the silver hilt of his sword, and thrust it back
into the scabbard as minerva bade him. then she went back to olympus
among the other gods, and to the house of aegis-bearing jove.

but the son of peleus again began railing at the son of atreus, for he
was still in a rage. "wine-bibber," he cried, "with the face of a dog
and the heart of a hind, you never dare to go out with the host in
fight, nor yet with our chosen men in ambuscade. you shun this as you
do death itself. you had rather go round and rob his prizes from any
man who contradicts you. you devour your people, for you are king over
a feeble folk; otherwise, son of atreus, henceforward you would insult
no man. therefore i say, and swe
 
 ___________________________
 
ains--for the
axe stripped it of leaf and bark, and now the sons of the achaeans bear
it as judges and guardians of the decrees of heaven--so surely and
solemnly do i swear that hereafter they shall look fondly for achilles
and shall not find him. in the day of your distress, when your men fall
dying by the murderous hand of hector, you shall not know how to help
them, and shall rend your heart with rage for the hour when you offered
insult to the bravest of the achaeans."

with this the son of peleus dashed his gold-bestudded sceptre on the
ground and took his seat, while the son of atreus was beginning
fiercely from his place upon the other side. then uprose smooth-tongued
nestor, the facile speaker of the pylians, and the words fell from his
lips sweeter than honey. two generations of men born and bred in pylos
had passed away under his rule, and he was now reigning over the third.
with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:--

"of a truth," he said, "a great sorro
 
 ___________________________
 
l things. order other people about, not me,
for i shall obey no longer. furthermore i say--and lay my saying to
your heart--i shall fight neither you nor any man about this girl, for
those that take were those also that gave. but of all else that is at
my ship you shall carry away nothing by force. try, that others may
see; if you do, my spear shall be reddened with your blood."

when they had quarrelled thus angrily, they rose, and broke up the
assembly at the ships of the achaeans. the son of peleus went back to
his tents and ships with the son of menoetius and his company, while
agamemnon drew a vessel into the water and chose a crew of twenty
oarsmen. he escorted chryseis on board and sent moreover a hecatomb for
the god. and ulysses went as captain.

these, then, went on board and sailed their ways over the sea. but the
son of atreus bade the people purify themselves; so they purified
themselves and cast their filth into the sea. then they offered
hecatombs of bulls and goats without bl
 
 ___________________________
 
emish on the sea-shore, and the
smoke with the savour of their sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven.

thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. but agamemnon did
not forget the threat that he had made achilles, and called his trusty
messengers and squires talthybius and eurybates. "go," said he, "to the
tent of achilles, son of peleus; take briseis by the hand and bring her
hither; if he will not give her i shall come with others and take
her--which will press him harder."

he charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the myrmidons. they found achilles sitting by his tent and
his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. they stood
fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak,
but he kne
 
 ___________________________
 
 fled beyond the
sea, for he was menaced by the other sons and grandsons of hercules.
after a voyage, during which he suffered great hardship, he came to
rhodes, where the people divided into three communities, according to
their tribes, and were dearly loved by jove, the lord of gods and men;
wherefore the son of saturn showered down great riches upon them.

and nireus brought three ships from syme--nireus, who was the
handsomest man that came up under ilius of all the danaans after the
son of peleus--but he was a man of no substance, and had but a small
following.

and those that held nisyrus, crapathus, and casus, with cos, the city
of eurypylus, and the calydnian islands, these were commanded by
pheidippus and antiphus, two sons of king thessalus the son of
hercules. and with them there came thirty ships.

those again who held pelasgic argos, alos, alope, and trachis; and
those of phthia and hellas the land of fair women, who were called
myrmidons, hellenes, and achaeans; these had fifty
 
 ___________________________
 
g him in battle. sit down your own people, and the achaeans will
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

with these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,
whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders.
then nestor rose and spoke, "of a truth," said he, "the achaean land is
fallen upon evil times. the old knight peleus, counsellor and orator
among the myrmidons, loved when i was in his house to question me
concerning the race and lineage of all the argives. how would it not
grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before hector? many a
time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave his
body and go down within the house of hades. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo, that i were still young and strong as when the
pylians and arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river ce
 
 ___________________________
 
nevertheless we
have compassion upon the danaan warriors who are perishing and coming
to a bad end. we will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from
actual fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to the
argives, that they may not all of them perish in your displeasure."

and jove answered, "to-morrow morning, juno, if you choose to do so,
you will see the son of saturn destroying large numbers of the argives,
for fierce hector shall not cease fighting till he has roused the son
of peleus when they are fighting in dire straits at their ships' sterns
about the body of patroclus. like it or no, this is how it is decreed;
for aught i care, you may go to the lowest depths beneath earth and
sea, where iapetus and saturn dwell in lone tartarus with neither ray
of light nor breath of wind to cheer them. you may go on and on till
you get there, and i shall not care one whit for your displeasure; you
are the greatest vixen living."

juno made him no answer. the sun's glorious orb now san
 
 ___________________________
 
s
are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to his
liking; furthermore let him take twenty trojan women, the loveliest
after helen herself. then, when we reach achaean argos, wealthiest of
all lands, he shall be my son-in-law and i will show him like honour
with my own dear son orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. i
have three daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa, let him
take the one of his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the
house of peleus; i will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave
his daughter, and will give him seven well established cities,
cardamyle, enope, and hire, where there is grass; holy pherae and the
rich meadows of anthea; aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of
pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy pylos. the men
that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour him
with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient to his comfortable
ordinances. all this will i do if he w
 
 ___________________________
 
ill now forgo his anger. let him
then yield; it is only hades who is utterly ruthless and
unyielding--and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to
mankind. moreover i am older and more royal than himself. therefore,
let him now obey me."

then nestor answered, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon. the gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send
chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of achilles son of peleus
without delay. let those go whom i shall name. let phoenix, dear to
jove, lead the way; let ajax and ulysses follow, and let the heralds
odius and eurybates go with them. now bring water for our hands, and
bid all keep silence while we pray to jove the son of saturn, if so be
that he may have mercy upon us."

thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round af
 
 ___________________________
 
ter giving
every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings,
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from
the tent of agamemnon son of atreus; and nestor, looking first to one
and then to another, but most especially at ulysses, was instant with
them that they should prevail with the noble son of peleus.

they went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed
earnestly to earth-encircling neptune that the high spirit of the son
of aeacus might incline favourably towards them. when they reached the
ships and tents of the myrmidons, they found achilles playing on a
lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. it
was part of the spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city of
eetion, and he was now diverting himself with it and singing the feats
of heroes. h
 
 ___________________________
 
c
of the achaeans while they are dazed and smothered in smoke; i much
fear that heaven will make good his boasting, and it will prove our lot
to perish at troy far from our home in argos. up, then, and late though
it be, save the sons of the achaeans who faint before the fury of the
trojans. you will repent bitterly hereafter if you do not, for when the
harm is done there will be no curing it; consider ere it be too late,
and save the danaans from destruction.

"my good friend, when your father peleus sent you from phthia to
agamemnon, did he not charge you saying, 'son, minerva and juno will
make you strong if they choose, but check your high temper, for the
better part is in goodwill. eschew vain quarrelling, and the achaeans
old and young will respect you more for doing so.' these were his
words, but you have forgotten them. even now, however, be appeased, and
put away your anger from you. agamemnon will make you great amends if
you will forgive him; listen, and i will tell you what he ha
 
 ___________________________
 
re dividing the spoil,
and load your ship with gold and bronze to your liking. you can take
twenty trojan women, the loveliest after helen herself. then, when we
reach achaean argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his
son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear son
orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. agamemnon has three
daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa; you may take the one
of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of
peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his
daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities, cardamyle,
enope, and hire where there is grass; holy pheras and the rich meadows
of anthea; aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of pedasus, all near
the sea, and on the borders of sandy pylos. the men that dwell there
are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though
were a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. all this
will he do if you w
 
 ___________________________
 
ch of which two hundred men may drive at once with their chariots and
horses; he may offer me gifts as the sands of the sea or the dust of
the plain in multitude, but even so he shall not move me till i have
been revenged in full for the bitter wrong he has done me. i will not
marry his daughter; she may be fair as venus, and skilful as minerva,
but i will have none of her: let another take her, who may be a good
match for her and who rules a larger kingdom. if the gods spare me to
return home, peleus will find me a wife; there are achaean women in
hellas and phthia, daughters of kings that have cities under them; of
these i can take whom i will and marry her. many a time was i minded
when at home in phthia to woo and wed a woman who would make me a
suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old father peleus. my life
is more to me than all the wealth of ilius while it was yet at peace
before the achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies on
the stone floor of apollo's temple 
 
 ___________________________
 
, let him sleep here that
he may sail with me in the morning if he so will. but i will not take
him by force."

they all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which he had
denied them, till presently the old knight phoenix in his great fear
for the ships of the achaeans, burst into tears and said, "noble
achilles, if you are now minded to return, and in the fierceness of
your anger will do nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my son,
can i remain here without you? your father peleus bade me go with you
when he sent you as a mere lad from phthia to agamemnon. you knew
nothing neither of war nor of the arts whereby men make their mark in
council, and he sent me with you to train you in all excellence of
speech and action. therefore, my son, i will not stay here without
you--no, not though heaven itself vouchsafe to strip my years from off
me, and make me young as i was when i first left hellas the land of
fair women. i was then flying the anger of father amyntor, son of
orme
 
 ___________________________
 
they set a guard over me taking
it in turns to watch, and they kept a fire always burning, both in the
cloister of the outer court and in the inner court at the doors of the
room wherein i lay; but when the darkness of the tenth night came, i
broke through the closed doors of my room, and climbed the wall of the
outer court after passing quickly and unperceived through the men on
guard and the women servants. i then fled through hellas till i came to
fertile phthia, mother of sheep, and to king peleus, who made me
welcome and treated me as a father treats an only son who will be heir
to all his wealth. he made me rich and set me over much people,
establishing me on the borders of phthia where i was chief ruler over
the dolopians.

"it was i, achilles, who had the making of you; i loved you with all my
heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you had gone out
elsewhere, till i had first set you upon my knees, cut up the dainty
morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup to you
 
 ___________________________
 
-ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be
trusted. the old man phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so
achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the morning
if he so would; but he will not take him by force."

they all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected,
by reason of the sternness with which achilles had refused them, till
presently diomed said, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the son of peleus nor offered him
gifts. he is proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged him in his
pride still further. let him stay or go as he will. he will fight later
when he is in the humour, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. now,
therefore, let us all do as i say; we have eaten and drunk our fill,
let us then take our rest, for in rest there is both strength and stay.
but when fair rosy-fingered morn appears, forthwith bring out your host
and your horsemen in front of the ships, urging them on
 
 ___________________________
 
 their watches."

they all held their peace; but there was among the trojans a certain
man named dolon, son of eumedes, the famous herald--a man rich in gold
and bronze. he was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son
among five sisters. he it was that now addressed the trojans. "i,
hector," said he, "will to the ships and will exploit them. but first
hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot,
bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of
peleus. i will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. i will go
through the host from one end to the other till i come to the ship of
agamemnon, where i take it the princes of the achaeans are now
consulting whether they shall fight or fly."

when he had done speaking hector held up his sceptre, and swore him his
oath saying, "may jove the thundering husband of juno bear witness that
no other trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that you
shall have your will with them for ever."

t
 
 ___________________________
 
but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone in
the dead of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while
other men are sleeping? is it to plunder the bodies of the slain, or
did hector send you to spy out what was going on at the ships? or did
you come here of your own mere notion?"

dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: "hector, with his vain
flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. he said he
would give me the horses of the noble son of peleus and his
bronze-bedizened chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the
flying night, get close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships
are still guarded as heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten
them, the achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are
neglecting to keep their watches."

ulysses smiled at him and answered, "you had indeed set your heart upon
a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of aeacus are hardly
to be kept in hand or driven by any othe
 
 ___________________________
 
rses
back from buprasium to pylos and gave thanks to jove among the gods,
and among mortal men to nestor.

"such was i among my peers, as surely as ever was, but achilles is for
keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue it hereafter
when the host is being cut to pieces. my good friend, did not menoetius
charge you thus, on the day when he sent you from phthia to agamemnon?
ulysses and i were in the house, inside, and heard all that he said to
you; for we came to the fair house of peleus while beating up recruits
throughout all achaea, and when we got there we found menoetius and
yourself, and achilles with you. the old knight peleus was in the outer
court, roasting the fat thigh-bones of a heifer to jove the lord of
thunder; and he held a gold chalice in his hand from which he poured
drink-offerings of wine over the burning sacrifice. you two were busy
cutting up the heifer, and at that moment we stood at the gates,
whereon achilles sprang to his feet, led us by the hand into 
 
 ___________________________
 
the house,
placed us at table, and set before us such hospitable entertainment as
guests expect. when we had satisfied ourselves with meat and drink, i
said my say and urged both of you to join us. you were ready enough to
do so, and the two old men charged you much and straitly. old peleus
bade his son achilles fight ever among the foremost and outvie his
peers, while menoetius the son of actor spoke thus to you: 'my son,'
said he, 'achilles is of nobler birth than you are, but you are older
than he, though he is far the better man of the two. counsel him
wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will follow you to his own
profit.' thus did your father charge you, but you have forgotten;
nevertheless, even now, say all this to achilles if he will listen to
you. who knows but wit
 
 ___________________________
 
o strength but in flight for they cannot defend themselves. hitherto
the trojans dared not for one moment face the attack of the achaeans,
but now they have sallied far from their city and are fighting at our
very ships through the cowardice of our leader and the disaffection of
the people themselves, who in their discontent care not to fight in
defence of the ships but are being slaughtered near them. true, king
agamemnon son of atreus is the cause of our disaster by having insulted
the son of peleus, still this is no reason why we should leave off
fighting. let us be quick to heal, for the hearts of the brave heal
quickly. you do ill to be thus remiss, you, who are the finest soldiers
in our whole army. i blame no man for keeping out of battle if he is a
weakling, but i am indignant with such men as you are. my good friends,
matters will soon become even worse through this slackness; think, each
one of you, of his own honour and credit, for the hazard of the fight
is extreme. great hector 
 
 ___________________________
 
our and my way of thinking. if,
then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the
rank and file of the gods, and tell iris and apollo lord of the bow,
that i want them--iris, that she may go to the achaean host and tell
neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and apollo, that he may send
hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of achilles son of peleus. achilles will
then send his comrade patroclus into battle, and hector will kill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my
own noble son sarpedon. achilles will kill hector to avenge patroclus,
and from that time i will bring it about that the achaeans shall
persistently drive the trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of
minerva and take ilius. but i will not stay my anger, nor permit any
god to help the danaans till i have accomplished the desire of the son
 
 ___________________________
 

of peleus, according to the promise i made by bowing my head on the day
when thetis touched my knees and besought me to give him honour."

juno heeded his words and went from the heights of ida to great
olympus. swift as the thought of one whose fancy carries him over vast
continents, and he says to himself, "now i will be here, or there," and
he would have all manner of things--even so swiftly did juno wing her
way till she came to high olympus and went in among the gods who were
gathered in the house o
 
 ___________________________
 
ry was as that of mars, or as when
a fire is raging in the glades of some dense forest upon the mountains;
he foamed at the mouth, his eyes glared under his terrible eye-brows,
and his helmet quivered on his temples by reason of the fury with which
he fought. jove from heaven was with him, and though he was but one
against many, vouchsafed him victory and glory; for he was doomed to an
early death, and already pallas minerva was hurrying on the hour of his
destruction at the hands of the son of peleus. now, however, he kept
trying to break the ranks of the enemy wherever he could see them
thickest, and in the goodliest armour; but do what he might he could
not break through them, for they stood as a tower foursquare, or as
some high cliff rising from the grey sea that braves the anger of the
gale, and of the waves that thunder up against it. he fell upon them
like flames of fire from every quarter. as when a wave, raised mountain
high by wind and storm, breaks over a ship and covers it deep 
 
 ___________________________
 
m and said, "why,
patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes
running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried--she catches
hold of her mother's dress to stay her though she is in a hurry, and
looks tearfully up until her mother carries her--even such tears,
patroclus, are you now shedding. have you anything to say to the
myrmidons or to myself? or have you had news from phthia which you
alone know? they tell me menoetius son of actor is still alive, as also
peleus son of aeacus, among the myrmidons--men whose loss we two should
bitterly deplore; or are you grieving about the argives and the way in
which they are being killed at the ships, through their own high-handed
doings? do not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may
know about it."

then, o knight patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "achilles, son
of peleus, foremost champion of the achaeans, do not be angry, but i
weep for the disaster that has now befallen the argives. all tho
 
 ___________________________
 
of tydeus has been hit with a spear,
while famed ulysses and agamemnon have received sword-wounds; eurypylus
again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries
are attending to these heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are
you still, o achilles, so inexorable? may it never be my lot to nurse
such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good name.
who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the
argives from ruin? you know no pity; knight peleus was not your father
nor thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore you and the sheer cliffs
begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you. if however you are kept
back through knowledge of some oracle, or if your mother thetis has
told you something from the mouth of jove, at least send me and the
myrmidons with me, if i may bring deliverance to the danaans. let me
moreover wear your armour; the trojans may thus mistake me for you and
quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the achaeans m
 
 ___________________________
 
er-studded sword of bronze about his
shoulders, and then his mighty shield. on his comely head he set his
helmet, well wrought, with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it. he grasped two redoubtable spears that suited his hands, but
he did not take the spear of noble achilles, so stout and strong, for
none other of the achaeans could wield it, though achilles could do so
easily. this was the ashen spear from mount pelion, which chiron had
cut upon a mountain top and had given to peleus, wherewith to deal out
death among heroes. he bade automedon yoke his horses with all speed,
for he was the man whom he held in honour next after achilles, and on
whose support in battle he could rely most firmly. automedon therefore
yoked the fleet horses xanthus and balius, steeds that could fly like
the wind: these were they whom the harpy podarge bore to the west wind,
as she was grazing in a meadow by the waters of the river oceanus. in
the side traces he set the noble horse pedasus, whom 
 
 ___________________________
 
rs of the myrmidons gather
round the good squire of the fleet descendant of aeacus, and among them
stood achilles himself cheering on both men and horses.

fifty ships had noble achilles brought to troy, and in each there was a
crew of fifty oarsmen. over these he set five captains whom he could
trust, while he was himself commander over them all. menesthius of the
gleaming corslet, son to the river spercheius that streams from heaven,
was captain of the first company. fair polydora daughter of peleus bore
him to ever-flowing spercheius--a woman mated with a god--but he was
called son of borus son of perieres, with whom his mother was living as
his wedded wife, and who gave great wealth to gain her. the second
company was led by noble eudorus, son to an unwedded woman. polymele,
daughter of phylas the graceful dancer, bore him; the mighty slayer of
argos was enamoured of her as he saw her among the singing women at a
dance held in honour of diana the rushing huntress of the golden
arrows; he
 
 ___________________________
 

led by pisander son of maemalus, the finest spearman among all the
myrmidons next to achilles' own comrade patroclus. the old knight
phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and alcimedon, noble son of
laerceus of the fifth.

when achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, "myrmidons, remember your
threats against the trojans while you were at the ships in the time of
my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'cruel son of peleus,'
you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless
are you. you keep us here at the ships against our will; if you are so
relentless it were better we went home over the sea.' often have you
gathered and thus chided with me. the hour is now come for those high
feats of arms that you have so long been pining for, therefore keep
high hearts each one of you to do battle with the trojans."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they serried
their companies 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing out like wasps
whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly children love to tease,
whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung--or again, if a
wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident, every wasp will
come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones--even with such
rage and courage did the myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their
cry of battle rose heavenwards. patroclus called out to his men at the
top of his voice, "myrmidons, followers of achilles son of peleus, be
men my friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory
for the son of peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the
argives--he, and his close fighting followers. the son of atreus king
agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the
bravest of the achaeans."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell in
a body upon the trojans. the ships rang again with the cry which the
achaeans raised, and when the trojans saw the brave 
 
 ___________________________
 
son of menoetius
and his squire all gleaming in their armour, they were daunted and
their battalions were thrown into confusion, for they thought the fleet
son of peleus must now have put aside his anger, and have been
reconciled to agamemnon; every one, therefore, looked round about to
see whither he might fly for safety.

patroclus first aimed a spear into the middle of the press where men
were packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of protesilaus. he
hit pyraechmes who had led his paeonian horsemen from the amydon and
the broad waters of the river axius; the spear struck him on the right
shoulder, and with a groan he fell backwards in the dust; on thi
 
 ___________________________
 
ways with their cries of
panic and rout; the air was darkened with the clouds of dust they
raised, and the horses strained every nerve in their flight from the
tents and ships towards the city.

patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men flying in
confusion, cheering on his men the while. chariots were being smashed
in all directions, and many a man came tumbling down from his own car
to fall beneath the wheels of that of patroclus, whose immortal steeds,
given by the gods to peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound as they
sped onward. he was intent on trying to get near hector, for he had set
his heart on spearing him, but hector's horses were now hurrying him
away. as the whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day
when jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving crooked judgement
in their courts, and driving justice therefrom without heed to the
decrees of heaven--all the rivers run full and the torrents tear many a
new channel as they roar headlong
 
 ___________________________
 
the body of sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while.
mighty was the din of their armour as they came together, and jove shed
a thick darkness over the fight, to increase the toil of the battle
over the body of his son.

at first the trojans made some headway against the achaeans, for one of
the best men among the myrmidons was killed, epeigeus, son of noble
agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with peleus and thetis, who sent him to ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the trojans under achilles. hector now struck him on the head
with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains
inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost
upon the body of sarpedon, and there died. patroclus was enraged by the
death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. even so swiftly,
o noble knight p
 
 ___________________________
 
en they are
brimming with milk--even so did they gather round sarpedon; nor did
jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept
looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill
patroclus, and considering whether hector should be allowed to end him
now in the fight round the body of sarpedon, and strip him of his
armour, or whether he should let him give yet further trouble to the
trojans. in the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire of
achilles son of peleus should drive hector and the trojans back towards
the city and take the lives of many. first, therefore, he made hector
turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and fled, bidding the
other trojans fly also, for he saw that the scales of jove had turned
against him. neither would the brave lycians stand firm; they were
dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap
of corpses--for when the son of saturn made the fight wax hot many had
fallen above him. the achaea
 
 ___________________________
 
rpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way off,
where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and
clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to the
arms of the two fleet messengers, death, and sleep, who presently set
him down in the rich land of lycia.

meanwhile patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to automedon,
pursued the trojans and lycians in the pride and foolishness of his
heart. had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of peleus, he would
have escaped death and have been scatheless; but the counsels of jove
pass man's understanding; he will put even a brave man to flight and
snatch victory from his grasp, or again he will set him on to fight, as
he now did when he put a high spirit into the heart of patroclus.

who then first, and who last, was slain by you, o patroclus, when the
gods had now called you to meet your doom? first adrestus, autonous,
echeclus, perimus the son of megas, epistor and melanippus; after these

 
 ___________________________
 
he was, hector still spoke to him saying, "patroclus, why should you
thus foretell my doom? who knows but achilles, son of lovely thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?"

as he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. he then
went spear in hand after automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of
aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the
gods had given as a rich gift to peleus bore him swiftly from the field.



book xvii

  the fight around the body of patroclus.

brave menelaus son of atreus now came to know that patroclus had
fallen, and made his way through the front ranks clad in full armour to
bestride him. as a cow stands lowing over her first calf, even so did
yellow-haired menelaus bestride patroclus. he held his round shield and
his spear in front of him, resolute to kill any who should dare face
him. but the son of panthous had also noted the body, and cam
 
 ___________________________
 
 my honour's sake i fight hector and the trojans single-handed, they
will prove too many for me, for hector is bringing them up in force.
why, however, should i thus hesitate? when a man fights in despite of
heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue it. let no
danaan think ill of me if i give place to hector, for the hand of
heaven is with him. yet, if i could find ajax, the two of us would
fight hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of
patroclus for achilles son of peleus. this, of many evils would be the
least."

while he was thus in two minds, the trojans came up to him with hector
at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off--even so did menelaus son of atreus turn and leave the body
of patroclus. when among the body of his men, he looked around for
mighty ajax son of telamon, and prese
 
 ___________________________
 
and dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and fight
might and main, while i put on the goodly armour of achilles, which i
took when i killed patroclus."

with this hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men who
were taking the armour of achilles to troy, but had not yet got far.
standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed his
armour. his own he sent to the strong city of ilius and to the trojans,
while he put on the immortal armour of the son of peleus, which the
gods had given to peleus, who in his age gave it to his son; but the
son did not grow old in his father's armour.

when jove, lord of the storm-cloud, saw hector standing aloof and
arming himself in the armour of the son of peleus, he wagged his head
and muttered to himself saying, "a! poor wretch, you arm in the armour
of a hero, before whom many another trembles, and you reck nothing of
the doom that is already close upon you. you have killed his comrade so
brave and strong, but it
 
 ___________________________
 
 was not well that you should strip the armour
from his head and shoulders. i do indeed endow you with great might
now, but as against this you shall not return from battle to lay the
armour of the son of peleus before andromache."

the son of saturn bowed his portentous brows, and hector fitted the
armour to his body, while terrible mars entered into him, and filled
his whole body with might and valour. with a shout he strode in among
the allies, and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to all
of them like the great son of peleus himself. he went about among them
and cheered them on--mesthles, glaucus, medon, thersilochus,
asteropaeus, deisenor and hippothous, phorcys, chromius and ennomus t
 
 ___________________________
 

no grudge against the son of menoetius while he was still alive and
squire to the descendant of aeacus; therefore he was loth to let him
fall a prey to the dogs of his foes the trojans, and urged his comrades
on to defend him.

at first the trojans drove the achaeans back, and they withdrew from
the dead man daunted. the trojans did not succeed in killing any one,
nevertheless they drew the body away. but the achaeans did not lose it
long, for ajax, foremost of all the danaans after the son of peleus
alike in stature and prowess, quickly rallied them and made towards the
front like a wild boar upon the mountains when he stands at bay in the
forest glades and routs the hounds and lusty youths that have attacked
him--even so did ajax son of telamon passing easily in among the
phalanxes of the trojans, disperse those who had bestridden patroclus
and were most bent on winning glory by dragging him off to their city.
at this moment hippothous brave son of the pelasgian lethus, in his
zeal for he
 
 ___________________________
 
nd antilochus, had not yet heard of the death of patroclus, and
believed him to be still alive and leading the van against the trojans;
they were keeping themselves in reserve against the death or rout of
their own comrades, for so nestor had ordered when he sent them from
the ships into battle.

thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the sweat
of their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on their hands
and eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet son of peleus. it
was as when a man gives a great ox-hide all drenched in fat to his men,
and bids them stretch it; whereon they stand round it in a ring and tug
till the moisture leaves it, and the fat soaks in for the many that
pull at it, and it is well stretched--even so did the two sides tug the
dead body hither and thither within the compass of but a little
space--the trojans steadfastly set on dragging it into ilius, while the
achaeans were no less so on taking it to their ships; and fierce was
the fi
 
 ___________________________
 
 nor yet into battle among the
achaeans; they stood with their chariot stock still, as a pillar set
over the tomb of some dead man or woman, and bowed their heads to the
ground. hot tears fell from their eyes as they mourned the loss of
their charioteer, and their noble manes drooped all wet from under the
yokestraps on either side the yoke.

the son of saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. he wagged
his head, and muttered to himself, saying, "poor things, why did we
give you to king peleus who is a mortal, while you are yourselves
ageless and immortal? was it that you might share the sorrows that
befall mankind? for of all creatures that live and move upon the earth
there is none so pitiable as he is--still, hector son of priam shall
drive neither you nor your chariot. i will not have it. it is enough
that he should have the armour over which he vaunts so vainly.
furthermore i will give you strength of heart and limb to bear
automedon safely to the ships from battle, for i shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
ns. all their weapons strike
home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that hurls them,
jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without
effect. what, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and
our return to the joy of our friends who will be grieving as they look
hitherwards; for they will make sure that nothing can now check the
terrible hands of hector, and that he will fling himself upon our
ships. i wish that some one would go and tell the son of peleus at
once, for i do not think he can have yet heard the sad news that the
dearest of his friends has fallen. but i can see not a man among the
achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in
darkness. o father jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the
achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we
perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight."

father jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. forthwith he
chased away the cloud of darkness, so that
 
 ___________________________
 
 achilles, that he may come to rescue the body and
bear it to the ships. as for the armour, hector already has it."

antilochus was struck with horror. for a long time he was speechless;
his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did
as menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his
armour to a comrade, laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round, close
beside him.

thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to
achilles son of peleus. nor were you, o menelaus, minded to succour his
harassed comrades, when antilochus had left the pylians--and greatly
did they miss him--but he sent them noble thrasymedes, and himself went
back to patroclus. he came running up to the two ajaxes and said, "i
have sent antilochus to the ships to tell achilles, but rage against
hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour.
what then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and
our own escape from death amid
 
 ___________________________
 
spoke, saying that while i was
yet alive the bravest of the myrmidons should fall before the trojans,
and see the light of the sun no longer. i fear the brave son of
menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet i bade him return
to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing
fire against them, and not join battle with hector."

as he was thus pondering, the son of nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "alas," he cried, "son of noble
peleus, i bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue.
patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked body--for
hector holds his armour."

a dark cloud of grief fell upon achilles as he listened. he filled both
hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head,
disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refuse settle over his
shirt so fair and new. he flung himself down all huge and hugely at
full length, and tore his hair with his hands. the bondswomen whom
 
 ___________________________
 
filled with their
multitude and they all beat their breasts while thetis led them in
their lament.

"listen," she cried, "sisters, daughters of nereus, that you may hear
the burden of my sorrows. alas, woe is me, woe in that i have borne the
most glorious of offspring. i bore him fair and strong, hero among
heroes, and he shot up as a sapling; i tended him as a plant in a
goodly garden, and sent him with his ships to ilius to fight the
trojans, but never shall i welcome him back to the house of peleus. so
long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun he is in heaviness,
and though i go to him i cannot help him. nevertheless i will go, that
i may see my dear son and learn what sorrow has befallen him though he
is still holding aloof from battle."

she left the cave as she spoke, while the others followed weeping
after, and the waves opened a path before them. when they reached the
rich plain of troy, they came up out of the sea in a long line on to
the sands, at the place where the ships
 
 ___________________________
 
eans might all of them be pent up at their ships, and
rue it bitterly in that you were no longer with them."

achilles groaned and answered, "mother, olympian jove has indeed
vouchsafed me the fulfilment of my prayer, but what boots it to me,
seeing that my dear comrade patroclus has fallen--he whom i valued more
than all others, and loved as dearly as my own life? i have lost him;
aye, and hector when he had killed him stripped the wondrous armour, so
glorious to behold, which the gods gave to peleus when they laid you in
the couch of a mortal man. would that you were still dwelling among the
immortal sea-nymphs, and that peleus had taken to himself some mortal
bride. for now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of
that son whom you can never welcome home--nay, i will not live nor go
about among mankind unless hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for
having slain patroclus son of menoetius."

thetis wept and answered, "then, my son, is your end near at hand--for
your own
 
 ___________________________
 
t, beat him from off the
body; but all undaunted he would now charge into the thick of the
fight, and now again he would stand still and cry aloud, but he would
give no ground. as upland shepherds that cannot chase some famished
lion from a carcase, even so could not the two ajaxes scare hector son
of priam from the body of patroclus.

and now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable
glory, had not iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger from
olympus to the son of peleus and bidden him arm. she came secretly
without the knowledge of jove and of the other gods, for juno sent her,
and when she had got close to him she said, "up, son of peleus,
mightiest of all mankind; rescue patroclus about whom this fearful
fight is now raging by the ships. men are killing one another, the
danaans in defence of the dead body, while the trojans are trying to
hale it away, and take it to windy ilius: hector is the most furious of
them all; he is for cutting the head from the body
 
 ___________________________
 
loud. minerva also raised her voice from
afar, and spread terror unspeakable among the trojans. ringing as the
note of a trumpet that sounds alarm then the foe is at the gates of a
city, even so brazen was the voice of the son of aeacus, and when the
trojans heard its clarion tones they were dismayed; the horses turned
back with their chariots for they boded mischief, and their drivers
were awe-struck by the steady flame which the grey-eyed goddess had
kindled above the head of the great son of peleus.

thrice did achilles raise his loud cry as he stood by the trench, and
thrice were the trojans and their brave allies thrown into confusion;
whereon twelve of their noblest champions fell beneath the wheels of
their chariots and perished by their own spears. the achaeans to their
great joy then drew patroclus out of reach of the weapons, and laid him
on a litter: his comrades stood mourning round him, and among them
fleet achilles who wept bitterly as he saw his true comrade lying dead
upon hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was comrade to hector, and they had been born upon the
same night; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed
them thus:--

"look to it well, my friends; i would urge you to go back now to your
city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from
our walls. so long as this man was at enmity with agamemnon the
achaeans were easier to deal with, and i would have gladly camped by
the ships in the hope of taking them; but now i go in great fear of the
fleet son of peleus; he is so daring that he will never bide here on
the plain whereon the trojans and achaeans fight with equal valour, but
he will try to storm our city and carry off our women. do then as i
say, and let us retreat. for this is what will happen. the darkness of
night will for a time stay the son of peleus, but if he find us here in
the morning when he sallies forth in full armour, we shall have
knowledge of him in good earnest. glad indeed will he be who can escape
and get back to ilius, and many
 
 ___________________________
 
not shun him, but
will fight him, to fall or conquer. the god of war deals out like
measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain."

thus spoke hector; and the trojans, fools that they were, shouted in
applause, for pallas minerva had robbed them of their understanding.
they gave ear to hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words of
polydamas no man would heed. they took their supper throughout the
host, and meanwhile through the whole night the achaeans mourned
patroclus, and the son of peleus led them in their lament. he laid his
murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again and
again as a bearded lion when a man who was chasing deer has robbed him
of his young in some dense forest; when the lion comes back he is
furious, and searches dingle and dell to track the hunter if he can
find him, for he is mad with rage--even so with many a sigh did
achilles speak among the myrmidons saying, "alas! vain were the words
with which i cheered the hero menoetius in his own hous
 
 ___________________________
 
e; i said that i
would bring his brave son back again to opoeis after he had sacked
ilius and taken his share of the spoils--but jove does not give all men
their heart's desire. the same soil shall be reddened here at troy by
the blood of us both, for i too shall never be welcomed home by the old
knight peleus, nor by my mother thetis, but even in this place shall
the earth cover me. nevertheless, o patroclus, now that i am left
behind you, i will not bury you, till i have brought hither the head
and armour of mighty hector who has slain you. twelve noble sons of
trojans will i behead before your bier to avenge you; till i have done
so you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women of troy and
dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we
sacked men's goodly cities, shall
 
 ___________________________
 
 thetis, seated her upon a goodly seat, and
took her hand in his own, saying, "why have you come to our house,
thetis honoured and ever welcome--for you do not visit us often? say
what you want, and i will do it for you at once if i can, and if it can
be done at all."

thetis wept and answered, "vulcan, is there another goddess in olympus
whom the son of saturn has been pleased to try with so much affliction
as he has me? me alone of the marine goddesses did he make subject to a
mortal husband, peleus son of aeacus, and sorely against my will did i
submit to the embraces of one who was but mortal, and who now stays at
home worn out with age. neither is this all. heaven vouchsafed me a
son, hero among heroes, and he shot up as a sapling. i tended him as a
plant in a goodly garden and sent him with his ships to ilius to fight
the trojans, but never shall i welcome him back to the house of peleus.
so long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun, he is in
heaviness, and though i go to him 
 
 ___________________________
 
 when i wield it."

thus did he speak, and the achaeans rejoiced in that he had put away
his anger.

then agamemnon spoke, rising in his place, and not going into the
middle of the assembly. "danaan heroes," said he, "servants of mars, it
is well to listen when a man stands up to speak, and it is not seemly
to interrupt him, or it will go hard even with a practised speaker. who
can either hear or speak in an uproar? even the finest orator will be
disconcerted by it. i will expound to the son of peleus, and do you
other achaeans heed me and mark me well. often have the achaeans spoken
to me of this matter and upbraided me, but it was not i that did it:
jove, and fate, and erinys that walks in darkness struck me mad when we
were assembled on the day that i took from achilles the meed that had
been awarded to him. what could i do? all things are in the hand of
heaven, and folly, eldest of jove's daughters, shuts men's eyes to
their destruction. she walks delicately, not on the solid earth, but

 
 ___________________________
 
 priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain? let the sons
of the achaeans, say i, fight fasting and without food, till we have
avenged them; afterwards at the going down of the sun let them eat
their fill. as for me, patroclus is lying dead in my tent, all hacked
and hewn, with his feet to the door, and his comrades are mourning
round him. therefore i can take thought of nothing save only slaughter
and blood and the rattle in the throat of the dying."

ulysses answered, "achilles, son of peleus, mightiest of all the
achaeans, in battle you are better than i, and that more than a little,
but in counsel i am much before you, for i am older and of greater
knowledge. therefore be patient under my words. fighting is a thing of
which men soon surfeit, and when jove, who is war's steward, weighs the
upshot, it may well prove that the straw which our sickles have reaped
is far heavier than the grain. it may not be that the achaeans should
mourn the dead with their bellies; day by day men fall
 
 ___________________________
 
s now in phthia weeping for the loss of me his son, who am here
fighting the trojans in a strange land for the accursed sake of helen,
nor yet though i should hear that my son is no more--he who is being
brought up in scyros--if indeed neoptolemus is still living. till now i
made sure that i alone was to fall here at troy away from argos, while
you were to return to phthia, bring back my son with you in your own
ship, and show him all my property, my bondsmen, and the greatness of
my house--for peleus must surely be either dead, or what little life
remains to him is oppressed alike with the infirmities of age and ever
present fear lest he should hear the sad tidings of my death."

he wept as he spoke, and the elders sighed in concert as each thought
on what he had left at home behind him. the son of saturn looked down
with pity upon them, and said presently to minerva, "my child, you have
quite deserted your hero; is he then gone so clean out of your
recollection? there he sits by the ships 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the ridge of the helmet, waved all around
it. then achilles made trial of himself in his armour to see whether it
fitted him, so that his limbs could play freely under it, and it seemed
to buoy him up as though it had been wings.

he also drew his father's spear out of the spear-stand, a spear so
great and heavy and strong that none of the achaeans save only achilles
had strength to wield it; this was the spear of pelian ash from the
topmost ridges of mt. pelion, which chiron had once given to peleus,
fraught with the death of heroes. automedon and alcimus busied
themselves with the harnessing of his horses; they made the bands fast
about them, and put the bit in their mouths, drawing the reins back
towards the chariot. automedon, whip in hand, sprang up behind the
horses, and after him achilles mounted in full armour, resplendent as
the sun-god hyperion. then with a loud voice he chided with his
father's horses saying, "xanthus and balius, famed offspring of
podarge--this time when we have
 
 ___________________________
 
y dear father and mother; none the more, however,
shall i stay my hand till i have given the trojans their fill of
fighting."

so saying, with a loud cry he drove his horses to the front.



book xx

  the gods hold a council and determine to watch the fight, from
  the hill callicolone, and the barrow of hercules--a fight
  between achilles and aeneas is interrupted by neptune, who
  saves aeneas--achilles kills many trojans.

thus, then, did the achaeans arm by their ships round you, o son of
peleus, who were hungering for battle; while the trojans over against
them armed upon the rise of the plain.

meanwhile jove from the top of many-delled olympus, bade themis gather
the gods in council, whereon she went about and called them to the
house of jove. there was not a river absent except oceanus, nor a
single one of the nymphs that haunt fair groves, or springs of rivers
and meadows of green grass. when they reached the house of
cloud-compelling jove, they took their seats in the arcades of 
 
 ___________________________
 

them also came vulcan in all his glory, limping, but yet with his thin
legs plying lustily under him. mars of gleaming helmet joined the
trojans, and with him apollo of locks unshorn, and the archer goddess
diana, leto, xanthus, and laughter-loving venus.

so long as the gods held themselves aloof from mortal warriors the
achaeans were triumphant, for achilles who had long refused to fight
was now with them. there was not a trojan but his limbs failed him for
fear as he beheld the fleet son of peleus all glorious in his armour,
and looking like mars himself. when, however, the olympians came to
take their part among men, forthwith uprose strong strife, rouser of
hosts, and minerva raised her loud voice, now standing by the deep
trench that ran outside the wall, and now shouting with all her might
upon the shore of the sounding sea. mars also bellowed out upon the
other side, dark as some black thunder-cloud, and called on the trojans
at the top of his voice, now from the acropolis, and now 
 
 ___________________________
 
h
her golden arrows, sister of far-darting apollo, stood to face juno;
mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced leto, while the mighty
eddying river whom men can scamander, but gods xanthus, matched himself
against vulcan.

the gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. but the heart of
achilles was set on meeting hector son of priam, for it was with his
blood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of
battle. meanwhile apollo set aeneas on to attack the son of peleus, and
put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of lycaon son of
priam. in his likeness therefore, he said to aeneas, "aeneas,
counsellor of the trojans, where are now the brave words with which you
vaunted over your wine before the trojan princes, saying that you would
fight achilles son of peleus in single combat?"

and aeneas answered, "why do you thus bid me fight the proud son of
peleus, when i am in no mind to do so? were i to face him now, it would
not be for the first time. his
 
 ___________________________
 
while the whole plain was alive with
men and horses, and blazing with the gleam of armour. the earth rang
again under the tramp of their feet as they rushed towards each other,
and two champions, by far the foremost of them all, met between the
hosts to fight--to wit, aeneas son of anchises, and noble achilles.

aeneas was first to stride forward in attack, his doughty helmet
tossing defiance as he came on. he held his strong shield before his
breast, and brandished his bronze spear. the son of peleus from the
other side sprang forth to meet him, like some fierce lion that the
whole country-side has met to hunt and kill--at first he bodes no ill,
but when some daring youth has struck him with a spear, he crouches
openmouthed, his jaws foam, he roars with fury, he lashes his tail from
side to side about his ribs and loins, and glares as he springs
straight before him, to find out whether he is to slay, or be slain
among the foremost of his foes--even with such fury did achilles burn
to spring
 
 ___________________________
 
our herds
helter-skelter down the slopes of ida? you did not turn round to look
behind you; you took refuge in lyrnessus, but i attacked the city, and
with the help of minerva and father jove i sacked it and carried its
women into captivity, though jove and the other gods rescued you. you
think they will protect you now, but they will not do so; therefore i
say go back into the host, and do not face me, or you will rue it. even
a fool may be wise after the event."

then aeneas answered, "son of peleus, think not that your words can
scare me as though i were a child. i too, if i will, can brag and talk
unseemly. we know one another's race and parentage as matters of common
fame, though neither have you ever seen my parents nor i yours. men say
that you are son to noble peleus, and that your mother is thetis,
fair-haired daughter of the sea. i have noble anchises for my father,
and venus for my mother; the parents of one or other of us shall this
day mourn a son, for it will be more than silly
 
 ___________________________
 

it can go here and there, and as a man says, so shall he be gainsaid.
what is the use of our bandying hard like women who when they fall foul
of one another go out and wrangle in the streets, one half true and the
other lies, as rage inspires them? no words of yours shall turn me now
that i am fain to fight--therefore let us make trial of one another
with our spears."

as he spoke he drove his spear at the great and terrible shield of
achilles, which rang out as the point struck it. the son of peleus held
the shield before him with his strong hand, and he was afraid, for he
deemed that aeneas's spear would go through it quite easily, not
reflecting that the god's glorious gifts were little likely to yield
before the blows of mortal men; and indeed aeneas's spear did not
pierce the shield, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the
point. it went through two layers, but the god had made the shield in
five, two of bronze, the two innermost ones of tin, and one of gold; it
was in this 
 
 ___________________________
 
that two men, as men
now are, would be unable to lift it, but aeneas wielded it quite easily.

aeneas would then have struck achilles as he was springing towards him,
either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered him, and achilles
would have closed with him and despatched him with his sword, had not
neptune lord of the earthquake been quick to mark, and said forthwith
to the immortals, "alas, i am sorry for great aeneas, who will now go
down to the house of hades, vanquished by the son of peleus. fool that
he was to give ear to the counsel of apollo. apollo will never save him
from destruction. why should this man suffer when he is guiltless, to
no purpose, and in another's quarrel? has he not at all times offered
acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven? let us then
snatch him from death's jaws, lest the son of saturn be angry should
achilles slay him. it is fated, moreover, that he should escape, and
that the race of dardanus, whom jove loved above all the sons born to
h
 
 ___________________________
 
im of mortal women, shall not perish utterly without seed or sign. for
now indeed has jove hated the blood of priam, while aeneas shall reign
over the trojans, he and his children's children that shall be born
hereafter."

then answered juno, "earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself, and
consider concerning aeneas, whether you will save him, or suffer him,
brave though he be, to fall by the hand of achilles son of peleus. for
of a truth we two, i and pallas minerva, have sworn full many a time
before all the immortals, that never would we shield trojans from
destruction, not even when all troy is burning in the flames that the
achaeans shall kindle."

when earth-encircling neptune heard this he went into the battle amid
the clash of spears, and came to the place where achilles and aeneas
were. forthwith he shed a darkness before the eyes of the son of
peleus, drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield o
 
 ___________________________
 
f aeneas,
and laid it at the feet of achilles. then he lifted aeneas on high from
off the earth and hurried him away. over the heads of many a band of
warriors both horse and foot did he soar as the god's hand sped him,
till he came to the very fringe of the battle where the cauconians were
arming themselves for fight. neptune, shaker of the earth, then came
near to him and said, "aeneas, what god has egged you on to this folly
in fighting the son of peleus, who is both a mightier man of valour and
more beloved of heaven than you are? give way before him whensoever you
meet him, lest you go down to the house of hades even though fate would
have it otherwise. when achilles is dead you may then fight among the
foremost undaunted, for none other of the achaeans shall slay you."

the god left him when he had given him these instructions, and at once
removed the darkness from before the eyes of achilles, who opened them
wide indeed and said in great an
 
 ___________________________
 
ortal, or minerva, would shrink from flinging himself into the
jaws of such a fight and laying about him; nevertheless, so far as in
me lies i will show no slackness of hand or foot nor want of endurance,
not even for a moment; i will utterly break their ranks, and woe to the
trojan who shall venture within reach of my spear."

thus did he exhort them. meanwhile hector called upon the trojans and
declared that he would fight achilles. "be not afraid, proud trojans,"
said he, "to face the son of peleus; i could fight gods myself if the
battle were one of words only, but they would be more than a match for
me, if we had to use our spears. even so the deed of achilles will fall
somewhat short of his word; he will do in part, and the other part he
will clip short. i will go up against him though his hands be as
fire--though his hands be fire and his strength iron."

thus urged the trojans lifted up their spears against the achaeans, and
raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves into the 
 
 ___________________________
 
his eyes, and he
could not bear to keep longer at a distance; he therefore poised his
spear and darted towards achilles like a flame of fire. when achilles
saw him he bounded forward and vaunted saying, "this is he that has
wounded my heart most deeply and has slain my beloved comrade. not for
long shall we two quail before one another on the highways of war."

he looked fiercely on hector and said, "draw near, that you may meet
your doom the sooner." hector feared him not and answered, "son of
peleus, think not that your words can scare me as though i were a
child; i too if i will can brag and talk unseemly; i know that you are
a mighty warrior, mightier by far than i, nevertheless the issue lies
in the lap of heaven whether i, worse man though i be, may not slay you
with my spear, for this too has been found keen ere now."

he hurled his spear as he spoke, but minerva breathed upon it, and
though she breathed but very lightly she turned it back from going
towards achilles, so that it retur
 
 ___________________________
 
god, and giving chase to those whom he
would slay, till the dark earth ran with blood. or as one who yokes
broad-browed oxen that they may tread barley in a threshing-floor--and
it is soon bruised small under the feet of the lowing cattle--even so
did the horses of achilles trample on the shields and bodies of the
slain. the axle underneath and the railing that ran round the car were
bespattered with clots of blood thrown up by the horses' hoofs, and
from the tyres of the wheels; but the son of peleus pressed on to win
still further glory, and his hands were bedrabbled with gore.



book xxi

  the fight between achilles and the river scamander--the gods
  fight among themselves--achilles drives the trojans within
  their gates.

now when they came to the ford of the full-flowing river xanthus,
begotten of immortal jove, achilles cut their forces in two: one half
he chased over the plain towards the city by the same way that the
achaeans had taken when flying panic-stricken on the preceding 
 
 ___________________________
 
ead, for all the bulls you offered him and all
the horses that you flung living into his waters. none the less
miserably shall you perish till there is not a man of you but has paid
in full for the death of patroclus and the havoc you wrought among the
achaeans whom you have slain while i held aloof from battle."

so spoke achilles, but the river grew more and more angry, and pondered
within himself how he should stay the hand of achilles and save the
trojans from disaster. meanwhile the son of peleus, spear in hand,
sprang upon asteropaeus son of pelegon to kill him. he was son to the
broad river axius and periboea eldest daughter of acessamenus; for the
river had lain with her. asteropaeus stood up out of the water to face
him with a spear in either hand, and xanthus filled him with courage,
being angry for the death of the youths whom achilles was slaying
ruthlessly within his waters. when they were close up with one another
achilles was first to speak. "who and whence are you," said he, 
 
 ___________________________
 
"who
dare to face me? woe to the parents whose son stands up against me."
and the son of pelegon answered, "great son of peleus, why should you
ask my lineage. i am from the fertile land of far paeonia, captain of
the paeonians, and it is now eleven days that i am at ilius. i am of
the blood of the river axius--of axius that is the fairest of all
rivers that run. he begot the famed warrior pelegon, whose son men call
me. let us now fight, achilles."

thus did he defy him, and achilles raised his spear of pelian ash.
asteropaeus failed with both his spears, for he could use both hands
alike; with the one spear he struck 
 
 ___________________________
 
achilles' shield, but did not
pierce it, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the point;
with the other spear he grazed the elbow of achilles' right arm drawing
dark blood, but the spear itself went by him and fixed itself in the
ground, foiled of its bloody banquet. then achilles, fain to kill him,
hurled his spear at asteropaeus, but failed to hit him and struck the
steep bank of the river, driving the spear half its length into the
earth. the son of peleus then drew his sword and sprang furiously upon
him. asteropaeus vainly tried to draw achilles' spear out of the bank
by main force; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his might to
draw it out, and thrice he had to leave off trying; the fourth time he
tried to bend and break it, but ere he could do so achilles smote him
with his sword and killed him. he struck him in the belly near the
navel, so that all his bowels came gushing out on to the ground, and
the darkness of death came over him a
 
 ___________________________
 
s he lay gasping. then achilles
set his foot on his chest and spoiled him of his armour, vaunting over
him and saying, "lie there--begotten of a river though you be, it is
hard for you to strive with the offspring of saturn's son. you declare
yourself sprung from the blood of a broad river, but i am of the seed
of mighty jove. my father is peleus, son of aeacus ruler over the many
myrmidons, and aeacus was the son of jove. therefore as jove is
mightier than any river that flows into the sea, so are his children
stronger than those of any river whatsoever. moreover you have a great
river hard by if he can be of any use to you, but there is no fighting
against jove the son of saturn, with whom not even king achelous can
compare, nor the mighty stream of deep-flowing oceanus, from whom all
rivers and seas with all springs and deep wells pr
 
 ___________________________
 
s
fears the lightnings of great jove, and his thunder that comes crashing
out of heaven."

with this he drew his bronze spear out of the bank, and now that he had
killed asteropaeus, he let him lie where he was on the sand, with the
dark water flowing over him and the eels and fishes busy nibbling and
gnawing the fat that was about his kidneys. then he went in chase of
the paeonians, who were flying along the bank of the river in panic
when they saw their leader slain by the hands of the son of peleus.
therein he slew thersilochus, mydon, astypylus, mnesus, thrasius,
oeneus, and ophelestes, and he would have slain yet others, had not the
river in anger taken human form, and spoken to him from out the deep
waters saying, "achilles, if you excel all in strength, so do you also
in wickedness, for the gods are ever with you to protect you: if, then,
the son of saturn has vouchsafed it to you to destroy all the trojans,
at any rate drive them out of my stream, and do your grim work on land.
my fa
 
 ___________________________
 
lling upon him and beating on his shield, so that he could not keep
his feet; he caught hold of a great elm-tree, but it came up by the
roots, and tore away the bank, damming the stream with its thick
branches and bridging it all across; whereby achilles struggled out of
the stream, and fled full speed over the plain, for he was afraid.

but the mighty god ceased not in his pursuit, and sprang upon him with
a dark-crested wave, to stay his hands and save the trojans from
destruction. the son of peleus darted away a spear's throw from him;
swift as the swoop of a black hunter-eagle which is the strongest and
fleetest of all birds, even so did he spring forward, and the armour
rang loudly about his breast. he fled on in front, but the river with a
loud roar came tearing after. as one who would water his garden leads a
stream from some fountain over his plants, and all his ground--spade in
hand he clears away the dams to free the channels, and the little
stones run rolling round and round with 
 
 ___________________________
 
can follow--even so did the river
keep catching up with achilles albeit he was a fleet runner, for the
gods are stronger than men. as often as he would strive to stand his
ground, and see whether or no all the gods in heaven were in league
against him, so often would the mighty wave come beating down upon his
shoulders, and he would have to keep flying on and on in great dismay;
for the angry flood was tiring him out as it flowed past him and ate
the ground from under his feet.

then the son of peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying, "father
jove, is there none of the gods who will take pity upon me, and save me
from the river? i do not care what may happen to me afterwards. i blame
none of the other dwellers on olympus so severely as i do my dear
mother, who has beguiled and tricked me. she told me i was to fall
under the walls of troy by the flying arrows of apollo; would that
hector, the best man among the trojans, might there slay me; then
should i fall a hero by the hand of a hero;
 
 ___________________________
 
 whereas now it seems that i
shall come to a most pitiable end, trapped in this river as though i
were some swineherd's boy, who gets carried down a torrent while trying
to cross it during a storm."

as soon as he had spoken thus, neptune and minerva came up to him in
the likeness of two men, and took him by the hand to reassure him.
neptune spoke first. "son of peleus," said he, "be not so exceeding
fearful; we are two gods, come with jove's sanction to assist you, i,
and pallas minerva. it is not your fate to perish in this river; he
will abate presently as you will see; moreover we strongly advise you,
if you will be guided by us, not to stay your hand from fighting till
you have pent the trojan host within the famed walls of ilius--as many
of them as may escape. then kill hector and go back to the ships, for
we will vouchsafe you a triumph over him."

whe
 
 ___________________________
 
mmortals, but
achilles strove onward over the plain, encouraged by the charge the
gods had laid upon him. all was now covered with the flood of waters,
and much goodly armour of the youths that had been slain was rifting
about, as also many corpses, but he forced his way against the stream,
speeding right onwards, nor could the broad waters stay him, for
minerva had endowed him with great strength. nevertheless scamander did
not slacken in his pursuit, but was still more furious with the son of
peleus. he lifted his waters into a high crest and cried aloud to
simois saying, "dear brother, let the two of us unite to save this man,
or he will sack the mighty city of king priam, and the trojans will not
hold out against him. help me at once; fill your streams with water
from their sources, rouse all your torrents to a fury; raise your wave
on high, and let snags and stones come thundering down you that we may
make an end of this savage creature who is now lording it as though he
were a god. not
 
 ___________________________
 
be lying low
in the deep waters covered over with mud. i will wrap him in sand, and
pour tons of shingle round him, so that the achaeans shall not know how
to gather his bones for the silt in which i shall have hidden him, and
when they celebrate his funeral they need build no barrow."

on this he upraised his tumultuous flood high against achilles,
seething as it was with foam and blood and the bodies of the dead. the
dark waters of the river stood upright and would have overwhelmed the
son of peleus, but juno, trembling lest achilles should be swept away
in the mighty torrent, lifted her voice on high and called out to
vulcan her son. "crook-foot," she cried, "my child, be up and doing,
for i deem it is with you that xanthus is fain to fight; help us at
once, kindle a fierce fire; i will then bring up the west and the white
south wind in a mighty hurricane from the sea, that shall bear the
flames against the heads and armour of the trojans and consume them,
while you go along the banks of 
 
 ___________________________
 
."

as he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the spear
struck achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of newly
wrought tin rang loudly, but the spear recoiled from the body of him
whom it had struck, and did not pierce it, for the god's gift stayed
it. achilles in his turn attacked noble agenor, but apollo would not
vouchsafe him glory, for he snatched agenor away and hid him in a thick
mist, sending him out of the battle unmolested. then he craftily drew
the son of peleus away from going after the host, for he put on the
semblance of agenor and stood in front of achilles, who ran towards him
to give him chase and pursued him over the corn lands of the plain,
turning him towards the deep waters of the river scamander. apollo ran
but a little way before him and beguiled achilles by making him think
all the time that he was on the point of overtaking him. meanwhile the
rabble of routed trojans was thankful to crowd within the city till
their numbers thronged it; no
 
 ___________________________
 
en in
fight, but all whose feet and knees could still carry them poured
pell-mell into the town.



book xxii

  the death of hector.

thus the trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat from
off them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against the goodly
battlements, while the achaeans with their shields laid upon their
shoulders drew close up to the walls. but stern fate bade hector stay
where he was before ilius and the scaean gates. then phoebus apollo
spoke to the son of peleus saying, "why, son of peleus, do you, who are
but man, give chase to me who am immortal? have you not yet found out
that it is a god whom you pursue so furiously? you did not harass the
trojans whom you had routed, and now they are within their walls, while
you have been decoyed hither away from them. me you cannot kill, for
death can take no hold upon me."

achilles was greatly angered and said, "you have baulked me,
far-darter, most malicious of all gods, and have drawn me away from the
wall, 
 
 ___________________________
 
armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. priam raised a
cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted
out to his dear son, imploring him to return; but hector still stayed
before the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle with
achilles. the old man reached out his arms towards him and bade him for
pity's sake come within the walls. "hector," he cried, "my son, stay
not to face this man alone and unsupported, or you will meet death at
the hands of the son of peleus, for he is mightier than you. monster
that he is; would indeed that the gods loved him no better than i do,
for so, dogs and vultures would soon devour him as he lay stretched on
earth, and a load of grief would be lifted from my heart, for many a
brave son has he reft from me, either by killing them or selling them
away in the islands that are beyond the sea: even now i miss two sons
from among the trojans who have thronged within the city, lycaon and
polydorus, whom laothoe peeress among wome
 
 ___________________________
 
chaeans, we will ransom them with
gold and bronze, of which we have store, for the old man altes endowed
his daughter richly; but if they are already dead and in the house of
hades, sorrow will it be to us two who were their parents; albeit the
grief of others will be more short-lived unless you too perish at the
hands of achilles. come, then, my son, within the city, to be the
guardian of trojan men and trojan women, or you will both lose your own
life and afford a mighty triumph to the son of peleus. have pity also
on your unhappy father while life yet remains to him--on me, whom the
son of saturn will destroy by a terrible doom on the threshold of old
age, after i have seen my sons slain and my daughters haled away as
captives, my bridal chambers pillaged, little children dashed to earth
amid the rage of battle, and my sons' wives dragged away by the cruel
hands of the achaeans; in the end fierce hounds will tear me in pieces
at my own gates after some one has beaten the life out of my bo
 
 ___________________________
 
k.

"alas," said he, "my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued
round the walls of troy; my heart is full of pity for hector, who has
burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my honour, one while on the
crests of many-valleyed ida, and again on the citadel of troy; and now
i see noble achilles in full pursuit of him round the city of priam.
what say you? consider among yourselves and decide whether we shall now
save him or let him fall, valiant though he be, before achilles, son of
peleus."

then minerva said, "father, wielder of the lightning, lord of cloud and
storm, what mean you? would you pluck this mortal whose doom has long
been decreed out of the jaws of death? do as you will, but we others
shall not be of a mind with you."

and jove answered, "my child, trito-born, take heart. i did not speak
in full earnest, and i will let you have your way. do without let or
hindrance as you are minded."

thus did he urge minerva who was already eager, and down she darted
from the top
 
 ___________________________
 
most summits of olympus.

achilles was still in full pursuit of hector, as a hound chasing a fawn
which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and hunts
through glade and thicket. the fawn may try to elude him by crouching
under cover of a bush, but he will scent her out and follow her up
until he gets her--even so there was no escape for hector from the
fleet son of peleus. whenever he made a set to get near the dardanian
gates and under the walls, that his people might help him by showering
down weapons from above, achilles would gain on him and head him back
towards the plain, keeping himself always on the city side. as a man in
a dream who fails to lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing--the
one cannot escape nor the other overtake--even so neither could
achilles come up with hector, nor hector break away from achilles;
nevertheless he might even yet have 
 
 ___________________________
 
ow that no man was to aim a dart
at hector, lest another might win the glory of having hit him and he
might himself come in second. then, at last, as they were nearing the
fountains for the fourth time, the father of all balanced his golden
scales and placed a doom in each of them, one for achilles and the
other for hector. as he held the scales by the middle, the doom of
hector fell down deep into the house of hades--and then phoebus apollo
left him. thereon minerva went close up to the son of peleus and said,
"noble achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely take back to
the ships a triumph for the achaeans by slaying hector, for all his
lust of battle. do what apollo may as he lies grovelling before his
father, aegis-bearing jove, hector cannot escape us longer. stay here
and take breath, while i go up to him and persuade him to make a stand
and fight you."

thus spoke minerva. achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while minerva lef
 
 ___________________________
 
, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but i was in an agony of
grief when i beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we may
learn whether achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to the
ships, or whether he shall fall before you."

thus did minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were now
close to one another great hector was first to speak. "i will no longer
fly you, son of peleus," said he, "as i have been doing hitherto. three
times have i fled round the mighty city of priam, without daring to
withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for i am in the
mind to face you. let us, then, give pledges to one another by our
gods, who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let
it be agreed between us that if jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and
i take your life, i am not to treat your dead body in any unseemly
fashion, but when i have stripped
 
 ___________________________
 
ave no more chance, and pallas minerva will forthwith
vanquish you by my spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief
you have caused me on account of my comrades whom you have killed in
battle."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. hector saw it coming and
avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it flew over his
head and stuck in the ground beyond; minerva then snatched it up and
gave it back to achilles without hector's seeing her; hector thereon
said to the son of peleus, "you have missed your aim, achilles, peer of
the gods, and jove has not yet revealed to you the hour of my doom,
though you made sure that he had done so. you were a false-tongued liar
when you deemed that i should forget my valour and quail before you.
you shall not drive your spear into the back of a runaway--drive it,
should heaven so grant you power, drive it into me as i make straight
towards you; and now for your own part avoid my spear if you can--would
that you might receive the whole 
 
 ___________________________
 
g smirched with fire. hardly could the people
hold priam back in his hot haste to rush without the gates of the city.
he grovelled in the mire and besought them, calling each one of them by
his name. "let be, my friends," he cried, "and for all your sorrow,
suffer me to go single-handed to the ships of the achaeans. let me
beseech this cruel and terrible man, if maybe he will respect the
feeling of his fellow-men, and have compassion on my old age. his own
father is even such another as myself--peleus, who bred him and reared
him to be the bane of us trojans, and of myself more than of all
others. many a son of mine has he slain in the flower of his youth, and
yet, grieve for these as i may, i do so for one--hector--more than for
them all, and the bitterness of my sorrow will bring me down to the
house of hades. would that he had died in my arms, for so both his
ill-starred mother who bore him, and myself, should have had the
comfort of weeping and mourning over him."

thus did he speak with
 
 ___________________________
 
r to the dead. when we
have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take
supper all of us here."

on this they all joined in a cry of wailing and achilles led them in
their lament. thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round
the body, and thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning. the
sands of the seashore and the men's armour were wet with their weeping,
so great a minister of fear was he whom they had lost. chief in all
their mourning was the son of peleus: he laid his bloodstained hand on
the breast of his friend. "fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in
the house of hades. i will now do all that i erewhile promised you; i
will drag hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons
of trojans will i also slay before your pyre to avenge you."

as he spoke he treated the body of noble hector with contumely, laying
it at full length in the dust beside the bier of patroclus. the others
then put off every man his armour, took the horses 
 
 ___________________________
 
from their chariots,
and seated themselves in great multitude by the ship of the fleet
descendant of aeacus, who thereon feasted them with an abundant funeral
banquet. many a goodly ox, with many a sheep and bleating goat did they
butcher and cut up; many a tusked boar moreover, fat and well-fed, did
they singe and set to roast in the flames of vulcan; and rivulets of
blood flowed all round the place where the body was lying.

then the princes of the achaeans took the son of peleus to agamemnon,
but hardly could they persuade him to come with them, so wroth was he
for the death of his comrade. as soon as they reached agamemnon's tent
they told the serving-men to set a large tripod over the fire in case
they might persuade the son of peleus to wash the clotted gore from
this body, but he denied them sternly, and swore it with a solemn oath,
saying, "nay, by king jove, first and mightiest of all gods, it is not
meet that water should touch my body, till i have laid patroclu
 
 ___________________________
 
emnon, bid your men bring wood, and provide all else that the dead
may duly take into the realm of darkness; the fire shall thus burn him
out of our sight the sooner, and the people shall turn again to their
own labours."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. they made haste to
prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full share so that
all were satisfied. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
the others went to their rest each in his own tent, but the son of
peleus lay grieving among his myrmidons by the shore of the sounding
sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in one after
another. here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and eased the
burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing hector
round windy ilius. presently the sad spirit of patroclus drew near him,
like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of his beaming
eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. the spirit hovered over
his head and said--

"you 
 
 ___________________________
 
 has yawned its wide jaws around me--nay, you too
achilles, peer of gods, are doomed to die beneath the wall of the noble
trojans.

"one prayer more will i make you, if you will grant it; let not my
bones be laid apart from yours, achilles, but with them; even as we
were brought up together in your own home, what time menoetius brought
me to you as a child from opoeis because by a sad spite i had killed
the son of amphidamas--not of set purpose, but in childish quarrel over
the dice. the knight peleus took me into his house, entreated me
kindly, and named me to be your squire; therefore let our bones lie in
but a single urn, the two-handled golden vase given to you by your
mother."

and achilles answered, "why, true heart, are you come hither to lay
these charges upon me? i will of my own self do all as you have bidden
me. draw closer to me, let us once more throw our arms around one
another, and find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows."

he opened his arms towards him as he spoke and
 
 ___________________________
 
ut off and threw
upon his body. last came achilles with his head bowed for sorrow, so
noble a comrade was he taking to the house of hades.

when they came to the place of which achilles had told them they laid
the body down and built up the wood. achilles then bethought him of
another matter. he went a space away from the pyre, and cut off the
yellow lock which he had let grow for the river spercheius. he looked
all sorrowfully out upon the dark sea, and said, "spercheius, in vain
did my father peleus vow to you that when i returned home to my loved
native land i should cut off this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb;
fifty she-goats was i to sacrifice to you there at your springs, where
is your grove and your altar fragrant with burnt-offerings. thus did my
father vow, but you have not fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore, that
i shall see my home no more, i give this lock as a keepsake to the hero
patroclus."

as he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and
all who sto
 
 ___________________________
 
 he is burning the bones of
his bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his parents,
even so did achilles mourn while burning the body of his comrade,
pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation.

at length as the morning star was beginning to herald the light which
saffron-mantled dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames fell
and the fire began to die. the winds then went home beyond the thracian
sea, which roared and boiled as they swept over it. the son of peleus
now turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with toil, till he
fell into a sweet slumber. presently they who were about the son of
atreus drew near in a body, and roused him with the noise and tramp of
their coming. he sat upright and said, "son of atreus, and all other
princes of the achaeans, first pour red wine everywhere upon the fire
and quench it; let us then gather the bones of patroclus son of
menoetius, singling them out with care; they are easily found, for they
lie in the mi
 
 ___________________________
 
ddle of the pyre, while all else, both men and horses, has
been thrown in a heap and burned at the outer edge. we will lay the
bones in a golden urn, in two layers of fat, against the time when i
shall myself go down into the house of hades. as for the barrow, labour
not to raise a great one now, but such as is reasonable. afterwards,
let those achaeans who may be left at the ships when i am gone, build
it both broad and high."

thus he spoke and they obeyed the word of the son of peleus. first they
poured red wine upon the thick layer of ashes and quenched the fire.
with many tears they singled out the whitened bones of their loved
comrade and laid them within a golden urn in two layers of fat: they
then covered the urn with a linen cloth and took it inside the tent.
they marked off the circle where the barrow should be, made a
foundation for it about the pyre, and forthwith heaped up the earth.
when they had thus raised a mound they were going away, but achilles
stayed the pe
 
 ___________________________
 
hen it left the
maker, and would hold four measures. the fourth prize was two talents
of gold, and the fifth a two-handled urn as yet unsoiled by smoke. then
he stood up and spoke among the argives saying--

"son of atreus, and all other achaeans, these are the prizes that lie
waiting the winners of the chariot races. at any other time i should
carry off the first prize and take it to my own tent; you know how far
my steeds excel all others--for they are immortal; neptune gave them to
my father peleus, who in his turn gave them to myself; but i shall hold
aloof, i and my steeds that have lost their brave and kind driver, who
many a time has washed them in clear water and anointed their manes
with oil. see how they stand weeping here, with their manes trailing on
the ground in the extremity of their sorrow. but do you others set
yourselves in order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in
his horses and in the strength of his chariot."

thus spoke the son of peleus and the drivers of 
 
 ___________________________
 
t of them all came the son of admetus, dragging his chariot
and driving his horses on in front. when achilles saw him he was sorry,
and stood up among the argives saying, "the best man is coming in last.
let us give him a prize for it is reasonable. he shall have the second,
but the first must go to the son of tydeus."

thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying, and
were for doing as he had said, but nestor's son antilochus stood up and
claimed his rights from the son of peleus. "achilles," said he, "i
shall take it much amiss if you do this thing; you would rob me of my
prize, because you think eumelus's chariot and horses were thrown out,
and himself too, good man that he is. he should have prayed duly to the
immortals; he would not have come in last if he had done so. if you are
sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents, with
bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. take something from this store if you
would have the achaeans speak well of you, and gi
 
 ___________________________
 
p. such was i then, but now i must leave these matters to
younger men; i must bow before the weight of years, but in those days i
was eminent among heroes. and now, sir, go on with the funeral contests
in honour of your comrade: gladly do i accept this urn, and my heart
rejoices that you do not forget me but are ever mindful of my goodwill
towards you, and of the respect due to me from the achaeans. for all
which may the grace of heaven be vouchsafed you in great abundance."

thereon the son of peleus, when he had listened to all the thanks of
nestor, went about among the concourse of the achaeans, and presently
offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing. he brought out a
strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of the crowd--a she-mule
never yet broken, but six years old--when it is hardest of all to break
them: this was for the victor, and for the vanquished he offered a
double cup. then he stood up and said among the argives, "son of
atreus, and all other achaeans, i invite 
 
 ___________________________
 
gave way under him in a moment and he
sprang up with a bound, as a fish leaps into the air near some shore
that is all bestrewn with sea-wrack, when boreas furs the top of the
waves, and then falls back into deep water. but noble epeus caught hold
of him and raised him up; his comrades also came round him and led him
from the ring, unsteady in his gait, his head hanging on one side, and
spitting great clots of gore. they set him down in a swoon and then
went to fetch the double cup.

the son of peleus now brought out the prizes for the third contest and
showed them to the argives. these were for the painful art of
wrestling. for the winner there was a great tripod ready for setting
upon the fire, and the achaeans valued it among themselves at twelve
oxen. for the loser he brought out a woman skilled in all manner of
arts, and they valued her at four oxen. he rose and said among the
argives, "stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

forthwith uprose great ajax the son of telamon, and
 
 ___________________________
 
and the two fell side by side on
the ground and were all begrimed with dust. they now sprang towards one
another and were for wrestling yet a third time, but achilles rose and
stayed them. "put not each other further," said he, "to such cruel
suffering; the victory is with both alike, take each of you an equal
prize, and let the other achaeans now compete."

thus did he speak and they did even as he had said, and put on their
shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.

the son of peleus then offered prizes for speed in running--a
mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. it would hold six
measures, and far exceeded all others in the whole world for beauty; it
was the work of cunning artificers in sidon, and had been brought into
port by phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it
to thoas. eueneus son of jason had given it to patroclus in ransom of
priam's son lycaon, and achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of
his comrade to him who should be 
 
 ___________________________
 
ugh she were his own mother." thus did
he speak and they all of them laughed heartily.

antilochus carried off the last prize and smiled as he said to the
bystanders, "you all see, my friends, that now too the gods have shown
their respect for seniority. ajax is somewhat older than i am, and as
for ulysses, he belongs to an earlier generation, but he is hale in
spite of his years, and no man of the achaeans can run against him save
only achilles."

he said this to pay a compliment to the son of peleus, and achilles
answered, "antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose; i
shall give you an additional half talent of gold." he then gave the
half talent to antilochus, who received it gladly.

then the son of peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that
had been borne by sarpedon, and were taken from him by patroclus. he
stood up and said among the argives, "we bid two champions put on their
armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the
presence of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the bow; then espying the pigeon high up under the
clouds, he hit her in the middle of the wing as she was circling
upwards; the arrow went clean through the wing and fixed itself in the
ground at meriones' feet, but the bird perched on the ship's mast
hanging her head and with all her feathers drooping; the life went out
of her, and she fell heavily from the mast. meriones, therefore, took
all ten double-edged axes, while teucer bore off the single-edged ones
to his ships.

then the son of peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had never
been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a pattern of
flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up--to wit the son of
atreus, king of men agamemnon, and meriones, stalwart squire of
idomeneus. but achilles spoke saying, "son of atreus, we know how far
you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take
the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let
us give the spear to meriones; this
 
 ___________________________
 
behind his chariot round the tomb of his comrade. it were better of
him, and for him, that he should not do so, for brave though he be we
gods may take it ill that he should vent his fury upon dead clay."

juno spoke up in a rage. "this were well," she cried, "o lord of the
silver bow, if you would give like honour to hector and to achilles;
but hector was mortal and suckled at a woman's breast, whereas achilles
is the offspring of a goddess whom i myself reared and brought up. i
married her to peleus, who is above measure dear to the immortals; you
gods came all of you to her wedding; you feasted along with them
yourself and brought your lyre--false, and fond of low company, that
you have ever been."

then said jove, "juno, be not so bitter. their honour shall not be
equal, but of all that dwell in ilius, hector was dearest to the gods,
as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. never was my
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we cl
 
 ___________________________
 
-in-law who had followed him went back to ilius.

but priam and idaeus as they showed out upon the plain did not escape
the ken of all-seeing jove, who looked down upon the old man and pitied
him; then he spoke to his son mercury and said, "mercury, for it is you
who are the most disposed to escort men on their way, and to hear those
whom you will hear, go, and so conduct priam to the ships of the
achaeans that no other of the danaans shall see him nor take note of
him until he reach the son of peleus."

thus he spoke and mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of argus, did as
he was told. forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with
which he could fly like the wind over land and sea; he took the wand
with which he seals men's eyes in sleep, or wakes them just as he
pleases, and flew holding it in his hand till he came to troy and to
the hellespont. to look at, he was like a young man of noble birth in
the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
face.

now
 
 ___________________________
 
 ship. i am a myrmidon,
and my father's name is polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as
you are; he has six sons besides myself, and i am the seventh. we cast
lots, and it fell upon me to sail hither with achilles. i am now come
from the ships on to the plain, for with daybreak the achaeans will set
battle in array about the city. they chafe at doing nothing, and are so
eager that their princes cannot hold them back."

then answered priam, "if you are indeed the squire of achilles son of
peleus, tell me now the whole truth. is my son still at the ships, or
has achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him to his hounds?"

"sir," replied the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, "neither hounds
nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying at the tents
by the ship of achilles, and though it is now twelve days that he has
lain there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the worms eaten him
although they feed on warriors. at daybreak achilles drags him cruelly
round the sepulch
 
 ___________________________
 
spears. such care have the blessed gods taken of
your brave son, for he was dear to them beyond all measure."

the old man was comforted as he heard him and said, "my son, see what a
good thing it is to have made due offerings to the immortals; for as
sure as that he was born my son never forgot the gods that hold
olympus, and now they requite it to him even in death. accept therefore
at my hands this goodly chalice; guard me and with heaven's help guide
me till i come to the tent of the son of peleus."

then answered the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, "sir, you are
tempting me and playing upon my youth, but you shall not move me, for
you are offering me presents without the knowledge of achilles whom i
fear and hold it great guilt to defraud, lest some evil presently
befall me; but as your guide i would go with you even to argos itself,
and would guard you so carefully whether by sea or land, that no one
should attack you through making light of him who was with you."

the bringer of 
 
 ___________________________
 
good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing the
whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses. when
they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships, those
who were on guard had just been getting their suppers, and the slayer
of argus threw them all into a deep sleep. then he drew back the bolts
to open the gates, and took priam inside with the treasure he had upon
his waggon. ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of
peleus for which the myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built
for their king; when they had built it they thatched it with coarse
tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and all round it
they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes set close
together. the gate was barred with a single bolt of pine which it took
three men to force into its place, and three to draw back so as to open
the gate, but achilles could draw it by himself. mercury opened the
gate for the old man,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and brought in the treasure that he was taking
with him for the son of peleus. then he sprang from the chariot on to
the ground and said, "sir, it is i, immortal mercury, that am come with
you, for my father sent me to escort you. i will now leave you, and
will not enter into the presence of achilles, for it might anger him
that a god should befriend mortal men thus openly. go you within, and
embrace the knees of the son of peleus: beseech him by his father, his
lovely mother, and his son; thus you may move him."

with these words mercury went back to high olympus. priam sprang from
his chariot to the ground, leaving idaeus where he was, in charge of
the mules and horses. the old man went straight into the house where
achilles, loved of the gods, was sitting. there he found him with his
men seated at a distance from him: only two, the hero automedon, and
alcimus of the race of mars, were busy in attendance about his pers
 
 ___________________________
 
ull of sorrow; on the floor of jove's palace there stand two urns,
the one filled with evil gifts, and the other with good ones. he for
whom jove the lord of thunder mixes the gifts he sends, will meet now
with good and now with evil fortune; but he to whom jove sends none but
evil gifts will be pointed at by the finger of scorn, the hand of
famine will pursue him to the ends of the world, and he will go up and
down the face of the earth, respected neither by gods nor men. even so
did it befall peleus; the gods endowed him with all good things from
his birth upwards, for he reigned over the myrmidons excelling all men
in prosperity and wealth, and mortal though he was they gave him a
goddess for his bride. but even on him too did heaven send misfortune,
for there is no race of royal children born to him in his house, save
one son who is doomed to die all untimely; nor may i take care of him
now that he is growing old, for i must stay here at troy to be the bane
of you and your children. and 
 
 ___________________________
 
jove to bid me deliver it to
you. moreover i know well, o priam, and you cannot hide it, that some
god has brought you to the ships of the achaeans, for else, no man
however strong and in his prime would dare to come to our host; he
could neither pass our guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus
easily; therefore, provoke me no further, lest i sin against the word
of jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within my tents."

the old man feared him and obeyed. then the son of peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his
two squires automedon and alcimus who were closer to him than any
others of his comrades now that patroclus was no more. these unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. they lifted the ransom for hector's body from the
waggon, but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. then he
calle