ter they shall look fondly for achilles
and shall not find him. in the day of your distress, when your men fall
dying by the murderous hand of hector, you shall not know how to help
them, and shall rend your heart with rage for the hour when you offered
insult to the bravest of the achaeans."

with this the son of peleus dashed his gold-bestudded sceptre on the
ground and took his seat, while the son of atreus was beginning
fiercely from his place upon the other side. then uprose smooth-tongued
nestor, the facile speaker of the pylians, and the words fell from his
lips sweeter than honey. two generations of men born and bred in pylos
had passed away under his rule, and he was now reigning over the third.
with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:--

"of a truth," he said, "a great sorrow has befallen the achaean land.
surely priam with his sons would rejoice, and the trojans be glad at
heart if they could hear this quarrel between you two, who are so
excellent in fig
 
 ___________________________
 
 into the tent of agamemnon, and say to him word for word as i
now bid you. tell him to get the achaeans instantly under arms, for he
shall take troy. there are no longer divided counsels among the gods;
juno has brought them to her own mind, and woe betides the trojans."

the dream went when it had heard its message, and soon reached the
ships of the achaeans. it sought agamemnon son of atreus and found him
in his tent, wrapped in a profound slumber. it hovered over his head in
the likeness of nestor, son of neleus, whom agamemnon honoured above
all his councillors, and said:--

"you are sleeping, son of atreus; one who has the welfare of his host
and so much other care upon his shoulders should dock his sleep. hear
me at once, for i come as a messenger from jove, who, though he be not
near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. he bids you get the
achaeans instantly under arms, for you shall take troy. there are no
longer divided counsels among the gods; juno has brought them over to
h
 
 ___________________________
 
ak. he bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
and slung his silver-studded sword about his shoulders; then he took
the imperishable staff of his father, and sallied forth to the ships of
the achaeans.

the goddess dawn now wended her way to vast olympus that she might
herald day to jove and to the other immortals, and agamemnon sent the
criers round to call the people in assembly; so they called them and
the people gathered thereon. but first he summoned a meeting of the
elders at the ship of nestor king of pylos, and when they were
assembled he laid a cunning counsel before them.

"my friends," said he, "i have had a dream from heaven in the dead of
night, and its face and figure resembled none but nestor's. it hovered
over my head and said, 'you are sleeping, son of atreus; one who has
the welfare of his host and so much other care upon his shoulders
should dock his sleep. hear me at once, for i am a messenger from jove,
who, though he be not near, yet takes thought for you and pities yo
 
 ___________________________
 
antly under arms, for you shall take
troy. there are no longer divided counsels among the gods; juno has
brought them over to her own mind, and woe betides the trojans at the
hands of jove. remember this.' the dream then vanished and i awoke. let
us now, therefore, arm the sons of the achaeans. but it will be well
that i should first sound them, and to this end i will tell them to fly
with their ships; but do you others go about among the host and prevent
their doing so."

he then sat down, and nestor the prince of pylos with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: "my friends," said he, "princes and
councillors of the argives, if any other man of the achaeans had told
us of this dream we should have declared it false, and would have had
nothing to do with it. but he who has seen it is the foremost man among
us; we must therefore set about getting the people under arms."

with this he led the way from the assembly, and the other sceptred
kings rose with him in obedience to the word o
 
 ___________________________
 
 thus speechless? jove has sent us this sign, long in coming, and
long ere it be fulfilled, though its fame shall last for ever. as the
serpent ate the eight fledglings and the sparrow that hatched them,
which makes nine, so shall we fight nine years at troy, but in the
tenth shall take the town.' this was what he said, and now it is all
coming true. stay here, therefore, all of you, till we take the city of
priam."

on this the argives raised a shout, till the ships rang again with the
uproar. nestor, knight of gerene, then addressed them. "shame on you,"
he cried, "to stay talking here like children, when you should fight
like men. where are our covenants now, and where the oaths that we have
taken? shall our counsels be flung into the fire, with our
drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship wherein we have put
our trust? we waste our time in words, and for all our talking here
shall be no further forward. stand, therefore, son of atreus, by your
own steadfast purpose; lead the arg
 
 ___________________________
 
, for the word that i say may not be neglected lightly.
divide your men, agamemnon, into their several tribes and clans, that
clans and tribes may stand by and help one another. if you do this, and
if the achaeans obey you, you will find out who, both chiefs and
peoples, are brave, and who are cowards; for they will vie against the
other. thus you shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of
heaven or the cowardice of man that you shall fail to take the town."

and agamemnon answered, "nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the
achaeans in counsel. would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that i
had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of king priam
would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. but the
son of saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife. achilles
and i are quarrelling about this girl, in which matter i was the first
to offend; if we can be of one mind again, the trojans will not stave
off destruction for a day. now, th
 
 ___________________________
 
 and buffeting it without ceasing, as the
storms from every quarter drive them, even so did the achaeans rise and
hurry in all directions to their ships. there they lighted their fires
at their tents and got dinner, offering sacrifice every man to one or
other of the gods, and praying each one of them that he might live to
come out of the fight. agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed a fat
five-year-old bull to the mighty son of saturn, and invited the princes
and elders of his host. first he asked nestor and king idomeneus, then
the two ajaxes and the son of tydeus, and sixthly ulysses, peer of gods
in counsel; but menelaus came of his own accord, for he knew how busy
his brother then was. they stood round the bull with the barley-meal in
their hands, and agamemnon prayed, saying, "jove, most glorious,
supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest upon the storm-cloud,
grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace
of priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed with fi
 
 ___________________________
 
f them. these they burned
upon the split logs of firewood, but they spitted the inward meats, and
held them in the flames to cook. when the thigh-bones were burned, and
they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small, put the
pieces upon spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off;
then, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, they
ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied.
as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, nestor, knight of
gerene, began to speak. "king agamemnon," said he, "let us not stay
talking here, nor be slack in the work that heaven has put into our
hands. let the heralds summon the people to gather at their several
ships; we will then go about among the host, that we may begin fighting
at once."

thus did he speak, and agamemnon heeded his words. he at once sent the
criers round to call the people in assembly. so they called them, and
the people gathered thereon. the chiefs about the son of atr
 
 ___________________________
 
foes with their long ashen
spears. of these there came fifty ships.

and they that held the strong city of athens, the people of great
erechtheus, who was born of the soil itself, but jove's daughter,
minerva, fostered him, and established him at athens in her own rich
sanctuary. there, year by year, the athenian youths worship him with
sacrifices of bulls and rams. these were commanded by menestheus, son
of peteos. no man living could equal him in the marshalling of chariots
and foot soldiers. nestor could alone rival him, for he was older. with
him there came fifty ships.

ajax brought twelve ships from salamis, and stationed them alongside
those of the athenians.

the men of argos, again, and those who held the walls of tiryns, with
hermione, and asine upon the gulf; troezene, eionae, and the vineyard
lands of epidaurus; the achaean youths, moreover, who came from aegina
and mases; these were led by diomed of the loud battle-cry, and
sthenelus son of famed capaneus. with them in command w
 
 ___________________________
 
of the river
alpheus; strong aipy, cyparisseis, and amphigenea; pteleum, helos, and
dorium, where the muses met thamyris, and stilled his minstrelsy for
ever. he was returning from oechalia, where eurytus lived and reigned,
and boasted that he would surpass even the muses, daughters of
aegis-bearing jove, if they should sing against him; whereon they were
angry, and maimed him. they robbed him of his divine power of song, and
thenceforth he could strike the lyre no more. these were commanded by
nestor, knight of gerene, and with him there came ninety ships.

and those that held arcadia, under the high mountain of cyllene, near
the tomb of aepytus, where the people fight hand to hand; the men of
pheneus also, and orchomenus rich in flocks; of rhipae, stratie, and
bleak enispe; of tegea and fair mantinea; of stymphelus and parrhasia;
of these king agapenor son of ancaeus was commander, and they had sixty
ships. many arcadians, good soldiers, came in each one of them, but
agamemnon found them t
 
 ___________________________
 
f stalwart youths move in a dark
mass to battle under the ajaxes, horrid with shield and spear. glad was
king agamemnon when he saw them. "no need," he cried, "to give orders
to such leaders of the argives as you are, for of your own selves you
spur your men on to fight with might and main. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo that all were so minded as you are, for the city of
priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it."

with this he left them and went onward to nestor, the facile speaker of
the pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in company
with pelagon, alastor, chromius, haemon, and bias shepherd of his
people. he placed his knights with their chariots and horses in the
front rank, while the foot-soldiers, brave men and many, whom he could
trust, were in the rear. the cowards he drove into the middle, that
they might fight whether they would or no. he gave his orders to the
knights first, bidding them hold their horses well in hand, so
 
 ___________________________
 
my's chariot throw his spear from his own; this be
much the best; this is how the men of old took towns and strongholds;
in this wise were they minded."

thus did the old man charge them, for he had been in many a fight, and
king agamemnon was glad. "i wish," he said to him, "that your limbs
were as supple and your strength as sure as your judgment is; but age,
the common enemy of mankind, has laid his hand upon you; would that it
had fallen upon some other, and that you were still young."

and nestor, knight of gerene, answered, "son of atreus, i too would
gladly be the man i was when i slew mighty ereuthalion; but the gods
will not give us everything at one and the same time. i was then young,
and now i am old; still i can go with my knights and give them that
counsel which old men have a right to give. the wielding of the spear i
leave to those who are younger and stronger than myself."

agamemnon went his way rejoicing, and presently found menestheus, son
of peteos, tarrying in his place
 
 ___________________________
 
of
them fell. as two lions whom their dam has reared in the depths of some
mountain forest to plunder homesteads and carry off sheep and cattle
till they get killed by the hand of man, so were these two vanquished
by aeneas, and fell like high pine-trees to the ground.

brave menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the
front, clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for mars
egged him on to do so with intent that he should be killed by aeneas;
but antilochus the son of nestor saw him and sprang forward, fearing
that the king might come to harm and thus bring all their labour to
nothing; when, therefore aeneas and menelaus were setting their hands
and spears against one another eager to do battle, antilochus placed
himself by the side of menelaus. aeneas, bold though he was, drew back
on seeing the two heroes side by side in front of him, so they drew the
bodies of crethon and orsilochus to the ranks of the achaeans and
committed the two poor fellows into the hands o
 
 ___________________________
 
 the earth.

euryalus killed dresus and opheltius, and then went in pursuit of
aesepus and pedasus, whom the naiad nymph abarbarea had borne to noble
bucolion. bucolion was eldest son to laomedon, but he was a bastard.
while tending his sheep he had converse with the nymph, and she
conceived twin sons; these the son of mecisteus now slew, and he
stripped the armour from their shoulders. polypoetes then killed
astyalus, ulysses pidytes of percote, and teucer aretaon. ablerus fell
by the spear of nestor's son antilochus, and agamemnon, king of men,
killed elatus who dwelt in pedasus by the banks of the river satnioeis.
leitus killed phylacus as he was flying, and eurypylus slew melanthus.

then menelaus of the loud war-cry took adrestus alive, for his horses
ran into a tamarisk bush, as they were flying wildly over the plain,
and broke the pole from the car; they went on towards the city along
with the others in full flight, but adrestus rolled out, and fell in
the dust flat on his face by the
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
hands of the trojans? let us not spare a single one of them--not even
the child unborn and in its mother's womb; let not a man of them be
left alive, but let all in ilius perish, unheeded and forgotten."

thus did he speak, and his brother was persuaded by him, for his words
were just. menelaus, therefore, thrust adrestus from him, whereon king
agamemnon struck him in the flank, and he fell: then the son of atreus
planted his foot upon his breast to draw his spear from the body.

meanwhile nestor shouted to the argives, saying, "my friends, danaan
warriors, servants of mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead,
and bring back much booty to the ships. let us kill as many as we can;
the bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them later at
your leisure."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. and now the
trojans would have been routed and driven back into ilius, had not
priam's son helenus, wisest of augurs, said to hector and aeneas,
"hector and aeneas, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by many another as well as you.
even achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from
meeting him in battle. sit down your own people, and the achaeans will
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

with these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,
whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders.
then nestor rose and spoke, "of a truth," said he, "the achaean land is
fallen upon evil times. the old knight peleus, counsellor and orator
among the myrmidons, loved when i was in his house to question me
concerning the race and lineage of all the argives. how would it not
grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before hector? many a
time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave his
body and go down within the house of hades. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo, that i 
 
 ___________________________
 
uld face
him. but you, foremost among the whole host though you be, have none of
you any stomach for fighting hector."

thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to
their feet. foremost of all uprose king agamemnon, and after him brave
diomed the son of tydeus. next were the two ajaxes, men clothed in
valour as with a garment, and then idomeneus, and meriones his brother
in arms. after these eurypylus son of euaemon, thoas the son of
andraemon, and ulysses also rose. then nestor knight of gerene again
spoke, saying: "cast lots among you to see who shall be chosen. if he
come alive out of this fight he will have done good service alike to
his own soul and to the achaeans."

thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown
it into the helmet of agamemnon son of atreus, the people lifted their
hands in prayer, and thus would one of them say as he looked into the
vault of heaven, "father jove, grant that the lot fall on ajax, or on
the son of tydeus,
 
 ___________________________
 
 or upon the king of rich mycene himself."

as they were speaking, nestor knight of gerene shook the helmet, and
from it there fell the very lot which they wanted--the lot of ajax. the
herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the
achaeans, going from left to right; but they none of them owned it.
when, however, in due course he reached the man who had written upon it
and had put it into the helmet, brave ajax held out his hand, and the
herald gave him the lot. when ajax saw his mark he knew it and was
glad; he threw it to the ground and said, "my f
 
 ___________________________
 
aturn. they flayed the carcass, made it ready, and divided it into
joints; these they cut carefully up into smaller pieces, putting them
on the spits, roasting them sufficiently, and then drawing them off.
when they had done all this and had prepared the feast, they ate it,
and every man had his full and equal share, so that all were satisfied,
and king agamemnon gave ajax some slices cut lengthways down the loin,
as a mark of special honour. as soon as they had had enough to eat and
drink, old nestor whose counsel was ever truest began to speak; with
all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:--

"son of atreus, and other chieftains, inasmuch as many of the achaeans
are now dead, whose blood mars has shed by the banks of the scamander,
and their souls have gone down to the house of hades, it will be well
when morning comes that we should cease fighting; we will then wheel
our dead together with oxen and mules and burn them not far from the
ships, that when we sail hence w
 
 ___________________________
 
 the other for
the achaeans. he took the balance by the middle, and when he lifted it
up the day of the achaeans sank; the death-fraught scale of the
achaeans settled down upon the ground, while that of the trojans rose
heavenwards. then he thundered aloud from ida, and sent the glare of
his lightning upon the achaeans; when they saw this, pale fear fell
upon them and they were sore afraid.

idomeneus dared not stay nor yet agamemnon, nor did the two ajaxes,
servants of mars, hold their ground. nestor knight of gerene alone
stood firm, bulwark of the achaeans, not of his own will, but one of
his horses was disabled. alexandrus husband of lovely helen had hit it
with an arrow just on the top of its head where the mane begins to grow
away from the skull, a very deadly place. the horse bounded in his
anguish as the arrow pierced his brain, and his struggles threw others
into confusion. the old man instantly began cutting the traces with his
sword, but hector's fleet horses bore down upon him th
 
 ___________________________
 
rough the rout
with their bold charioteer, even hector himself, and the old man would
have perished there and then had not diomed been quick to mark, and
with a loud cry called ulysses to help him.

"ulysses," he cried, "noble son of laertes where are you flying to,
with your back turned like a coward? see that you are not struck with a
spear between the shoulders. stay here and help me to defend nestor
from this man's furious onset."

ulysses would not give ear, but sped onward to the ships of the
achaeans, and the son of tydeus flinging himself alone into the thick
of the fight took his stand before the horses of the son of neleus.
"sir," said he, "these young warriors are pressing you hard, your force
is spent, and age is heavy upon you, your squire is naught, and your
horses are slow to move. mount my chariot and see what the horses of
tros can do--how cleverly they can scud hither and thi
 
 ___________________________
 
ther over the
plain either in flight or in pursuit. i took them from the hero aeneas.
let our squires attend to your own steeds, but let us drive mine
straight at the trojans, that hector may learn how furiously i too can
wield my spear."

nestor knight of gerene hearkened to his words. thereon the doughty
squires, sthenelus and kind-hearted eurymedon, saw to nestor's horses,
while the two both mounted diomed's chariot. nestor took the reins in
his hands and lashed the horses on; they were soon close up with
hector, and the son of tydeus aimed a spear at him as he was charging
full speed towards them. he missed him, but struck his charioteer and
squire eniopeus son of noble thebaeus in the breast by the nipple while
the reins were in his hands, so that he died there and then, and the
horses swerved as he fell headlong from the chariot. hector was greatly
grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but let him lie for all 
 
 ___________________________
 
ne, for he presently found brave archeptolemus
the son of iphitus, and made him get up behind the horses, giving the
reins into his hand.

all had then been lost and no help for it, for they would have been
penned up in ilius like sheep, had not the sire of gods and men been
quick to mark, and hurled a fiery flaming thunderbolt which fell just
in front of diomed's horses with a flare of burning brimstone. the
horses were frightened and tried to back beneath the car, while the
reins dropped from nestor's hands. then he was afraid and said to
diomed, "son of tydeus, turn your horses in flight; see you not that
the hand of jove is against you? to-day he vouchsafes victory to
hector; to-morrow, if it so please him, he will again grant it to
ourselves; no man, however brave, may thwart the purpose of jove, for
he is far stronger than any."

diomed answered, "all that you have said is true; there is a grief
however which pierces me to the very heart, for hector will talk among
the trojans and say,
 
 ___________________________
 
 'the son of tydeus fled before me to the ships.'
this is the vaunt he will make, and may earth then swallow me."

"son of tydeus," replied nestor, "what mean you? though hector say that
you are a coward the trojans and dardanians will not believe him, nor
yet the wives of the mighty warriors whom you have laid low."

so saying he turned the horses back through the thick of the battle,
and with a cry that rent the air the trojans and hector rained their
darts after them. hector shouted to him and said, "son of tydeus, the
danaans have done you honour hitherto as regards your place at table,
the meals they give you, and the filling of your
 
 ___________________________
 
o bring me fire that i may burn them, while i slaughter the
argives who will be all dazed and bewildered by the smoke."

then he cried to his horses, "xanthus and podargus, and you aethon and
goodly lampus, pay me for your keep now and for all the honey-sweet
corn with which andromache daughter of great eetion has fed you, and
for she has mixed wine and water for you to drink whenever you would,
before doing so even for me who am her own husband. haste in pursuit,
that we may take the shield of nestor, the fame of which ascends to
heaven, for it is of solid gold, arm-rods and all, and that we may
strip from the shoulders of diomed the cuirass which vulcan made him.
could we take these two things, the achaeans would set sail in their
ships this self-same night."

thus did he vaunt, but queen juno made high olympus quake as she shook
with rage upon her throne. then said she to the mighty god of neptune,
"what now, wide ruling lord of the earthquake? can you find no
compassion in your heart for
 
 ___________________________
 
s unwarlike and
cowardly as you say they are? if your own mind is set upon going
home--go--the way is open to you; the many ships that followed you from
mycene stand ranged upon the seashore; but the rest of us stay here
till we have sacked troy. nay though these too should turn homeward
with their ships, sthenelus and myself will still fight on till we
reach the goal of ilius, for heaven was with us when we came."

the sons of the achaeans shouted applause at the words of diomed, and
presently nestor rose to speak. "son of tydeus," said he, "in war your
prowess is beyond question, and in council you excel all who are of
your own years; no one of the achaeans can make light of what you say
nor gainsay it, but you have not yet come to the end of the whole
matter. you are still young--you might be the youngest of my own
children--still you have spoken wisely and have counselled the chief of
the achaeans not without discretion; nevertheless i am older than you
and i will tell you everything; th
 
 ___________________________
 
from thrace daily. you have everything at your disposal wherewith to
entertain guests, and you have many subjects. when many are got
together, you can be guided by him whose counsel is wisest--and sorely
do we need shrewd and prudent counsel, for the foe has lit his
watchfires hard by our ships. who can be other than dismayed? this
night will either be the ruin of our host, or save it."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. the sentinels went
out in their armour under command of nestor's son thrasymedes, a
captain of the host, and of the bold warriors ascalaphus and ialmenus:
there were also meriones, aphareus and deipyrus, and the son of creion,
noble lycomedes. there were seven captains of the sentinels, and with
each there went a hundred youths armed with long spears: they took
their places midway between the trench and the wall, and when they had
done so they lit their fires and got every man his supper.

the son of atreus then bade many councillors of the achaeans to his
 
 ___________________________
 

quarters and prepared a great feast in their honour. they laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had
enough to eat and drink, old nestor, whose counsel was ever truest, was
the first to lay his mind before them. he, therefore, with all
sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus.

"with yourself, most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon, will
i both begin my speech and end it, for you are king over much people.
jove, moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the sceptre and to uphold
righteousness, that you may take thought for your people under you;
therefore it behooves you above all others both to speak and to give
ear, an
 
 ___________________________
 
f
pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy pylos. the men
that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour him
with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient to his comfortable
ordinances. all this will i do if he will now forgo his anger. let him
then yield; it is only hades who is utterly ruthless and
unyielding--and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to
mankind. moreover i am older and more royal than himself. therefore,
let him now obey me."

then nestor answered, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon. the gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send
chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of achilles son of peleus
without delay. let those go whom i shall name. let phoenix, dear to
jove, lead the way; let ajax and ulysses follow, and let the heralds
odius and eurybates go with them. now bring water for our hands, and
bid all keep silence while we pray to jove the son of saturn, if so be
that he may have mercy upon us."

thu
 
 ___________________________
 
s did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings,
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from
the tent of agamemnon son of atreus; and nestor, looking first to one
and then to another, but most especially at ulysses, was instant with
them that they should prevail with the noble son of peleus.

they went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed
earnestly to earth-encircling neptune that the high spirit of the son
of aeacus might incline favourably towards them. when they reached the
ships and tents of the myrmidons, they found achilles playing on a
lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. it
w
 
 ___________________________
 
n the wide jaws of hungry war, even so
did agamemnon heave many a heavy sigh, for his soul trembled within
him. when he looked upon the plain of troy he marvelled at the many
watchfires burning in front of ilius, and at the sound of pipes and
flutes and of the hum of men, but when presently he turned towards the
ships and hosts of the achaeans, he tore his hair by handfuls before
jove on high, and groaned aloud for the very disquietness of his soul.
in the end he deemed it best to go at once to nestor son of neleus, and
see if between them they could find any way of the achaeans from
destruction. he therefore rose, put on his shirt, bound his sandals
about his comely feet, flung the skin of a huge tawny lion over his
shoulders--a skin that reached his feet--and took his spear in his hand.

neither could menelaus sleep, for he, too, boded ill for the argives
who for his sake had sailed from far over the seas to fight the
trojans. he covered his broad back with the skin of a spotted panther,
p
 
 ___________________________
 
counsel to save the argives and our ships, for jove has changed his
mind, and inclines towards hector's sacrifices rather than ours. i
never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one
day as hector has now wrought against the sons of the achaeans--and
that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor
goddess. the argives will rue it long and deeply. run, therefore, with
all speed by the line of the ships, and call ajax and idomeneus.
meanwhile i will go to nestor, and bid him rise and go about among the
companies of our sentinels to give them their instructions; they will
listen to him sooner than to any man, for his own son, and meriones
brother in arms to idomeneus, are captains over them. it was to them
more particularly that we gave this charge."

menelaus replied, "how do i take your meaning? am i to stay with them
and wait your coming, or shall i return here as soon as i have given
your orders?" "wait," answered king agamemnon, "for there are so m
 
 ___________________________
 
any
paths about the camp that we might miss one another. call every man on
your way, and bid him be stirring; name him by his lineage and by his
father's name, give each all titular observance, and stand not too much
upon your own dignity; we must take our full share of toil, for at our
birth jove laid this heavy burden upon us."

with these instructions he sent his brother on his way, and went on to
nestor shepherd of his people. he found him sleeping in his tent hard
by his own ship; his goodly armour lay beside him--his shield, his two
spears and his helmet; beside him also lay the gleaming girdle with
which the old man girded himself when he armed to lead his people into
battle--for his age stayed him not. he raised himself on his elbow and
looked up at agamemnon. "who is it," said he, "that goes thus about the
host and the ships alone and in the dead of night, when men are
sleeping? are you l
 
 ___________________________
 
ooking for one of your mules or for some comrade? do
not stand there and say nothing, but speak. what is your business?"

and agamemnon answered, "nestor, son of neleus, honour to the achaean
name, it is i, agamemnon son of atreus, on whom jove has laid labour
and sorrow so long as there is breath in my body and my limbs carry me.
i am thus abroad because sleep sits not upon my eyelids, but my heart
is big with war and with the jeopardy of the achaeans. i am in great
fear for the danaans. i am at sea, and without sure counsel; my heart
beats as though it would leap out of my body, and my limbs fail me. if
then you can do anything--for you too ca
 
 ___________________________
 
nnot sleep--let us go the round
of the watch, and see whether they are drowsy with toil and sleeping to
the neglect of their duty. the enemy is encamped hard and we know not
but he may attack us by night."

nestor replied, "most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon, jove
will not do all for hector that hector thinks he will; he will have
troubles yet in plenty if achilles will lay aside his anger. i will go
with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of tydeus, or
ulysses, or fleet ajax and the valiant son of phyleus. some one had
also better go and call ajax and king idomeneus, for their ships are
not near at hand but the farthest of all. i cannot however refrain from
blaming menelaus, muc
 
 ___________________________
 
may sometimes blame him justly, for
he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself--not indeed from
sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and expects me
to take the lead. on this occasion, however, he was awake before i was,
and came to me of his own accord. i have already sent him to call the
very men whom you have named. and now let us be going. we shall find
them with the watch outside the gates, for it was there i said that we
would meet them."

"in that case," answered nestor, "the argives will not blame him nor
disobey his orders when he urges them to fight or gives them
instructions."

with this he put on his shirt, and bound his sandals about his comely
feet. he buckled on his purple coat, of two thicknesses, large, and of
a rough shaggy texture, grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and
wended his way along the line of the achaean ships. first he called
loudly to ulysses peer of gods in counsel and woke him, for he was soon
roused by the sound of the battle
 
 ___________________________
 
-cry. he came outside his tent and
said, "why do you go thus alone about the host, and along the line of
the ships in the stillness of the night? what is it that you find so
urgent?" and nestor knight of gerene answered, "ulysses, noble son of
laertes, take it not amiss, for the achaeans are in great straits. come
with me and let us wake some other, who may advise well with us whether
we shall fight or fly."

on this ulysses went at once into his tent, put his shield about his
shoulders and came out with them. first they went to diomed son of
tydeus, and found him outside his tent clad in his armour with his
comrades sleeping round him and using their shields as pillows; as for
their 
 
 ___________________________
 
spears, they stood upright on the spikes of their butts that were
driven into the ground, and the burnished bronze flashed afar like the
lightning of father jove. the hero was sleeping upon the skin of an ox,
with a piece of fine carpet under his head; nestor went up to him and
stirred him with his heel to rouse him, upbraiding him and urging him
to bestir himself. "wake up," he exclaimed, "son of tydeus. how can you
sleep on in this way? can you not see that the trojans are encamped on
the brow of the plain hard by our ships, with but a little space
between us and them?"

on these words diomed leaped up instantly and said, "old man, your
heart is of iron; you rest not one moment from your labours. are there
no younger men among the achaeans who cou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld go about to rouse the
princes? there is no tiring you."

and nestor knight of gerene made answer, "my son, all that you have
said is true. i have good sons, and also much people who might call the
chieftains, but the achaeans are in the gravest danger; life and death
are balanced as it were on the edge of a razor. go then, for you are
younger than i, and of your courtesy rouse ajax and the fleet son of
phyleus."

diomed threw the skin of a great tawny lion about his shoulders--a skin
that reached his feet--and grasped his spear. when he had roused the
heroes, h
 
 ___________________________
 
-even so was sleep
chased from the eyes of the achaeans as they kept the watches of the
wicked night, for they turned constantly towards the plain whenever
they heard any stir among the trojans. the old man was glad and bade
them be of good cheer. "watch on, my children," said he, "and let not
sleep get hold upon you, lest our enemies triumph over us."

with this he passed the trench, and with him the other chiefs of the
achaeans who had been called to the council. meriones and the brave son
of nestor went also, for the princes bade them. when they were beyond
the trench that was dug round the wall they held their meeting on the
open ground where there was a space clear of corpses, for it was here
that when night fell hector had turned back from his onslaught on the
argives. they sat down, therefore, and held debate with one another.

nestor spoke first. "my friends," said he, "is there any man bold
enough to venture among the trojans, and cut off some straggler, or
bring us news of what the
 
 ___________________________
 
er, now that they have worsted
the achaeans, they will retire within their walls. if he could learn
all this and come back safely here, his fame would be high as heaven in
the mouths of all men, and he would be rewarded richly; for the chiefs
from all our ships would each of them give him a black ewe with her
lamb--which is a present of surpassing value--and he would be asked as
a guest to all feasts and clan-gatherings."

they all held their peace, but diomed of the loud war-cry spoke saying,
"nestor, gladly will i visit the host of the trojans over against us,
but if another will go with me i shall do so in greater confidence and
comfort. when two men are together, one of them may see some
opportunity which the other has not caught sight of; if a man is alone
he is less full of resource, and his wit is weaker."

on this several offered to go with diomed. the two ajaxes, servants of
mars, meriones, and the son of nestor all wanted to go, so did menelaus
son of atreus; ulysses also wished to
 
 ___________________________
 
hen the whole trojan camp was in an uproar as the people kept
hurrying together, and they marvelled at the deeds of the heroes who
had now got away towards the ships.

when they reached the place where they had killed hector's scout,
ulysses stayed his horses, and the son of tydeus, leaping to the
ground, placed the blood-stained spoils in the hands of ulysses and
remounted: then he lashed the horses onwards, and they flew forward
nothing loth towards the ships as though of their own free will. nestor
was first to hear the tramp of their feet. "my friends," said he,
"princes and counsellors of the argives, shall i guess right or
wrong?--but i must say what i think: there is a sound in my ears as of
the tramp of horses. i hope it may be diomed and ulysses driving in
horses from the trojans, but i much fear that the bravest of the
argives may have come to some harm at their hands."

he had hardly done speaking when the two men came in and dismounted,
whereon the others shook hands right gladly
 
 ___________________________
 
 with them and congratulated
them. nestor knight of gerene was first to question them. "tell me,"
said he, "renowned ulysses, how did you two come by these horses? did
you steal in among the trojan forces, or did some god meet you and give
them to you? they are like sunbeams. i am well conversant with the
trojans, for old warrior though i am i never hold back by the ships,
but i never yet saw or heard of such horses as these are. surely some
god must have met you and given them to you, for you are both of you
dear to jove, and to jove'
 
 ___________________________
 
s daughter minerva."

and ulysses answered, "nestor son of neleus, honour to the achaean
name, heaven, if it so will, can give us even better horses than these,
for the gods are far mightier than we are. these horses, however, about
which you ask me, are freshly come from thrace. diomed killed their
king with the twelve bravest of his companions. hard by the ships we
took a thirteenth man--a scout whom hector and the other trojans had
sent as a spy upon our ships."

he laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while the
other acha
 
 ___________________________
 
 had refreshed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. after they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

and now as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, jove sent fierce discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the achaeans. she took her
sta
 
 ___________________________
 
wollen torrent comes rushing in full flood from
the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain of heaven--many a dry
oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much mud does it bring down and
cast into the sea--even so did brave ajax chase the foe furiously over
the plain, slaying both men and horses.

hector did not yet know what ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river scamander, where
the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round nestor and brave
idomeneus. among these hector was making great slaughter with his spear
and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to
him; still the achaeans would have given no ground, had not alexandrus
husband of lovely helen stayed the prowess of machaon, shepherd of his
people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed
arrow. the achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned
against them the trojans might take him prisoner, and idomeneus said 
 
 ___________________________
 
to
nestor, "nestor son of neleus, honour to the achaean name, mount your
chariot at once; take machaon with you and drive your horses to the
ships as fast as you can. a physician is worth more than several other
men put together, for he can cut out arrows and spread healing herbs."

nestor knight of gerene did as idomeneus had counselled; he at once
mounted his chariot, and machaon son of the famed physician
aesculapius, went with him. he lashed his horses and they flew onward
nothing loth towards the ships, as though of their own free will.

then cebriones seeing the trojans in confusion said to hector from his
place beside him, "hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme wing
of the battle, while the other trojans are in pell-mell rout, they and
their horses. ajax son of t
 
 ___________________________
 
bt whether he will come out of the fight alive. hither, then, to
the rescue of great ajax son of telamon."

even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near,
and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their
shoulders so as to give him cover. ajax then made towards them, and
turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the mares
of neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing nestor out of the
fight, and with him machaon shepherd of his people. achilles saw and
took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the
hard stress and struggle of the fight. he called from the ship to his
comrade patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking like
mars himself--here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently
befell him. "why," said he, "achilles, do you call me? what do you want
with me?" and achilles answered, "noble son of menoetius, man after
 
 ___________________________
 
 my
own heart, i take it that i shall now have the achaeans praying at my
knees, for they are in great straits; go, patroclus, and ask nestor who
it is that he is bearing away wounded from the field; from his back i
should say it was machaon son of aesculapius, but i could not see his
face for the horses went by me at full speed."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running
by the ships and tents of the achaeans.

when nestor and machaon had reached the tents of the son of neleus,
they dismounted, and an esquire, eurymedon, took the horses from the
chariot. the pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the
sweat from their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside and
took their seats. fair hecamede, whom nestor had had awarded to him
from tenedos when achilles took it, mixed them a mess; she was daughter
of wise arsinous, and the achaeans had given her to nestor because he
excelled all of them in
 
 ___________________________
 
she set for them a fair and
well-made table that had feet of cyanus; on it there was a vessel of
bronze and an onion to give relish to the drink, with honey and cakes
of barley-meal. there was also a cup of rare workmanship which the old
man had brought with him from home, studded with bosses of gold; it had
four handles, on each of which there were two golden doves feeding, and
it had two feet to stand on. any one else would hardly have been able
to lift it from the table when it was full, but nestor could do so
quite easily. in this the woman, as fair as a goddess, mixed them a
mess with pramnian wine; she grated goat's milk cheese into it with a
bronze grater, threw in a handful of white barley-meal, and having thus
prepared the mess she bade them drink it. when they had done so and had
thus quenched their thirst, they fell talking with one another, and at
this moment patroclus appeared at the door.

when the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand, led
him into the tent,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and bade him take his place among them; but
patroclus stood where he was and said, "noble sir, i may not stay, you
cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me is not one to be trifled
with, and he bade me ask who the wounded man was whom you were bearing
away from the field. i can now see for myself that he is machaon,
shepherd of his people. i must go back and tell achilles. you, sir,
know what a terrible man he is, and how ready to blame even where no
blame should lie."

and nestor answered, "why should achilles care to know how many of the
achaeans may be wounded? he recks not of the dismay that reigns in our
host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave diomed, son of
tydeus, is wounded; so are ulysses and agamemnon; eurypylus has been
hit with an arrow in the thigh, and i have just been bringing this man
from the field--he too wounded with an arrow. nevertheless, achilles,
so valiant though he be, cares not and knows no ruth. will he wait till
the ships, do wha
 
 ___________________________
 
hem out of the fight. thereon jove vouchsafed the
pylians a great victory, for we chased them far over the plain, killing
the men and bringing in their armour, till we had brought our horses to
buprasium, rich in wheat, and to the olenian rock, with the hill that
is called alision, at which point minerva turned the people back. there
i slew the last man and left him; then the achaeans drove their horses
back from buprasium to pylos and gave thanks to jove among the gods,
and among mortal men to nestor.

"such was i among my peers, as surely as ever was, but achilles is for
keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue it hereafter
when the host is being cut to pieces. my good friend, did not menoetius
charge you thus, on the day when he sent you from phthia to agamemnon?
ulysses and i were in the house, inside, and heard all that he said to
you; for we came to the fair house of peleus while beating up recruits
throughout all achaea, and when we got there we found menoetius and
you
 
 ___________________________
 
 lay upon it those gracious herbs
which, so they say, have been shown you by achilles, who was himself
shown them by chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs. for of the
physicians podalirius and machaon, i hear that the one is lying wounded
in his tent and is himself in need of healing, while the other is
fighting the trojans upon the plain."

"hero eurypylus," replied the brave son of menoetius, "how may these
things be? what can i do? i am on my way to bear a message to noble
achilles from nestor of gerene, bulwark of the achaeans, but even so i
will not be unmindful of your distress."

with this he clasped him round the middle and led him into the tent,
and a servant, when he saw him, spread bullock-skins on the ground for
him to lie on. he laid him at full length and cut out the sharp arrow
from his thigh; he washed the black blood from the wound with warm
water; he then crushed a bitter herb, rubbing it between his hands, and
spread it upon the wound; this was a virtuous herb which k
 
 ___________________________
 
ch shipwrights have felled for
ship's timber upon the mountains with whetted axes--even thus did he
lie full length in front of his chariot and horses, grinding his teeth
and clutching at the bloodstained dust. his charioteer was struck with
panic and did not dare turn his horses round and escape: thereupon
antilochus hit him in the middle of his body with a spear; his cuirass
of bronze did not protect him, and the spear stuck in his belly. he
fell gasping from his chariot and antilochus, great nestor's son, drove
his horses from the trojans to the achaeans.

deiphobus then came close up to idomeneus to avenge asius, and took aim
at him with a spear, but idomeneus was on the look-out and avoided it,
for he was covered by the round shield he always bore--a shield of
oxhide and bronze with two arm-rods on the inside. he crouched under
cover of this, and the spear flew over him, but the shield rang out as
the spear grazed it, and the weapon sped not in vain from the strong
hand of deiphobus, fo
 
 ___________________________
 
 round. he laid
open the vein that runs all the way up the back to the neck; he cut
this vein clean away throughout its whole course, and thoon fell in the
dust face upwards, stretching out his hands imploringly towards his
comrades. antilochus sprang upon him and stripped the armour from his
shoulders, glaring round him fearfully as he did so. the trojans came
about him on every side and struck his broad and gleaming shield, but
could not wound his body, for neptune stood guard over the son of
nestor, though the darts fell thickly round him. he was never clear of
the foe, but was always in the thick of the fight; his spear was never
idle; he poised and aimed it in every direction, so eager was he to hit
someone from a distance or to fight him hand to hand.

as he was thus aiming among the crowd, he was seen by adamas, son of
asius, who rushed towards him and struck him with a spear in the middle
of his shield, but neptune made its point without effect, for he
grudged him the life of antiloc
 
 ___________________________
 
rds he led the way and the others followed after with a
cry that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them. the argives
on their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their
prowess, but stood firm against the onslaught of the trojan chieftains,
and the cry from both the hosts rose up to heaven and to the brightness
of jove's presence.



book xiv

  agamemnon proposes that the achaeans should sail home, and
  is rebuked by ulysses--juno beguiles jupiter--hector is
  wounded.

nestor was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not escape
him, and he said to the son of aesculapius, "what, noble machaon, is
the meaning of all this? the shouts of men fighting by our ships grow
stronger and stronger; stay here, therefore, and sit over your wine,
while fair hecamede heats you a bath and washes the clotted blood from
off you. i will go at once to the look-out station and see what it is
all about."

as he spoke he took up the shield of his son thrasymedes that was lying
i
 
 ___________________________
 
ay nor that, till some particular wind sweeps down from
heaven to determine them--even so did the old man ponder whether to
make for the crowd of danaans, or go in search of agamemnon. in the end
he deemed it best to go to the son of atreus; but meanwhile the hosts
were fighting and killing one another, and the hard bronze rattled on
their bodies, as they thrust at one another with their swords and
spears.

the wounded kings, the son of tydeus, ulysses, and agamemnon son of
atreus, fell in with nestor as they were coming up from their
ships--for theirs were drawn up some way from where the fighting was
going on, being on the shore itself inasmuch as they had been beached
first, while the wall had been built behind the hindermost. the stretch
of the shore, wide though it was, did not afford room for all the
ships, and the host was cramped for space, therefore they had placed
the ships in rows one behind the other, and had filled the whole
opening of the bay between the two points that formed 
 
 ___________________________
 
it. the kings,
leaning on their spears, were coming out to survey the fight, being in
great anxiety, and when old nestor met them they were filled with
dismay. then king agamemnon said to him, "nestor son of neleus, honour
to the achaean name, why have you left the battle to come hither? i
fear that what dread hector said will come true, when he vaunted among
the trojans saying that he would not return to ilius till he had fired
our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it is all coming
true. alas! others of the achaeans, like achilles, are in such anger with
me that they refuse to fight by the sterns of our ships."

then nestor knight of gerene, answered, "it is indeed as you s
 
 ___________________________
 
hich we relied as an
impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet. the trojans are fighting
stubbornly and without ceasing at the ships; look where you may you
cannot see from what quarter the rout of the achaeans is coming; they
are being killed in a confused mass and the battle-cry ascends to
heaven; let us think, if counsel can be of any use, what we had better
do; but i do not advise our going into battle ourselves, for a man
cannot fight when he is wounded."

and king agamemnon answered, "nestor, if the trojans are indeed
fighting at the rear of our ships, and neither the wall nor the trench
has served us--over which the danaans toiled so hard, and which they
deemed would be an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet--i see
it must be the will of jove that the achaeans should perish
ingloriously here, far from argos. i knew when jove was willing to
defend us, and i know now that he is raising the trojans to like honour
with the gods, while us, on the other hand, he has bound hand
 
 ___________________________
 
an battalions poured
over the bridge, and apollo with his redoubtable aegis led the way. he
kicked down the wall of the achaeans as easily as a child who playing
on the sea-shore has built a house of sand and then kicks it down again
and destroys it--even so did you, o apollo, shed toil and trouble upon
the argives, filling them with panic and confusion.

thus then were the achaeans hemmed in at their ships, calling out to
one another and raising their hands with loud cries every man to
heaven. nestor of gerene, tower of strength to the achaeans, lifted up
his hands to the starry firmament of heaven, and prayed more fervently
than any of them. "father jove," said he, "if ever any one in
wheat-growing argos burned you fat thigh-bones of sheep or heifer and
prayed that he might return safely home, whereon you bowed your head to
him in assent, bear it in mind now, and suffer not the trojans to
triumph thus over the achaeans."

all-counselling jove thundered loudly in answer to the prayer of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 away from its covert, and killed it.
even so, o melanippus, did stalwart antilochus spring upon you to strip
you of your armour; but noble hector marked him, and came running up to
him through the thick of the battle. antilochus, brave soldier though
he was, would not stay to face him, but fled like some savage creature
which knows it has done wrong, and flies, when it has killed a dog or a
man who is herding his cattle, before a body of men can be gathered to
attack it. even so did the son of nestor fly, and the trojans and
hector with a cry that rent the air showered their weapons after him;
nor did he turn round and stay his flight till he had reached his
comrades.

the trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships
in fulfilment of the behests of jove who kept spurring them on to new
deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the argives and
defeated them by encouraging the trojans. for he meant giving glory to
hector son of priam, and letting him throw fire up
 
 ___________________________
 
im close to his own comrades. these,
for all their sorrow, could not help him for they were themselves
terribly afraid of hector.

they had now reached the ships and the prows of those that had been
drawn up first were on every side of them, but the trojans came pouring
after them. the argives were driven back from the first row of ships,
but they made a stand by their tents without being broken up and
scattered; shame and fear restrained them. they kept shouting
incessantly to one another, and nestor of gerene, tower of strength to
the achaeans, was loudest in imploring every man by his parents, and
beseeching him to stand firm.

"be men, my friends," he cried, "and respect one another's good
opinion. think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your
property, and your parents whether these be alive or dead. on their
behalf though they are not here, i implore you to stand firm, and not
to turn in flight."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. minerva lifted
the thick ve
 
 ___________________________
 
eilycus just as he was turning
round; the point went clean through, and broke the bone so that he fell
forward. meanwhile menelaus struck thoas in the chest, where it was
exposed near the rim of his shield, and he fell dead. the son of
phyleus saw amphiclus about to attack him, and ere he could do so took
aim at the upper part of his thigh, where the muscles are thicker than
in any other part; the spear tore through all the sinews of the leg,
and his eyes were closed in darkness. of the sons of nestor one,
antilochus, speared atymnius, driving the point of the spear through
his throat, and down he fell. maris then sprang on antilochus in
hand-to-hand fight to avenge his brother, and bestrode the body spear
in hand; but valiant thrasymedes was too quick for him, and in a moment
had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his blow; his aim was
true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root of his arm, and
tore them right down to the bone, so he fell heavily to the ground and
his 
 
 ___________________________
 
eyes were closed in darkness. thus did these two noble comrades of
sarpedon go down to erebus slain by the two sons of nestor; they were
the warrior sons of amisodorus, who had reared the invincible chimaera,
to the bane of many. ajax son of oileus sprang on cleobulus and took
him alive as he was entangled in the crush; but he killed him then and
there by a sword-blow on the neck. the sword reeked with his blood,
while dark death and the strong hand of fate gripped him and closed his
eyes.

peneleos and lycon now met in close fight, for they had missed each
other with their spears. they had both thrown without effect,
 
 ___________________________
 
istance apart and beyond the range of one another's weapons,
whereas those who were in the thick of the fray suffered both from
battle and darkness. all the best of them were being worn out by the
great weight of their armour, but the two valiant heroes, thrasymedes
and antilochus, had not yet heard of the death of patroclus, and
believed him to be still alive and leading the van against the trojans;
they were keeping themselves in reserve against the death or rout of
their own comrades, for so nestor had ordered when he sent them from
the ships into battle.

thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the sweat
of their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on their hands
and eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet son of peleus. it
was as when a man gives a great ox-hide all drenched in fat to his men,
and bids them stretch it; whereon they stand round it in a ring and tug
till the moisture leaves it, and the fat soaks in for the many that
pull at it, and
 
 ___________________________
 
t a man among the
achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in
darkness. o father jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the
achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we
perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight."

father jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. forthwith he
chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and all
the fighting was revealed. ajax then said to menelaus, "look, menelaus,
and if antilochus son of nestor be still living, send him at once to
tell achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his comrades has
fallen."

menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a
stockyard--the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep
watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of
their herd. in his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain,
for darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt
him for all his hunger, so in the morni
 
 ___________________________
 
us was; he was ever courteous while alive,
bear it in mind now that he is dead."

with this menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an eagle,
whose sight they say is keener than that of any other bird--however
high he may be in the heavens, not a hare that runs can escape him by
crouching under bush or thicket, for he will swoop down upon it and
make an end of it--even so, o menelaus, did your keen eyes range round
the mighty host of your followers to see if you could find the son of
nestor still alive. presently menelaus saw him on the extreme left of
the battle cheering on his men and exhorting them to fight boldly.
menelaus went up to him and said, "antilochus, come here and listen to
sad news, which i would indeed were untrue. you must see with your own
eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the danaans, and giving
victory to the trojans. patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of
the achaeans, and sorely will the danaans miss him. run instantly to
the ships and tell achi
 
 ___________________________
 
wards the ships? heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that
sorrow upon me of which my mother thetis spoke, saying that while i was
yet alive the bravest of the myrmidons should fall before the trojans,
and see the light of the sun no longer. i fear the brave son of
menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet i bade him return
to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing
fire against them, and not join battle with hector."

as he was thus pondering, the son of nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "alas," he cried, "son of noble
peleus, i bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue.
patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked body--for
hector holds his armour."

a dark cloud of grief fell upon achilles as he listened. he filled both
hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head,
disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refuse settle over his
shirt so fair and new. he flu
 
 ___________________________
 
ld continually; when should we have respite from our sorrow? let
us mourn our dead for a day and bury them out of sight and mind, but
let those of us who are left eat and drink that we may arm and fight
our foes more fiercely. in that hour let no man hold back, waiting for
a second summons; such summons shall bode ill for him who is found
lagging behind at our ships; let us rather sally as one man and loose
the fury of war upon the trojans."

when he had thus spoken he took with him the sons of nestor, with meges
son of phyleus, thoas, meriones, lycomedes son of creontes, and
melanippus, and went to the tent of agamemnon son of atreus. the word
was not sooner said than the deed was done: they brought out the seven
tripods which agamemnon had promised, with the twenty metal cauldrons
and the twelve horses; they also brought the women skilled in useful
arts, seven in number, with briseis, which made eight. ulysses weighed
out the ten talents of gold and then led the way back, while the young
a
 
 ___________________________
 
women joined in her lament-making as
though their tears were for patroclus, but in truth each was weeping
for her own sorrows. the elders of the achaeans gathered round achilles
and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. "i
pray you," said he, "if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat
nor drink, for i am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to
the going down of the sun."

on this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of
atreus and ulysses, nestor, idomeneus, and the knight phoenix, who
stayed behind and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow:
but he would not be comforted till he should have flung himself into
the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of
patroclus. then he said--

"hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner
ready for me at once and without delay when the achaeans were hasting
to fight the trojans; now, therefore, though i have meat and drink in
my tents, yet wi
 
 ___________________________
 
 him out of the fight. next to him,
yellow-haired menelaus son of atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses,
agamemnon's mare aethe, and his own horse podargus. the mare had been
given to agamemnon by echepolus son of anchises, that he might not have
to follow him to ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for
jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious sicyon.
this mare, all eager for the race, did menelaus put under the yoke.

fourth in order antilochus, son to noble nestor son of neleus, made
ready his horses. these were bred in pylos, and his father came up to
him to give him good advice of which, however, he stood in but little
need. "antilochus," said nestor, "you are young, but jove and neptune
have loved you well, and have made you an excellent horseman. i need
not therefore say much by way of instruction. you are skilful at
wheeling your horses round the post, but the horses themselves are very
slow, and it is this that will, i fear, mar your chances. the o
 
 ___________________________
 
f your wheel shall almost graze the post; but mind the
stone, or you will wound your horses and break your chariot in pieces,
which would be sport for others but confusion for yourself. therefore,
my dear son, mind well what you are about, for if you can be first to
round the post there is no chance of any one giving you the go-by
later, not even though you had adrestus's horse arion behind you--a
horse which is of divine race--or those of laomedon, which are the
noblest in this country."

when nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in his
place, and fifth in order meriones got ready his horses. they then all
mounted their chariots and cast lots. achilles shook the helmet, and
the lot of antilochus son of nestor fell out first; next came that of
king eumelus, and after his, those of menelaus son of atreus and of
meriones. the last place fell to the lot of diomed son of tydeus, who
was the best man of them all. they took their places in line; achilles
showed them the doubli
 
 ___________________________
 
d himself with glory.

menelaus son of atreus came next behind him, but antilochus called to
his father's horses. "on with you both," he cried, "and do your very
utmost. i do not bid you try to beat the steeds of the son of tydeus,
for minerva has put running into them, and has covered diomed with
glory; but you must overtake the horses of the son of atreus and not be
left behind, or aethe who is so fleet will taunt you. why, my good
fellows, are you lagging? i tell you, and it shall surely be--nestor
will keep neither of you, but will put both of you to the sword, if we
win any the worse a prize through your carelessness. fly after them at
your utmost speed; i will hit on a plan for passing them in a narrow
part of the way, and it shall not fail me."

they feared the rebuke of their master, and for a short space went
quicker. presently antilochus saw a narrow place where the road had
sunk. the ground was broken, for the winter's rain had gathered and had
worn the road so that the whole plac
 
 ___________________________
 
nelaus. his horses were slowest of all, and he was the worst
driver. last of them all came the son of admetus, dragging his chariot
and driving his horses on in front. when achilles saw him he was sorry,
and stood up among the argives saying, "the best man is coming in last.
let us give him a prize for it is reasonable. he shall have the second,
but the first must go to the son of tydeus."

thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying, and
were for doing as he had said, but nestor's son antilochus stood up and
claimed his rights from the son of peleus. "achilles," said he, "i
shall take it much amiss if you do this thing; you would rob me of my
prize, because you think eumelus's chariot and horses were thrown out,
and himself too, good man that he is. he should have prayed duly to the
immortals; he would not have come in last if he had done so. if you are
sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents, with
bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. take something 
 
 ___________________________
 
han you are; you stand higher than i do and are the better man of the
two; you know how easily young men are betrayed into indiscretion;
their tempers are more hasty and they have less judgement; make due
allowances therefore, and bear with me; i will of my own accord give up
the mare that i have won, and if you claim any further chattel from my
own possessions, i would rather yield it to you, at once, than fall
from your good graces henceforth, and do wrong in the sight of heaven."

the son of nestor then took the mare and gave her over to menelaus,
whose anger was thus appeased; as when dew falls upon a field of
ripening corn, and the lands are bristling with the harvest--even so, o
menelaus, was your heart made glad within you. he turned to antilochus
and said, "now, antilochus, angry though i have been, i can give way to
you of my own free will; you have never been headstrong nor
ill-disposed hitherto, but this time your youth has got the better of
your judgement; be careful how you outw
 
 ___________________________
 
our good father,
your brother, and yourself have all of you had infinite trouble on my
behalf; i therefore yield to your entreaty, and will give up the mare
to you, mine though it indeed be; the people will thus see that i am
neither harsh nor vindictive."

with this he gave the mare over to antilochus's comrade noemon, and
then took the cauldron. meriones, who had come in fourth, carried off
the two talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the two-handled urn,
being unawarded, achilles gave it to nestor, going up to him among the
assembled argives and saying, "take this, my good old friend, as an
heirloom and memorial of the funeral of patroclus--for you shall see
him no more among the argives. i give you this prize though you cannot
win one; you can now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot enter for
the javelin-match nor foot-races, for the hand of age has been laid
heavily upon you."

so saying he gave the urn over to nestor, who received it gladly and
answered, "my son, all that you have s
 
 ___________________________
 
ters to
younger men; i must bow before the weight of years, but in those days i
was eminent among heroes. and now, sir, go on with the funeral contests
in honour of your comrade: gladly do i accept this urn, and my heart
rejoices that you do not forget me but are ever mindful of my goodwill
towards you, and of the respect due to me from the achaeans. for all
which may the grace of heaven be vouchsafed you in great abundance."

thereon the son of peleus, when he had listened to all the thanks of
nestor, went about among the concourse of the achaeans, and presently
offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing. he brought out a
strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of the crowd--a she-mule
never yet broken, but six years old--when it is hardest of all to break
them: this was for the victor, and for the vanquished he offered a
double cup. then he stood up and said among the argives, "son of
atreus, and all other achaeans, i invite our two champion boxers to lay
about them lustily 
 
 ___________________________
 
 had made a present of it
to thoas. eueneus son of jason had given it to patroclus in ransom of
priam's son lycaon, and achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of
his comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. for the second
prize he offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there
was to be half a talent of gold. he then rose and said among the
argives, "stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

forthwith uprose fleet ajax son of oileus, with cunning ulysses, and
nestor's son antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of his
time. they stood side by side and achilles showed them the goal. the
course was set out for them from the starting-post, and the son of
oileus took the lead at once, with ulysses as close behind him as the
shuttle is to a woman's bosom when she throws the woof across the warp
and holds it close up to her; even so close behind him was
ulysses--treading in his footprints before the dust could settle there,
and ajax could feel his bre
 
 ___________________________
 
f the city."

he drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the old
man sped them. then he called to his sons, upbraiding helenus, paris,
noble agathon, pammon, antiphonus, polites of the loud battle-cry,
deiphobus, hippothous, and dius. these nine did the old man call near
him. "come to me at once," he cried, "worthless sons who do me shame;
would that you had all been killed at the ships rather than hector.
miserable man that i am, i have had the bravest sons in all troy--noble
nestor, troilus the dauntless charioteer, and hector who was a god
among men, so that one would have thought he was son to an
immortal--yet there is not one of them left. mars has slain them and
those of whom i am ashamed are alone left me. liars, and light of foot,
heroes of the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own people,
why do you not get a waggon ready for me at once, and put all these
things upon it that i may set out on my way?"

thus did he speak, and they feared the rebuke of their 