host to plague the people, because the son of
atreus had dishonoured chryses his priest. now chryses had come to the
ships of the achaeans to free his daughter, and had brought with him a
great ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of apollo
wreathed with a suppliant's wreath, and he besought the achaeans, but
most of all the two sons of atreus, who were their chiefs.

"sons of atreus," he cried, "and all other achaeans, may the gods who
dwell in olympus grant you to sack the city of priam, and to reach your
homes in safety; but free my daughter, and accept a ransom for her, in
reverence to apollo, son of jove."

on this the rest of the achaeans with one voice were for respecting the
priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so agamemnon, who
spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. "old man," said he,
"let me not find you tarrying about our ships, nor yet coming
hereafter. your sceptre of the god and your wreath shall profit you
nothing. i will not free her. 
 
 ___________________________
 
e
ground and took his seat, while the son of atreus was beginning
fiercely from his place upon the other side. then uprose smooth-tongued
nestor, the facile speaker of the pylians, and the words fell from his
lips sweeter than honey. two generations of men born and bred in pylos
had passed away under his rule, and he was now reigning over the third.
with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:--

"of a truth," he said, "a great sorrow has befallen the achaean land.
surely priam with his sons would rejoice, and the trojans be glad at
heart if they could hear this quarrel between you two, who are so
excellent in fight and counsel. i am older than either of you;
therefore be guided by me. moreover i have been the familiar friend of
men even greater than you are, and they did not disregard my counsels.
never again can i behold such men as pirithous and dryas shepherd of
his people, or as caeneus, exadius, godlike polyphemus, and theseus son
of aegeus, peer of the immortal
 
 ___________________________
 
e be not
near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. he bids you get the
achaeans instantly under arms, for you shall take troy. there are no
longer divided counsels among the gods; juno has brought them over to
her own mind, and woe betides the trojans at the hands of jove.
remember this, and when you wake see that it does not escape you."

the dream then left him, and he thought of things that were, surely not
to be accomplished. he thought that on that same day he was to take the
city of priam, but he little knew what was in the mind of jove, who had
many another hard-fought fight in store alike for danaans and trojans.
then presently he woke, with the divine message still ringing in his
ears; so he sat upright, and put on his soft shirt so fair and new, and
over this his heavy cloak. he bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
and slung his silver-studded sword about his shoulders; then he took
the imperishable staff of his father, and sallied forth to the ships of
the achaeans.

th
 
 ___________________________
 
 king mercury gave it to pelops, the
mighty charioteer, and pelops to atreus, shepherd of his people.
atreus, when he died, left it to thyestes, rich in flocks, and thyestes
in his turn left it to be borne by agamemnon, that he might be lord of
all argos and of the isles. leaning, then, on his sceptre, he addressed
the argives.

"my friends," he said, "heroes, servants of mars, the hand of heaven
has been laid heavily upon me. cruel jove gave me his solemn promise
that i should sack the city of priam before returning, but he has
played me false, and is now bidding me go ingloriously back to argos
with the loss of much people. such is the will of jove, who has laid
many a proud city in the dust, as he will yet lay others, for his power
is above all. it will be a sorry tale hereafter that an achaean host,
at once so great and valiant, battled in vain against men fewer in
number than themselves; but as yet the end is not in sight. think that
the achaeans and trojans have sworn to a solemn cove
 
 ___________________________
 
 under their feet rose heavenward. they cheered each other on to
draw the ships into the sea; they cleared the channels in front of
them; they began taking away the stays from underneath them, and the
welkin rang with their glad cries, so eager were they to return.

then surely the argives would have returned after a fashion that was
not fated. but juno said to minerva, "alas, daughter of aegis-bearing
jove, unweariable, shall the argives fly home to their own land over
the broad sea, and leave priam and the trojans the glory of still
keeping helen, for whose sake so many of the achaeans have died at
troy, far from their homes? go about at once among the host, and speak
fairly to them, man by man, that they draw not their ships into the
sea."

minerva was not slack to do her bidding. down she darted from the
topmost summits of olympus, and in a moment she was at the ships of the
achaeans. there she found ulysses, peer of jove in counsel, standing
alone. he had not as yet laid a hand upon hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s ship, for he was grieved
and sorry; so she went close up to him and said, "ulysses, noble son of
laertes, are you going to fling yourselves into your ships and be off
home to your own land in this way? will you leave priam and the trojans
the glory of still keeping helen, for whose sake so many of the
achaeans have died at troy, far from their homes? go about at once
among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by man, that they draw
not their ships into the sea."

ulysses knew the voice as that of the goddess: he flung his cloak from
him and set off to run. his servant eurybates, a man of ithaca, who
waited on him, took charge of the cloak, whereon ulysses went straight
up to agamemnon and received from him his
 
 ___________________________
 
now nine long years that we have been kept here; i cannot, therefore,
blame the achaeans if they turn restive; still we shall be shamed if we
go home empty after so long a stay--therefore, my friends, be patient
yet a little longer that we may learn whether the prophesyings of
calchas were false or true.

"all who have not since perished must remember as though it were
yesterday or the day before, how the ships of the achaeans were
detained in aulis when we were on our way hither to make war on priam
and the trojans. we were ranged round about a fountain offering
hecatombs to the gods upon their holy altars, and there was a fine
plane-tree from beneath which there welled a stream of pure water. then
we saw a prodigy; for jove sent a fearful serpent out of the ground,
with blood-red stains upon its back, and it darted from under the altar
on to the plane-tree. now there was a brood of young sparrows, quite
small, upon the topmost bough, peeping out from under the leaves, eight
in all, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
lchas forthwith
declared to us the oracles of heaven. 'why, achaeans,' said he, 'are
you thus speechless? jove has sent us this sign, long in coming, and
long ere it be fulfilled, though its fame shall last for ever. as the
serpent ate the eight fledglings and the sparrow that hatched them,
which makes nine, so shall we fight nine years at troy, but in the
tenth shall take the town.' this was what he said, and now it is all
coming true. stay here, therefore, all of you, till we take the city of
priam."

on this the argives raised a shout, till the ships rang again with the
uproar. nestor, knight of gerene, then addressed them. "shame on you,"
he cried, "to stay talking here like children, when you should fight
like men. where are our covenants now, and where the oaths that we have
taken? shall our counsels be flung into the fire, with our
drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship wherein we have put
our trust? we waste our time in words, and for all our talking here
shall be no furt
 
 ___________________________
 
ou do this, and
if the achaeans obey you, you will find out who, both chiefs and
peoples, are brave, and who are cowards; for they will vie against the
other. thus you shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of
heaven or the cowardice of man that you shall fail to take the town."

and agamemnon answered, "nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the
achaeans in counsel. would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that i
had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of king priam
would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. but the
son of saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife. achilles
and i are quarrelling about this girl, in which matter i was the first
to offend; if we can be of one mind again, the trojans will not stave
off destruction for a day. now, therefore, get your morning meal, that
our hosts join in fight. whet well your spears; see well to the
ordering of your shields; give good feeds to your horses, and look your
chariots
 
 ___________________________
 
princes
and elders of his host. first he asked nestor and king idomeneus, then
the two ajaxes and the son of tydeus, and sixthly ulysses, peer of gods
in counsel; but menelaus came of his own accord, for he knew how busy
his brother then was. they stood round the bull with the barley-meal in
their hands, and agamemnon prayed, saying, "jove, most glorious,
supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest upon the storm-cloud,
grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace
of priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed with fire. grant that
my sword may pierce the shirt of hector about his heart, and that full
many of his comrades may bite the dust as they fall dying round him."

thus he prayed, but the son of saturn would not fulfil his prayer. he
accepted the sacrifice, yet none the less increased their toil
continually. when they had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal
upon the victim, they drew back its head, killed it, and then flayed
it. they cut out the t
 
 ___________________________
 
lack of leadership, wandered hither and
thither about the host and went not forth to fight.

thus marched the host like a consuming fire, and the earth groaned
beneath them when the lord of thunder is angry and lashes the land
about typhoeus among the arimi, where they say typhoeus lies. even so
did the earth groan beneath them as they sped over the plain.

and now iris, fleet as the wind, was sent by jove to tell the bad news
among the trojans. they were gathered in assembly, old and young, at
priam's gates, and iris came close up to priam, speaking with the voice
of priam's son polites, who, being fleet of foot, was stationed as
watchman for the trojans on the tomb of old aesyetes, to look out for
any sally of the achaeans. in his likeness iris spoke, saying, "old
man, you talk idly, as in time of peace, while war is at hand. i have
been in many a battle, but never yet saw such a host as is now
advancing. they are crossing the plain to attack the city as thick as
leaves or as the sands of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the sea. hector, i charge you above all
others, do as i say. there are many allies dispersed about the city of
priam from distant places and speaking divers tongues. therefore, let
each chief give orders to his own people, setting them severally in
array and leading them forth to battle."

thus she spoke, but hector knew that it was the goddess, and at once
broke up the assembly. the men flew to arms; all the gates were opened,
and the people thronged through them, horse and foot, with the tramp as
of a great multitude.

now there is a high mound before the city, rising by itself upon the
plain. men call it b
 
 ___________________________
 
atieia, but the gods know that it is the tomb of
lithe myrine. here the trojans and their allies divided their forces.

priam's son, great hector of the gleaming helmet, commanded the
trojans, and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most
valiant of those who were longing for the fray.

the dardanians were led by brave aeneas, whom venus bore to anchises,
when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain
slopes of ida. he was not alone, for with him were the two sons of
antenor, archilochus and acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.

they that dwelt in telea under the lowest sp
 
 ___________________________
 
lofty crests of mt. mycale. these were commanded by nastes and
amphimachus, the brave sons of nomion. he came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to
save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant
of aeacus, and achilles bore away his gold.

sarpedon and glaucus led the lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the xanthus.



book iii

  alexandria, also called paris, challenges menelaus--helen and
  priam view the achaeans from the wall--the covenant--paris
  and menelaus fight, and paris is worsted--venus carries him
  off to save him--scene between him and helen.

when the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream
overhead when rain and winter drive them over the flowing waters of
oceanus to bring death and destruction on the pygmies, and they wrangle
in the air as they fly; but the achaeans marched silently, in
 
 ___________________________
 
d their peace, till menelaus of the loud
battle-cry addressed them. "and now," he said, "hear me too, for it is
i who am the most aggrieved. i deem that the parting of achaeans and
trojans is at hand, as well it may be, seeing how much have suffered
for my quarrel with alexandrus and the wrong he did me. let him who
shall die, die, and let the others fight no more. bring, then, two
lambs, a white ram and a black ewe, for earth and sun, and we will
bring a third for jove. moreover, you shall bid priam come, that he may
swear to the covenant himself; for his sons are high-handed and ill to
trust, and the oaths of jove must not be transgressed or taken in vain.
young men's minds are light as air, but when an old man comes he looks
before and after, deeming that which shall be fairest upon both sides."

the trojans and achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they
thought that they should now have rest. they backed their chariots
toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, 
 
 ___________________________
 
laying it
down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a
little space between them. hector sent two messengers to the city to
bring the lambs and to bid priam come, while agamemnon told talthybius
to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as agamemnon had
said.

meanwhile iris went to helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of
the son of antenor, for helicaon, son of antenor, had married laodice,
the fairest of priam's daughters. she found her in her own room,
working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering
the battles between trojans and achaeans, that mars had made them fight
for her sake. iris then came close up to her and said, "come hither,
child, and see the strange doings of the trojans and achaeans. till now
they have been warring upon the plain, mad with lust of battle, but now
they have left off fighting, and are leaning upon their shields,
sitting still with their spears pla
 
 ___________________________
 
about yourself, and you are to be the wife
of him who is the victor."

thus spoke the goddess, and helen's heart yearned after her former
husband, her city, and her parents. she threw a white mantle over her
head, and hurried from her room, weeping as she went, not alone, but
attended by two of her handmaids, aethrae, daughter of pittheus, and
clymene. and straightway they were at the scaean gates.

the two sages, ucalegon and antenor, elders of the people, were seated
by the scaean gates, with priam, panthous, thymoetes, lampus, clytius,
and hiketaon of the race of mars. these were too old to fight, but they
were fluent orators, and sat on the tower like cicales that chirrup
delicately from the boughs of some high tree in a wood. when they saw
helen coming towards the tower, they said softly to one another, "small
wonder that trojans and achaeans should endure so much and so long, for
the sake of a woman so marvellously and divinely lovely. still, fair
though she be, let them take her and 
 
 ___________________________
 
go, or she will breed sorrow for
us and for our children after us."

but priam bade her draw nigh. "my child," said he, "take your seat in
front of me that you may see your former husband, your kinsmen and your
friends. i lay no blame upon you, it is the gods, not you who are to
blame. it is they that have brought about this terrible war with the
achaeans. tell me, then, who is yonder huge hero so great and goodly? i
have seen men taller by a head, but none so comely and so royal. surely
he must be a king."

"sir," answered helen, "father of my husband, dear and reverend 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the two; ulysses, on the
other hand, when he rose to speak, was at first silent and kept his
eyes fixed upon the ground. there was no play nor graceful movement of
his sceptre; he kept it straight and stiff like a man unpractised in
oratory--one might have taken him for a mere churl or simpleton; but
when he raised his voice, and the words came driving from his deep
chest like winter snow before the wind, then there was none to touch
him, and no man thought further of what he looked like."

priam then caught sight of ajax and asked, "who is that great and
goodly warrior whose head and broad shoulders tower above the rest of
the argives?"

"that," answered helen, "is huge ajax, bulwark of the achaeans, and on
the other side of him, among the cretans, stands idomeneus looking like
a god, and with the captains of the cretans round him. often did
menelaus receive him as a guest in our house when he came visiting us
from crete. i see, moreover, many other achaeans whose names i could
tell yo
 
 ___________________________
 
myself. either they have not left lacedaemon, or
else, though they have brought their ships, they will not show
themselves in battle for the shame and disgrace that i have brought
upon them."

she knew not that both these heroes were already lying under the earth
in their own land of lacedaemon.

meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy oath-offerings through the
city--two lambs and a goatskin of wine, the gift of earth; and idaeus
brought the mixing bowl and the cups of gold. he went up to priam and
said, "son of laomedon, the princes of the trojans and achaeans bid you
come down on to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant. alexandrus
and menelaus are to fight for helen in single combat, that she and all
her wealth may go with him who is the victor. we are to swear to a
solemn covenant of peace whereby we others shall dwell here in troy,
while the achaeans return to argos and the land of the achaeans."

the old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the
horses, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
o all things, earth and rivers, and ye who
in the realms below chastise the soul of him that has broken his oath,
witness these rites and guard them, that they be not vain. if
alexandrus kills menelaus, let him keep helen and all her wealth, while
we sail home with our ships; but if menelaus kills alexandrus, let the
trojans give back helen and all that she has; let them moreover pay
such fine to the achaeans as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among
those that shall be born hereafter. and if priam and his sons refuse
such fine when alexandrus has fallen, then will i stay here and fight
on till i have got satisfaction."

as he spoke he drew his knife across the throats of the victims, and
laid them down gasping and dying upon the ground, for the knife had
reft them of their strength. then they poured wine from the mixing-bowl
into the cups, and prayed to the everlasting gods, saying, trojans and
achaeans among one another, "jove, most great and glorious, and ye
other everlasting gods, gra
 
 ___________________________
 
nt that the brains of them who shall first
sin against their oaths--of them and their children--may be shed upon
the ground even as this wine, and let their wives become the slaves of
strangers."

thus they prayed, but not as yet would jove grant them their prayer.
then priam, descendant of dardanus, spoke, saying, "hear me, trojans
and achaeans, i will now go back to the wind-beaten city of ilius: i
dare not with my own eyes witness this fight between my son and
menelaus, for jove and the other immortals alone know which shall fall."

on this he laid the two lambs on his chariot and took his seat. he
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor sat beside him; the two
then went back to ilius. hector and ulysses measured the ground, and
cast lots from a helmet of bro
 
 ___________________________
 
o good friends
among the goddesses, juno of argos, and minerva of alalcomene, but they
only sit still and look on, while venus keeps ever by alexandrus' side
to defend him in any danger; indeed she has just rescued him when he
made sure that it was all over with him--for the victory really did lie
with menelaus. we must consider what we shall do about all this; shall
we set them fighting anew or make peace between them? if you will agree
to this last menelaus can take back helen and the city of priam may
remain still inhabited."

minerva and juno muttered their discontent as they sat side by side
hatching mischief for the trojans. minerva scowled at her father, for
she was in a furious passion with him, and said nothing, but juno could
not contain herself. "dread son of saturn," said she, "what, pray, is
the meaning of all this? is my trouble, then, to go for nothing, and
the sweat that i have sweated, to say nothing of my horses, while
getting the people together against priam and his chil
 
 ___________________________
 
dren? do as you
will, but we other gods shall not all of us approve your counsel."

jove was angry and answered, "my dear, what harm have priam and his
sons done you that you are so hotly bent on sacking the city of ilius?
will nothing do for you but you must within their walls and eat priam
raw, with his sons and all the other trojans to boot? have it your own
way then; for i would not have this matter become a bone of contention
between us. i say further, and lay my saying to your heart, if ever i
want to sack a city belonging to friends of yours, you must not try to
stop me; you will have to let me do it, for i am giving in to you
sorely against my will. of all inhabited cities under the sun and stars
of heaven, there was none that i so much respected as ilius with priam
and his
 
 ___________________________
 
his covenant and letting you come forward as our champion.
the trojans have trampled on their oaths and have wounded you;
nevertheless the oath, the blood of lambs, the drink-offerings and the
right hands of fellowship in which we have put our trust shall not be
vain. if he that rules olympus fulfil it not here and now, he will yet
fulfil it hereafter, and they shall pay dearly with their lives and
with their wives and children. the day will surely come when mighty
ilius shall be laid low, with priam and priam's people, when the son of
saturn from his high throne shall overshadow them with his awful aegis
in punishment of their present treachery. this shall surely be; but
how, menelaus, shall i mourn you, if it be your lot now to die? i
should return to argos as a by-word, for the achaeans will at once go
home. we shall leave priam and the trojans the glory of still keeping
helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie here at troy with
your purpose not fulfilled. then shall some brag
 
 ___________________________
 
hty
whirlwind draws towards him, so that he is afraid and drives his flock
into a cave--even thus did the ranks of stalwart youths move in a dark
mass to battle under the ajaxes, horrid with shield and spear. glad was
king agamemnon when he saw them. "no need," he cried, "to give orders
to such leaders of the argives as you are, for of your own selves you
spur your men on to fight with might and main. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo that all were so minded as you are, for the city of
priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it."

with this he left them and went onward to nestor, the facile speaker of
the pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in company
with pelagon, alastor, chromius, haemon, and bias shepherd of his
people. he placed his knights with their chariots and horses in the
front rank, while the foot-soldiers, brave men and many, whom he could
trust, were in the rear. the cowards he drove into the middle, that
they might fight 
 
 ___________________________
 
by the right nipple
as he was coming on among the foremost fighters; the spear went right
through his shoulder, and he fell as a poplar that has grown straight
and tall in a meadow by some mere, and its top is thick with branches.
then the wheelwright lays his axe to its roots that he may fashion a
felloe for the wheel of some goodly chariot, and it lies seasoning by
the waterside. in such wise did ajax fell to earth simoeisius, son of
anthemion. thereon antiphus of the gleaming corslet, son of priam,
hurled a spear at ajax from amid the crowd and missed him, but he hit
leucus, the brave comrade of ulysses, in the groin, as he was dragging
the body of simoeisius over to the other side; so he fell upon the body
and loosed his hold upon it. ulysses was furious when he saw leucus
slain, and strode in full armour through the front ranks till he was
quite close; then he glared round about him and took aim, and the
trojans fell back as he did so. his dart was not sped in vain, for it
struck democ
 
 ___________________________
 
oon, the bastard son of priam, who had come to him from
abydos, where he had charge of his father's mares. ulysses, infuriated
by the death of his comrade, hit him with his spear on one temple, and
the bronze point came through on the other side of his forehead.
thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. hector, and they that were in
front, then gave round while the argives raised a shout and drew off
the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. but apoll
 
 ___________________________
 
mas: they never came
back for him to read them any more dreams, for mighty diomed made an
end of them. he then gave chase to xanthus and thoon, the two sons of
phaenops, both of them very dear to him, for he was now worn out with
age, and begat no more sons to inherit his possessions. but diomed took
both their lives and left their father sorrowing bitterly, for he
nevermore saw them come home from battle alive, and his kinsmen divided
his wealth among themselves.

then he came upon two sons of priam, echemmon and chromius, as they
were both in one chariot. he sprang upon them as a lion fastens on the
neck of some cow or heifer when the herd is feeding in a coppice. for
all their vain struggles he flung them both from their chariot and
stripped the armour from their bodies. then he gave their horses to his
comrades to take them back to the ships.

when aeneas saw him thus making havoc among the ranks, he went through
the fight amid the rain of spears to see if he could find pandarus.
when h
 
 ___________________________
 
 bane of men, blood-stained stormer of cities, can
you not go to this man, the son of tydeus, who would now fight even
with father jove, and draw him out of the battle? he first went up to
the cyprian and wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and afterwards
sprang upon me too, as though he were a god."

he then took his seat on the top of pergamus, while murderous mars went
about among the ranks of the trojans, cheering them on, in the likeness
of fleet acamas chief of the thracians. "sons of priam," said he, "how
long will you let your people be thus slaughtered by the achaeans?
would you wait till they are at the walls of troy? aeneas the son of
anchises has fallen, he whom we held in as high honour as hector
himself. help me, then, to rescue our brave comrade from the stress of
the fight."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. then sarpedon
rebuked hector very sternly. "hector," said he, "where is your prowess
now? you used to say that though you had neither people nor
 
 ___________________________
 
ing against the trojans. the son of
atreus went about among them and exhorted them. "my friends," said he,
"quit yourselves like brave men, and shun dishonour in one another's
eyes amid the stress of battle. they that shun dishonour more often
live than get killed, but they that fly save neither life nor name."

as he spoke he hurled his spear and hit one of those who were in the
front rank, the comrade of aeneas, deicoon son of pergasus, whom the
trojans held in no less honour than the sons of priam, for he was ever
quick to place himself among the foremost. the spear of king agamemnon
struck his shield and went right through it, for the shield stayed it
not. it drove through his belt into the lower part of his belly, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.

then aeneas killed two champions of the danaans, crethon and
orsilochus. their father was a rich man who lived in the strong city of
phere and was descended from the river alpheus, whose broad stream
fl
 
 ___________________________
 
al man. keep your faces therefore towards
the trojans, but give ground backwards, for we dare not fight with
gods."

as he spoke the trojans drew close up, and hector killed two men, both
in one chariot, menesthes and anchialus, heroes well versed in war.
ajax son of telamon pitied them in their fall; he came close up and
hurled his spear, hitting amphius the son of selagus, a man of great
wealth who lived in paesus and owned much corn-growing land, but his
lot had led him to come to the aid of priam and his sons. ajax struck
him in the belt; the spear pierced the lower part of his belly, and he
fell heavily to the ground. then ajax ran towards him to strip him of
his armour, but the trojans rained spears upon him, many of which fell
upon his shield. he planted his heel upon the body and drew out his
spear, but the darts pressed so heavily upon him that he could not
strip the goodly armour from his shoulders. the trojan chieftains,
moreover, many and valiant, came about him with their spear
 
 ___________________________
 
 or to make slaughter of the lycian rank and
file; it was not decreed, however, that he should slay the son of jove;
minerva, therefore, turned him against the main body of the lycians. he
killed coeranus, alastor, chromius, alcandrus, halius, noemon, and
prytanis, and would have slain yet more, had not great hector marked
him, and sped to the front of the fight clad in his suit of mail,
filling the danaans with terror. sarpedon was glad when he saw him
coming, and besought him, saying, "son of priam, let me not be here to
fall into the hands of the danaans. help me, and since i may not return
home to gladden the hearts of my wife and of my infant son, let me die
within the walls of your city."

hector made him no answer, but rushed onward to fall at once upon the
achaeans and kill many among them. his comrades then bore sarpedon away
and laid him beneath jove's spreading oak tree. pelagon, his friend and
comrade, drew the spear out of his thigh, but sarpedon fainted and a
mist came over hi
 
 ___________________________
 
us
planted his foot upon his breast to draw his spear from the body.

meanwhile nestor shouted to the argives, saying, "my friends, danaan
warriors, servants of mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead,
and bring back much booty to the ships. let us kill as many as we can;
the bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them later at
your leisure."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. and now the
trojans would have been routed and driven back into ilius, had not
priam's son helenus, wisest of augurs, said to hector and aeneas,
"hector and aeneas, you two are the mainstays of the trojans and
lycians, for you are foremost at all times, alike in fight and counsel;
hold your ground here, and go about among the host to rally them in
front of the gates, or they will fling themselves into the arms of
their wives, to the great joy of our foes. then, when you have put
heart into all our companies, we will stand firm here and fight the
danaans however hard they press 
 
 ___________________________
 
iendship. but the son of saturn made glaucus take
leave of his wits, for he exchanged golden armour for bronze, the worth
of a hundred head of cattle for the worth of nine.

now when hector reached the scaean gates and the oak tree, the wives
and daughters of the trojans came running towards him to ask after
their sons, brothers, kinsmen, and husbands: he told them to set about
praying to the gods, and many were made sorrowful as they heard him.

presently he reached the splendid palace of king priam, adorned with
colonnades of hewn stone. in it there were fifty bedchambers--all of
hewn stone--built near one another, where the sons of priam slept, each
with his wedded wife. opposite these, on the other side the courtyard,
there were twelve upper rooms also of hewn stone for priam's daughters,
built near one another, where his sons-in-law slept with their wives.
when hector got there, his fond mother came up to him with laodice the
fairest of her daughters. she took his hand within her own a
 
 ___________________________
 
elve yearling heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the
temple of the goddess if she will take pity on the town, with the wives
and little ones of the trojans, and keep the son of tydeus from off the
goodly city of ilius, for he fights with fury, and fills men's souls
with panic. go, then, to the temple of minerva, while i seek paris and
exhort him, if he will hear my words. would that the earth might open
her jaws and swallow him, for jove bred him to be the bane of the
trojans, and of priam and priam's sons. could i but see him go down
into the house of hades, my heart would forget its heaviness."

his mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who
gathered the matrons throughout the city. she then went down into her
fragrant store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept, the work of
sidonian women, whom alexandrus had brought over from sidon when he
sailed the seas upon that voyage during which he carried off helen.
hecuba took out the largest robe, and the one t
 
 ___________________________
 
e scaean gates. do
this, and we will sacrifice twelve heifers that have never yet known
the goad, in your temple, if you will have pity upon the town, with the
wives and little ones of the trojans." thus she prayed, but pallas
minerva granted not her prayer.

while they were thus praying to the daughter of great jove, hector went
to the fair house of alexandrus, which he had built for him by the
foremost builders in the land. they had built him his house,
storehouse, and courtyard near those of priam and hector on the
acropolis. here hector entered, with a spear eleven cubits long in his
hand; the bronze point gleamed in front of him, and was fastened to the
shaft of the spear by a ring of gold. he found alexandrus within the
house, busied about his armour, his shield and cuirass, and handling
his curved bow; there, too, sat argive helen with her women, setting
them their several tasks; and as hector saw him he rebuked him with
words of scorn. "sir," said he, "you do ill to nurse this ranco
 
 ___________________________
 
s of
atreus, and the brave son of tydeus, either of their own bidding, or
because some soothsayer had told them."

and hector answered, "wife, i too have thought upon all this, but with
what face should i look upon the trojans, men or women, if i shirked
battle like a coward? i cannot do so: i know nothing save to fight
bravely in the forefront of the trojan host and win renown alike for my
father and myself. well do i know that the day will surely come when
mighty ilius shall be destroyed with priam and priam's people, but i
grieve for none of these--not even for hecuba, nor king priam, nor for
my brothers many and brave who may fall in the dust before their
foes--for none of these do i grieve as for yourself when the day shall
come on which some one of the achaeans shall rob you for ever of your
freedom, and bear you weeping away. it may be that you will have to ply
the loom in argos at the bidding of a mistress, or to fetch water from
the springs messeis or hypereia, treated brutally by 
 
 ___________________________
 
 doom of ilius,
since you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city."

and minerva answered, "so be it, far-darter; it was in this mind that i
came down from olympus to the trojans and achaeans. tell me, then, how
do you propose to end this present fighting?"

apollo, son of jove, replied, "let us incite great hector to challenge
some one of the danaans in single combat; on this the achaeans will be
shamed into finding a man who will fight him."

minerva assented, and helenus son of priam divined the counsel of the
gods; he therefore went up to hector and said, "hector son of priam,
peer of gods in counsel, i am your brother, let me then persuade you.
bid the other trojans and achaeans all of them take their seats, and
challenge the best man among the achaeans to meet you in single combat.
i have heard the voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your
doom is not yet come."

hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the
trojans, grasping his spear by the
 
 ___________________________
 
will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods."

with these words he put on his armour; and then, o menelaus, your life
would have come to an end at the hands of hands of hector, for he was
far better the man, had not the princes of the achaeans sprung upon you
and checked you. king agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said,
"menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. be patient in spite of
passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself
as hector son of priam, who is feared by many another as well as you.
even achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from
meeting him in battle. sit down your own people, and the achaeans will
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

with these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,
whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his sho
 
 ___________________________
 
yed at home, he gave it to his faithful squire ereuthalion,
who in this same armour challenged the foremost men among us. the
others quaked and quailed, but my high spirit bade me fight him though
none other would venture; i was the youngest man of them all; but when
i fought him minerva vouchsafed me victory. he was the biggest and
strongest man that ever i killed, and covered much ground as he lay
sprawling upon the earth. would that i were still young and strong as i
then was, for the son of priam would then soon find one who would face
him. but you, foremost among the whole host though you be, have none of
you any stomach for fighting hector."

thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to
their feet. foremost of all uprose king agamemnon, and after him brave
diomed the son of tydeus. next were the two ajaxes, men clothed in
valour as with a garment, and then idomeneus, and meriones his brother
in arms. after these eurypylus son of euaemon, thoas the son of
andraem
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle. i can charge among the chariots and horsemen, and
in hand to hand fighting can delight the heart of mars; howbeit i would
not take such a man as you are off his guard--but i will smite you
openly if i can."

he poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it from him. it struck the
sevenfold shield in its outermost layer--the eighth, which was of
bronze--and went through six of the layers but in the seventh hide it
stayed. then ajax threw in his turn, and struck the round shield of the
son of priam. the terrible spear went through his gleaming shield, and
pressed onward through his cuirass of cunning workmanship; it pierced
the shirt against his side, but he swerved and thus saved his life.
they then each of them drew out the spear from his shield, and fell on
one another like savage lions or wild boars of great strength and
endurance: the son of priam struck the middle of ajax's shield, but the
bronze did not break, and the point of his dart was turned. ajax then
sprang forward and pierc
 
 ___________________________
 
, "ajax, heaven has vouchsafed you stature and
strength, and judgement; and in wielding the spear you excel all others
of the achaeans. let us for this day cease fighting; hereafter we will
fight anew till heaven decide between us, and give victory to one or to
the other; night is now falling, and the behests of night may not be
well gainsaid. gladden, then, the hearts of the achaeans at your ships,
and more especially those of your own followers and clansmen, while i,
in the great city of king priam, bring comfort to the trojans and their
women, who vie with one another in their prayers on my behalf. let us,
moreover, exchange presents that it may be said among the achaeans and
trojans, 'they fought with might and main, but were reconciled and
parted in friendship.'"

on this he gave ajax a silver-studded sword with its sheath and
leathern baldric, and in return ajax gave him a girdle dyed with
purple. thus they parted, the one going to the host of the achaeans,
and the other to that of th
 
 ___________________________
 
 the plain for all in common; near this let us
set about building a high wall, to shelter ourselves and our ships, and
let it have well-made gates that there may be a way through them for
our chariots. close outside we will dig a deep trench all round it to
keep off both horse and foot, that the trojan chieftains may not bear
hard upon us."

thus he spoke, and the princess shouted in applause. meanwhile the
trojans held a council, angry and full of discord, on the acropolis by
the gates of king priam's palace; and wise antenor spoke. "hear me," he
said, "trojans, dardanians, and allies, that i may speak even as i am
minded. let us give up argive helen and her wealth to the sons of
atreus, for we are now fighting in violation of our solemn covenants,
and shall not prosper till we have done as i say."

he then sat down and alexandrus husband of lovely helen rose to speak.
"antenor," said he, "your words are not to my liking; you can find a
better saying than this if you will; if, however, you
 
 ___________________________
 
 have spoken in
good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason. i will
speak plainly, and hereby notify to the trojans that i will not give up
the woman; but the wealth that i brought home with her from argos i
will restore, and will add yet further of my own."

on this, when paris had spoken and taken his seat, priam of the race of
dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: "hear me, trojans, dardanians, and
allies, that i may speak even as i am minded. get your suppers now as
hitherto throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful. at
daybreak let idaeus go to the ships, and tell agamemnon and menelaus
sons of atreus the saying of alexandrus through whom this quarrel has
come about; and let him also be instant with them that they now cease
fi
 
 ___________________________
 
ghting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till
heaven decide between us and give victory to one or to the other."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. they took supper
in their companies and at daybreak idaeus went his way to the ships. he
found the danaans, servants of mars, in council at the stern of
agamemnon's ship, and took his place in the midst of them. "son of
atreus," he said, "and princes of the achaean host, priam and the other
noble trojans have sent me to tell you the saying of alexandrus through
whom this quarrel has come about, if so be that you may find it
acceptable. all the treasure he took with him in his ships to
troy--would that he had sooner perished--he will restore, and will add
yet further of his own, but he will not give up the wedded wife of
menelaus, though the trojans would have him do so. priam bade me
inquire further if you will cease fighting till we burn our dead;
hereafter we will 
 
 ___________________________
 
out their twofold labour, some to gather the
corpses, and others to bring in wood. the argives on their part also
hastened from their ships, some to gather the corpses, and others to
bring in wood.

the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh risen into the
vault of heaven from the slow still currents of deep oceanus, when the
two armies met. they could hardly recognise their dead, but they washed
the clotted gore from off them, shed tears over them, and lifted them
upon their waggons. priam had forbidden the trojans to wail aloud, so
they heaped their dead sadly and silently upon the pyre, and having
burned them went back to the city of ilius. the achaeans in like manner
heaped their dead sadly and silently on the pyre, and having burned
them went back to their ships.

now in the twilight when it was not yet dawn, chosen bands of the
achaeans were gathered round the pyre and built one barrow that was
raised in common for all, and hard by this they built a high wall to
shelter them
 
 ___________________________
 
re with the danaans were to drive the trojans back and keep
jove from helping them, he would have to sit there sulking alone on
ida."

king neptune was greatly troubled and answered, "juno, rash of tongue,
what are you talking about? we other gods must not set ourselves
against jove, for he is far stronger than we are."

thus did they converse; but the whole space enclosed by the ditch, from
the ships even to the wall, was filled with horses and warriors, who
were pent up there by hector son of priam, now that the hand of jove
was with him. he would even have set fire to the ships and burned them,
had not queen juno put it into the mind of agamemnon, to bestir himself
and to encourage the achaeans. to this end he went round the ships and
tents carrying a great purple cloak, and took his stand by the huge
black hull of ulysses' ship, which was middlemost of all; it was from
this place that his voice would carry farthest, on the one hand towards
the tents of ajax son of telamon, and on the ot
 
 ___________________________
 
 go up
into your bed."

and teucer answered, "most noble son of atreus, you need not urge me;
from the moment we began to drive them back to ilius, i have never
ceased so far as in me lies to look out for men whom i can shoot and
kill; i have shot eight barbed shafts, and all of them have been buried
in the flesh of warlike youths, but this mad dog i cannot hit."

as he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at hector, for he was bent
on hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow hit priam's
brave son gorgythion in the breast. his mother, fair castianeira,
lovely as a goddess, had been married from aesyme, and now he bowed his
head as a garden poppy in full bloom when it is weighed down by showers
in spring--even thus heavy bowed his head beneath the weight of his
helmet.

again he aimed at hector, for he was longing to hit him, and again his
arrow missed, for apollo turned it aside; but he hit hector's brave
charioteer archeptolemus in the breast, by the nipple, as he was
drivin
 
 ___________________________
 
ne another and praying every
man instantly as they lifted up their hands to the gods; but hector
wheeled his horses this way and that, his eyes glaring like those of
gorgo or murderous mars.

juno when she saw them had pity upon them, and at once said to minerva,
"alas, child of aegis-bearing jove, shall you and i take no more
thought for the dying danaans, though it be the last time we ever do
so? see how they perish and come to a bad end before the onset of but a
single man. hector the son of priam rages with intolerable fury, and
has already done great mischief."

minerva answered, "would, indeed, this fellow might die in his own
land, and fall by the hands of the achaeans; but my father jove is mad
with spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and unjust. he forgets
how often i saved his son when he was worn out by the labours
eurystheus had laid on him. he would weep till his cry came up to
heaven, and then jove would send me down to help him; if i had had the
sense to foresee all this
 
 ___________________________
 
 house of
hades, to fetch the hell-hound from erebus, he would never have come
back alive out of the deep waters of the river styx. and now jove hates
me, while he lets thetis have her way because she kissed his knees and
took hold of his beard, when she was begging him to do honour to
achilles. i shall know what to do next time he begins calling me his
grey-eyed darling. get our horses ready, while i go within the house of
aegis-bearing jove and put on my armour; we shall then find out whether
priam's son hector will be glad to meet us in the highways of battle,
or whether the trojans will glut hounds and vultures with the fat of
their flesh as they be dead by the ships of the achaeans."

thus did she speak and white-armed juno, daughter of great saturn,
obeyed her words; she set about harnessing her gold-bedizened steeds,
while minerva daughter of aegis-bearing jove flung her richly vesture,
made with her own hands, on to the threshold of her father, and donned
the shirt of jove, arming h
 
 ___________________________
 
evil to the
argives."

thus spoke hector and the trojans shouted applause. they took their
sweating steeds from under the yoke, and made them fast each by his own
chariot. they made haste to bring sheep and cattle from the city, they
brought wine also and corn from their houses and gathered much wood.
they then offered unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, and the wind
carried the sweet savour of sacrifice to heaven--but the blessed gods
partook not thereof, for they bitterly hated ilius with priam and
priam's people. thus high in hope they sat through the livelong night
by the highways of war, and many a watchfire did they kindle. as when
the stars shine clear, and the moon is bright--there is not a breath of
air, not a peak nor glade nor jutting headland but it stands out in the
ineffable radiance that breaks from the serene of heaven; the stars can
all of them be told and the heart of the shepherd is glad--even thus
shone the watchfires of the trojans before ilius midway between the
sh
 
 ___________________________
 
old is he that has as many prizes as my horses have
won me. i will give him seven excellent workwomen, lesbians, whom i
chose for myself when he took lesbos--all of surpassing beauty. i will
give him these, and with them her whom i erewhile took from him, the
daughter of briseus; and i swear a great oath that i never went up into
her couch, nor have been with her after the manner of men and women.

"all these things will i give him now, and if hereafter the gods
vouchsafe me to sack the city of priam, let him come when we achaeans
are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to his
liking; furthermore let him take twenty trojan women, the loveliest
after helen herself. then, when we reach achaean argos, wealthiest of
all lands, he shall be my son-in-law and i will show him like honour
with my own dear son orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. i
have three daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa, let him
take the one of his choice, freely and without gif
 
 ___________________________
 
 these horses have won for agamemnon. moreover he will give you seven
excellent workwomen, lesbians, whom he chose for himself, when you took
lesbos--all of surpassing beauty. he will give you these, and with them
her whom he erewhile took from you, the daughter of briseus, and he
will swear a great oath, he has never gone up into her couch nor been
with her after the manner of men and women. all these things will he
give you now down, and if hereafter the gods vouchsafe him to sack the
city of priam, you can come when we achaeans are dividing the spoil,
and load your ship with gold and bronze to your liking. you can take
twenty trojan women, the loveliest after helen herself. then, when we
reach achaean argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his
son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear son
orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. agamemnon has three
daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa; you may take the one
of your choice, freely and without 
 
 ___________________________
 
 as messengers from the host of the danaans, and would
fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the achaeans."

"ajax," replied achilles, "noble son of telamon, you have spoken much
to my liking, but my blood boils when i think it all over, and remember
how the son of atreus treated me with contumely as though i were some
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the argives. go, then, and
deliver your message; say that i will have no concern with fighting
till hector, son of noble priam, reaches the tents of the myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. for all his
lust of battle, i take it he will be held in check when he is at my own
tent and ship."

on this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, ulysses leading the way. but patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for
phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of
fine linen. the old man
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
afterwards his comrade and charioteer oileus, who sprang from his
chariot and was coming full towards him; but agamemnon struck him on
the forehead with his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against
the weapon, which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were
battered in and he was killed in full fight.

agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their
breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. he then went on to kill
isus and antiphus two sons of priam, the one a bastard, the other born
in wedlock; they were in the same chariot--the bastard driving, while
noble antiphus fought beside him. achilles had once taken both of them
prisoners in the glades of ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as
they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now,
however, agamemnon son of atreus smote isus in the chest above the
nipple with his spear, while he struck antiphus hard by the ear and
threw him from his chariot. forthwith he stripped th
 
 ___________________________
 
leet iris, and speak thus to hector--say that so long as he sees
agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the trojan ranks, he is
to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when
agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his
chariot, then will i vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the
ships and night falls at the going down of the sun."

iris hearkened and obeyed. down she went to strong ilius from the
crests of ida, and found hector son of priam standing by his chariot
and horses. then she said, "hector son of priam, peer of gods in
counsel, father jove has sent me to bear you this message--so long as
you see agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the trojan ranks,
you are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle,
but when agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to
his chariot, then will jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you
reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of t
 
 ___________________________
 
arge the foe
with your chariots that you may win still greater glory."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a huntsman
hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so did hector,
peer of mars, hound the proud trojans on against the achaeans. full of
hope he plunged in among the foremost, and fell on the fight like some
fierce tempest that swoops down upon the sea, and lashes its deep blue
waters into fury.

what, then is the full tale of those whom hector son of priam killed in
the hour of triumph which jove then vouchsafed him? first asaeus,
autonous, and opites; dolops son of clytius, opheltius and agelaus;
aesymnus, orus and hipponous steadfast in battle; these chieftains of
the achaeans did hector slay, and then he fell upon the rank and file.
as when the west wind hustles the clouds of the white south and beats
them down with the fierceness of its fury--the waves of the sea roll
high, and the spray is flung aloft in the rage of the wandering
wind--even 
 
 ___________________________
 
hereon the jackals fly in terror and the lion robs them of their
prey--even so did trojans many and brave gather round crafty ulysses,
but the hero stood at bay and kept them off with his spear. ajax then
came up with his shield before him like a wall, and stood hard by,
whereon the trojans fled in all directions. menelaus took ulysses by
the hand, and led him out of the press while his squire brought up his
chariot, but ajax rushed furiously on the trojans and killed doryclus,
a bastard son of priam; then he wounded pandocus, lysandrus, pyrasus,
and pylartes; as some swollen torrent comes rushing in full flood from
the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain of heaven--many a dry
oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much mud does it bring down and
cast into the sea--even so did brave ajax chase the foe furiously over
the plain, slaying both men and horses.

hector did not yet know what ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river s
 
 ___________________________
 
 and trojans still fought desperately, nor
were the trench and the high wall above it, to keep the trojans in
check longer. they had built it to protect their ships, and had dug the
trench all round it that it might safeguard both the ships and the rich
spoils which they had taken, but they had not offered hecatombs to the
gods. it had been built without the consent of the immortals, and
therefore it did not last. so long as hector lived and achilles nursed
his anger, and so long as the city of priam remained untaken, the great
wall of the achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of the trojans
were no more, and many also of the argives, though some were yet left
alive--when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth year, and the
argives had gone back with their ships to their own country--then
neptune and apollo took counsel to destroy the wall, and they turned on
to it the streams of all the rivers from mount ida into the sea,
rhesus, heptaporus, caresus, rhodius, grenicus, aesopus, an
 
 ___________________________
 
nch. then
they formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in
five bodies followed their leaders. those that went with hector and
polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined
to break through the wall and fight at the ships. cebriones was also
joined with them as third in command, for hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man of them all. these
helped to array 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd many were struck clean through their
shields; the wall and battlements were everywhere deluged with the
blood alike of trojans and of achaeans. but even so the trojans could
not rout the achaeans, who still held on; and as some honest
hard-working woman weighs wool in her balance and sees that the scales
be true, for she would gain some pitiful earnings for her little ones,
even so was the fight balanced evenly between them till the time came
when jove gave the greater glory to hector son of priam, who was first
to spring towards the wall of the achaeans. when he had done so, he
cried aloud to the trojans, "up, trojans, break the wall of the
argives, and fling fire upon their ships."

thus did he hound them on, and in one body they rushed straight at the
wall as he had bidden them, and scaled the battlements with sharp
spears in their hands. hector laid hold of a stone that lay just
outside the gates and was thick at one end but pointed at the other;
two of the best men in a town, as men
 
 ___________________________
 
her towards the horse-breeders of thrace, the mysians,
fighters at close quarters, the noble hippemolgi, who live on milk, and
the abians, justest of mankind. he no longer turned so much as a glance
towards troy, for he did not think that any of the immortals would go
and help either trojans or danaans.

but king neptune had kept no blind look-out; he had been looking
admiringly on the battle from his seat on the topmost crests of wooded
samothrace, whence he could see all ida, with the city of priam and the
ships of the achaeans. he had come from under the sea and taken his
place here, for he pitied the achaeans who were being overcome by the
trojans; and he was furiously angry with jove.

presently he came down from his post on the mountain top, and as he
strode swiftly onwards the high hills and the forest quaked beneath the
tread of his immortal feet. three strides he took, and with the fourth
he reached his goal--aegae, where is his glittering golden palace,
imperishable, in the depths
 
 ___________________________
 
o the ships of the achaeans.

now there is a certain huge cavern in the depths of the sea midway
between tenedos and rocky imbrus; here neptune lord of the earthquake
stayed his horses, unyoked them, and set before them their ambrosial
forage. he hobbled their feet with hobbles of gold which none could
either unloose or break, so that they might stay there in that place
until their lord should return. this done he went his way to the host
of the achaeans.

now the trojans followed hector son of priam in close array like a
storm-cloud or flame of fire, fighting with might and main and raising
the cry battle; for they deemed that they should take the ships of the
achaeans and kill all their chiefest heroes then and there. meanwhile
earth-encircling neptune lord of the earthquake cheered on the argives,
for he had come up out of the sea and had assumed the form and voice of
calchas.

first he spoke to the two ajaxes, who were doing their best already,
and said, "ajaxes, you two can be the savi
 
 ___________________________
 
phet is bidding us fight hard by our ships. it
was not calchas the seer and diviner of omens; i knew him at once by
his feet and knees as he turned away, for the gods are soon recognised.
moreover i feel the lust of battle burn more fiercely within me, while
my hands and my feet under me are more eager for the fray."

and ajax son of telamon answered, "i too feel my hands grasp my spear
more firmly; my strength is greater, and my feet more nimble; i long,
moreover, to meet furious hector son of priam, even in single combat."

thus did they converse, exulting in the hunger after battle with which
the god had filled them. meanwhile the earth-encircler roused the
achaeans, who were resting in the rear by the ships overcome at once by
hard fighting and by grief at seeing that the trojans had got over the
wall in force. tears began falling from their eyes as they beheld them,
for they made sure that they should not escape destruction; but the
lord of the earthquake passed lightly about among the
 
 ___________________________
 
h swords and spears pointed
at both ends, and drove him from them so that he staggered and gave
ground; thereon he shouted to the trojans, "trojans, lycians, and
dardanians, fighters in close combat, stand firm: the achaeans have set
themselves as a wall against me, but they will not check me for long;
they will give ground before me if the mightiest of the gods, the
thundering spouse of juno, has indeed inspired my onset."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. deiphobus son of
priam went about among them intent on deeds of daring with his round
shield before him, under cover of which he strode quickly forward.
meriones took aim at him with a spear, nor did he fail to hit the broad
orb of ox-hide; but he was far from piercing it for the spear broke in
two pieces long ere he could do so; moreover deiphobus had seen it
coming and had held his shield well away from him. meriones drew back
under cover of his comrades, angry alike at having failed to vanquish
deiphobus, and havi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng broken his spear. he turned therefore towards the
ships and tents to fetch a spear which he had left behind in his tent.

the others continued fighting, and the cry of battle rose up into the
heavens. teucer son of telamon was the first to kill his man, to wit,
the warrior imbrius, son of mentor, rich in horses. until the achaeans
came he had lived in pedaeum, and had married medesicaste, a bastard
daughter of priam; but on the arrival of the danaan fleet he had gone
back to ilius, and was a great man among the trojans, dwelling near
priam himself, who gave him like honour with his own sons. the son of
telamon now struck him under the ear with a spear which he then drew
back again, and imbrius fell headlong as an ash-tree when it is felled
on the crest of some high mountain beacon, and its delicate green
foliage comes toppling down to the ground. thus did he fall with his
bronze-dight armour ringing harshl
 
 ___________________________
 
es and idomeneus, captains of men, go out to
battle clad in their bronze armour. meriones was first to speak. "son
of deucalion," said he, "where would you have us begin fighting? on the
right wing of the host, in the centre, or on the left wing, where i
take it the achaeans will be weakest?"

idomeneus answered, "there are others to defend the centre--the two
ajaxes and teucer, who is the finest archer of all the achaeans, and is
good also in a hand-to-hand fight. these will give hector son of priam
enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish their
indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of saturn fling a
firebrand upon them with his own hand. great ajax son of telamon will
yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of ceres, if
bronze and great stones can overthrow him. he would not yield even to
achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is none
to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing, that we may
know f
 
 ___________________________
 
 encouraging
them throughout their host. thus, then, did these two devise a knot of
war and battle, that none could unloose or break, and set both sides
tugging at it, to the failing of men's knees beneath them.

and now idomeneus, though his hair was already flecked with grey,
called loud on the danaans and spread panic among the trojans as he
leaped in among them. he slew othryoneus from cabesus, a sojourner, who
had but lately come to take part in the war. he sought cassandra, the
fairest of priam's daughters, in marriage, but offered no gifts of
wooing, for he promised a great thing, to wit, that he would drive the
sons of the achaeans willy nilly from troy; old king priam had given
his consent and promised her to him, whereon he fought on the strength
of the promises thus made to him. idomeneus aimed a spear, and hit him
as he came striding on. his cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and
the spear stuck in his belly, so that he fell heavily to the ground.
then idomeneus vaunted over
 
 ___________________________
 
 him saying, "othryoneus, there is no one in
the world whom i shall admire more than i do you, if you indeed perform
what you have promised priam son of dardanus in return for his
daughter. we too will make you an offer; we will give you the loveliest
daughter of the son of atreus, and will bring her from argos for you to
marry, if you will sack the goodly city of ilius in company with
ourselves; so come along with me, that we may make a covenant at the
ships about the marriage, and we will not be hard upon you about gifts
of wooing."

with this idomeneus began dragging him by the foot through the thick of
the fight, but asius came up to
 
 ___________________________
 
in crete, and minos in his
turn begot a son, noble deucalion. deucalion begot me to be a ruler
over many men in crete, and my ships have now brought me hither, to be
the bane of yourself, your father, and the trojans."

thus did he speak, and deiphobus was in two minds, whether to go back
and fetch some other trojan to help him, or to take up the challenge
single-handed. in the end, he deemed it best to go and fetch aeneas,
whom he found standing in the rear, for he had long been aggrieved with
priam because in spite of his brave deeds he did not give him his due
share of honour. deiphobus went up to him and said, "aeneas, prince
among the trojans, if you know any ties of kinship, help me now to
defend the body of your sister's husband; come with me to the rescue of
alcathous, who being husband to your sister brought you up when you
were a child in his house, and now idomeneus has slain him."

with these words he moved the heart of aeneas, and he went in pursuit
of idomeneus, big with great
 
 ___________________________
 
e in close combat and tearing the helmet from his head; the
helmet fell to the ground, and one of those who were fighting on the
achaean side took charge of it as it rolled at his feet, but the eyes
of deipyrus were closed in the darkness of death.

on this menelaus was grieved, and made menacingly towards helenus,
brandishing his spear; but helenus drew his bow, and the two attacked
one another at one and the same moment, the one with his spear, and the
other with his bow and arrow. the son of priam hit the breastplate of
menelaus's corslet, but the arrow glanced from off it. as black beans
or pulse come pattering down on to a threshing-floor from the broad
winnowing-shovel, blown by shrill winds and shaken by the shovel--even
so did the arrow glance off and recoil from the shield of menelaus, who
in his turn wounded the hand with which helenus carried his bow; the
spear went right through his hand and stuck in the bow itself, so that
to his life he retreated under cover of his men, with h
 
 ___________________________
 
 ascania on the
preceding day to relieve other troops. then jove urged them on to
fight. they flew forth like the blasts of some fierce wind that strike
earth in the van of a thunderstorm--they buffet the salt sea into an
uproar; many and mighty are the great waves that come crashing in one
after the other upon the shore with their arching heads all crested
with foam--even so did rank behind rank of trojans arrayed in gleaming
armour follow their leaders onward. the way was led by hector son of
priam, peer of murderous mars, with his round shield before him--his
shield of ox-hides covered with plates of bronze--and his gleaming
helmet upon his temples. he kept stepping forward under cover of his
shield in every direction, making trial of the ranks to see if they
would give way before him, but he could not daunt the courage of the
achaeans. ajax was the first to stride out and challenge him. "sir," he
cried, "draw near; why do you think thus vainly to dismay the argives?
we achaeans are exce
 
 ___________________________
 
 the earthquake. when he had
found him he said, "now, neptune, you can help the danaans with a will,
and give them victory though it be only for a short time while jove is
still sleeping. i have sent him into a sweet slumber, and juno has
beguiled him into going to bed with her."

sleep now departed and went his ways to and fro among mankind, leaving
neptune more eager than ever to help the danaans. he darted forward
among the first ranks and shouted saying, "argives, shall we let hector
son of priam have the triumph of taking our ships and covering himself
with glory? this is what he says that he shall now do, seeing that
achilles is still in dudgeon at his ship; we shall get on very well
without him if we keep each other in heart and stand by one another.
now, therefore, let us all do as i say. let us each take the best and
largest shield we can lay hold of, put on our helmets, and sally forth
with our longest spears in our hands; i will lead you on, and hector
son of priam, rage as he ma
 
 ___________________________
 
t well over, how the
achaeans may have a respite from their troubles."

apollo obeyed his father's saying, and left the crests of ida, flying
like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. he found hector
no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had just come
to himself again. he knew those who were about him, and the sweat and
hard breathing had left him from the moment when the will of
aegis-bearing jove had revived him. apollo stood beside him and said,
"hector son of priam, why are you so faint, and why are you here away
from the others? has any mishap befallen you?"

hector in a weak voice answered, "and which, kind sir, of the gods are
you, who now ask me thus? do you not know that ajax struck me on the
chest with a stone as i was killing his comrades at the ships of the
achaeans, and compelled me to leave off fighting? i made sure that this
very day i should breathe my last and go down into the house of hades."

then king apollo said to him, "take heart; the s
 
 ___________________________
 
ed him in the shoulder, from
behind, and the point, driven so furiously, went through into his
chest, whereon he fell headlong. the two then made towards him to strip
him of his armour, but hector called on all his brothers for help, and
he especially upbraided brave melanippus son of hiketaon, who erewhile
used to pasture his herds of cattle in percote before the war broke
out; but when the ships of the danaans came, he went back to ilius,
where he was eminent among the trojans, and lived near priam who
treated him as one of his own sons. hector now rebuked him and said,
"why, melanippus, are we thus remiss? do you take no note of the death
of your kinsman, and do you not see how they are trying to take
dolops's armour? follow me; there must be no fighting the argives from
a distance now, but we must do so in close combat till either we kill
them or they take the high wall of ilius and slay her people."

he led on as he spoke, and the hero melanippus followed after.
meanwhile ajax son of t
 
 ___________________________
 
ck it. even so did the son of nestor fly, and the trojans and
hector with a cry that rent the air showered their weapons after him;
nor did he turn round and stay his flight till he had reached his
comrades.

the trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships
in fulfilment of the behests of jove who kept spurring them on to new
deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the argives and
defeated them by encouraging the trojans. for he meant giving glory to
hector son of priam, and letting him throw fire upon the ships, till he
had fulfilled the unrighteous prayer that thetis had made him; jove,
therefore, bided his time till he should see the glare of a blazing
ship. from that hour he was about so to order that the trojans should
be driven back from the ships and to vouchsafe glory to the achaeans.
with this purpose he inspired hector son of priam, who was eager enough
already, to assail the ships. his fury was as that of mars, or as when
a fire is raging in the gla
 
 ___________________________
 
ong them, and
struck panic into the argives, while he gave triumph to hector and the
trojans. hector let the other danaans alone and killed no man, but
drove straight at patroclus. patroclus then sprang from his chariot to
the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right a jagged
stone as large as his hand could hold. he stood still and threw it, nor
did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for
the stone struck cebriones, hector's charioteer, a bastard son of
priam, as he held the reins in his hands. the stone hit him on the
forehead and drove his brows into his head for the bone was smashed,
and his eyes fell to the ground at his feet. he dropped dead from his
chariot as though he were diving, and there was no more life left in
him. over him did you then vaunt, o knight patroclus, saying, "bless my
heart, how active he is, and how well he dives. if we had been at sea
this fellow would have dived from the ship's side and brought up as
many oysters as the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ving ground,
forced his way through the ranks, and when close up with him struck him
in the lower part of the belly with a spear, driving the bronze point
right through it, so that he fell heavily to the ground to the great
grief of the achaeans. as when a lion has fought some fierce wild-boar
and worsted him--the two fight furiously upon the mountains over some
little fountain at which they would both drink, and the lion has beaten
the boar till he can hardly breathe--even so did hector son of priam
take the life of the brave son of menoetius who had killed so many,
striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him the while.
"patroclus," said he, "you deemed that you should sack our city, rob
our trojan women of their freedom, and carry them off in your ships to
your own country. fool; hector and his fleet horses were ever straining
their utmost to defend them. i am foremost of all the trojan warriors
to stave the day of bondage from off them; as for you, vultures shall
devour you he
 
 ___________________________
 
spoil and prey of the danaans? so long as he lived he
did good service both to your city and yourself; yet you had no stomach
to save his body from the dogs. if the lycians will listen to me, they
will go home and leave troy to its fate. if the trojans had any of that
daring fearless spirit which lays hold of men who are fighting for
their country and harassing those who would attack it, we should soon
bear off patroclus into ilius. could we get this dead man away and
bring him into the city of priam, the argives would readily give up the
armour of sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. for he whose
squire has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the
achaeans--he and his close-fighting followers. nevertheless you dared
not make a stand against ajax, nor face him, eye to eye, with battle
all round you, for he is a braver man than you are."

hector scowled at him and answered, "glaucus, you should know better. i
have held you so far as a man of more understanding than an
 
 ___________________________
 
harioteer, and their noble manes drooped all wet from under the
yokestraps on either side the yoke.

the son of saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. he wagged
his head, and muttered to himself, saying, "poor things, why did we
give you to king peleus who is a mortal, while you are yourselves
ageless and immortal? was it that you might share the sorrows that
befall mankind? for of all creatures that live and move upon the earth
there is none so pitiable as he is--still, hector son of priam shall
drive neither you nor your chariot. i will not have it. it is enough
that he should have the armour over which he vaunts so vainly.
furthermore i will give you strength of heart and limb to bear
automedon safely to the ships from battle, for i shall let the trojans
triumph still further, and go on killing till they reach the ships;
whereon night shall fall and darkness overshadow the land."

as he spoke he breathed heart and strength into the horses so that they
shook the dust from out of
 
 ___________________________
 
ze. chromius and aretus went also with
them, and their hearts beat high with hope that they might kill the men
and capture the horses--fools that they were, for they were not to
return scatheless from their meeting with automedon, who prayed to
father jove and was forthwith filled with courage and strength
abounding. he turned to his trusty comrade alcimedon and said,
"alcimedon, keep your horses so close up that i may feel their breath
upon my back; i doubt that we shall not stay hector son of priam till
he has killed us and mounted behind the horses; he will then either
spread panic among the ranks of the achaeans, or himself be killed
among the foremost."

on this he cried out to the two ajaxes and menelaus, "ajaxes captains
of the argives, and menelaus, give the dead body over to them that are
best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for hector
and aeneas who are the two best men among the trojans, are pressing us
hard in the full tide of war. nevertheless the issue 
 
 ___________________________
 
 with a suit of splendid armour."

when she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves, while
silver-footed thetis went her way that she might bring the armour for
her son.

thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to olympus, and meanwhile the
achaeans were flying with loud cries before murderous hector till they
reached the ships and the hellespont, and they could not draw the body
of mars's servant patroclus out of reach of the weapons that were
showered upon him, for hector son of priam with his host and horsemen
had again caught up to him like the flame of a fiery furnace; thrice
did brave hector seize him by the feet, striving with might and main to
draw him away and calling loudly on the trojans, and thrice did the two
ajaxes, clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him from off the
body; but all undaunted he would now charge into the thick of the
fight, and now again he would stand still and cry aloud, but he would
give no ground. as upland shepherds that cannot chase so
 
 ___________________________
 
me famished
lion from a carcase, even so could not the two ajaxes scare hector son
of priam from the body of patroclus.

and now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable
glory, had not iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger from
olympus to the son of peleus and bidden him arm. she came secretly
without the knowledge of jove and of the other gods, for juno sent her,
and when she had got close to him she said, "up, son of peleus,
mightiest of all mankind; rescue patroclus about whom this fearful
fight is now raging by the ships. men are killing one anothe
 
 ___________________________
 
e sallies from the ships to fight us. he will go back when he has
given his horses their fill of being driven all whithers under our
walls, and will be in no mind to try and force his way into the city.
neither will he ever sack it, dogs shall devour him ere he do so."

hector looked fiercely at him and answered, "polydamas, your words are
not to my liking in that you bid us go back and be pent within the
city. have you not had enough of being cooped up behind walls? in the
old-days the city of priam was famous the whole world over for its
wealth of gold and bronze, but our treasures are wasted out of our
houses, and much goods have been sold away to phrygia and fair meonia,
for the hand of jove has been laid heavily upon us. now, therefore,
that the son of scheming saturn has vouchsafed me to win glory here and
to hem the achaeans in at their ships, prate no more in this fool's
wise among the people. you will have no man with you; it shall not be;
do all of you as i now say;--take your sup
 
 ___________________________
 
ou:
take some noble young achaeans with you, and bring from my tents the
gifts that i promised yesterday to achilles, and bring the women also;
furthermore let talthybius find me a boar from those that are with the
host, and make it ready for sacrifice to jove and to the sun."

then said achilles, "son of atreus, king of men agamemnon, see to these
matters at some other season, when there is breathing time and when i
am calmer. would you have men eat while the bodies of those whom hector
son of priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain? let the sons
of the achaeans, say i, fight fasting and without food, till we have
avenged them; afterwards at the going down of the sun let them eat
their fill. as for me, patroclus is lying dead in my tent, all hacked
and hewn, with his feet to the door, and his comrades are mourning
round him. therefore i can take thought of nothing save only slaughter
and blood and the rattle in the throat of the dying."

ulysses answered, "achilles, son of peleus
 
 ___________________________
 
me together in battle.
apollo with his arrows took his stand to face king neptune, while
minerva took hers against the god of war; the archer-goddess diana with
her golden arrows, sister of far-darting apollo, stood to face juno;
mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced leto, while the mighty
eddying river whom men can scamander, but gods xanthus, matched himself
against vulcan.

the gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. but the heart of
achilles was set on meeting hector son of priam, for it was with his
blood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of
battle. meanwhile apollo set aeneas on to attack the son of peleus, and
put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of lycaon son of
priam. in his likeness therefore, he said to aeneas, "aeneas,
counsellor of the trojans, where are now the brave words with which you
vaunted over your wine before the trojan princes, saying that you would
fight achilles son of peleus in single combat?"

and aeneas
 
 ___________________________
 
hed, his jaws foam, he roars with fury, he lashes his tail from
side to side about his ribs and loins, and glares as he springs
straight before him, to find out whether he is to slay, or be slain
among the foremost of his foes--even with such fury did achilles burn
to spring upon aeneas.

when they were now close up with one another achilles was first to
speak. "aeneas," said he, "why do you stand thus out before the host to
fight me? is it that you hope to reign over the trojans in the seat of
priam? nay, though you kill me priam will not hand his kingdom over to
you. he is a man of sound judgement, and he has sons of his own. or
have the trojans been allotting you a demesne of passing richness, fair
with orchard lawns and corn lands, if you should slay me? this you
shall hardly do. i have discomfited you once already. have you
forgotten how when you were alone i chased you from your herds
helter-skelter down the slopes of ida? you did not turn round to look
behind you; you took refuge in 
 
 ___________________________
 
n, would go bounding on over the ripe ears of corn and not
break them; or again when they would disport themselves on the broad
back of ocean they could gallop on the crest of a breaker. erichthonius
begat tros, king of the trojans, and tros had three noble sons, ilus,
assaracus, and ganymede who was comeliest of mortal men; wherefore the
gods carried him off to be jove's cupbearer, for his beauty's sake,
that he might dwell among the immortals. ilus begat laomedon, and
laomedon begat tithonus, priam, lampus, clytius, and hiketaon of the
stock of mars. but assaracus was father to capys, and capys to
anchises, who was my father, while hector is son to priam.

"such do i declare my blood and lineage, but as for valour, jove gives
it or takes it as he will, for he is lord of all. and now let there be
no more of this prating in mid-battle as though we were children. we
could fling taunts without end at one another; a hundred-oared galley
would not hold them. the tongue can run all whithers and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ld this man suffer when he is guiltless, to
no purpose, and in another's quarrel? has he not at all times offered
acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven? let us then
snatch him from death's jaws, lest the son of saturn be angry should
achilles slay him. it is fated, moreover, that he should escape, and
that the race of dardanus, whom jove loved above all the sons born to
him of mortal women, shall not perish utterly without seed or sign. for
now indeed has jove hated the blood of priam, while aeneas shall reign
over the trojans, he and his children's children that shall be born
hereafter."

then answered juno, "earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself, and
consider concerning aeneas, whether you will save him, or suffer him,
brave though he be, to fall by the hand of achilles son of peleus. for
of a truth we two, i and pallas minerva, have sworn full many a time
before all the immortals, that never would we shield trojans from
destruction, not even when all troy is burning 
 
 ___________________________
 
t on, crushing the bone so that the brain inside was
shed in all directions, and his lust of fighting was ended. then he
struck hippodamas in the midriff as he was springing down from his
chariot in front of him, and trying to escape. he breathed his last,
bellowing like a bull bellows when young men are dragging him to offer
him in sacrifice to the king of helice, and the heart of the
earth-shaker is glad; even so did he bellow as he lay dying. achilles
then went in pursuit of polydorus son of priam, whom his father had
always forbidden to fight because he was the youngest of his sons, the
one he loved best, and the fastest runner. he, in his folly and showing
off the fleetness of his feet, was rushing about among front ranks
until he lost his life, for achilles struck him in the middle of the
back as he was darting past him: he struck him just at the golden
fastenings of his belt and where the two pieces of the double
breastplate overlapped. the point of the spear pierced him through and

 
 ___________________________
 
t all he can catch--even so did the trojans cower under the
banks of the mighty river, and when achilles' arms grew weary with
killing them, he drew twelve youths alive out of the water, to
sacrifice in revenge for patroclus son of menoetius. he drew them out
like dazed fawns, bound their hands behind them with the girdles of
their own shirts, and gave them over to his men to take back to the
ships. then he sprang into the river, thirsting for still further blood.

there he found lycaon, son of priam seed of dardanus, as he was
escaping out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken prisoner
when he was in his father's vineyard, having set upon him by night, as
he was cutting young shoots from a wild fig-tree to make the wicker
sides of a chariot. achilles then caught him to his sorrow unawares,
and sent him by sea to lemnos, where the son of jason bought him. but a
guest-friend, eetion of imbros, freed him with a great sum, and sent
him to arisbe, whence he had escaped and returned to 
 
 ___________________________
 
y father and my friends, and i brought you the
price of a hundred oxen. i have paid three times as much to gain my
freedom; it is but twelve days that i have come to ilius after much
suffering, and now cruel fate has again thrown me into your hands.
surely father jove must hate me, that he has given me over to you a
second time. short of life indeed did my mother laothoe bear me,
daughter of aged altes--of altes who reigns over the warlike lelegae
and holds steep pedasus on the river satnioeis. priam married his
daughter along with many other women and two sons were born of her,
both of whom you will have slain. your spear slew noble polydorus as he
was fighting in the front ranks, and now evil will here befall me, for
i fear that i shall not escape you since heaven has delivered me over
to you. furthermore i say, and lay my saying to your heart, spare me,
for i am not of the same womb as hector who slew your brave and noble
comrade."

with such words did the princely son of priam beseech a
 
 ___________________________
 
chilles; but
achilles answered him sternly. "idiot," said he, "talk not to me of
ransom. until patroclus fell i preferred to give the trojans quarter,
and sold beyond the sea many of those whom i had taken alive; but now
not a man shall live of those whom heaven delivers into my hands before
the city of ilius--and of all trojans it shall fare hardest with the
sons of priam. therefore, my friend, you too shall die. why should you
whine in this way? patroclus fell, and he was a better man than you
are. i too--see you not how i am great and goodly? i am son to a noble
father, and have a goddess for my mother, but the hands of doom and
death overshadow me all as surely. the day will come, either at dawn or
dark, or at the noontide, when one shall take my life also in battle,
either with his spear, or with an arrow sped from his bow."

thus did he speak, and lycaon's 
 
 ___________________________
 
the youths that had been slain was rifting
about, as also many corpses, but he forced his way against the stream,
speeding right onwards, nor could the broad waters stay him, for
minerva had endowed him with great strength. nevertheless scamander did
not slacken in his pursuit, but was still more furious with the son of
peleus. he lifted his waters into a high crest and cried aloud to
simois saying, "dear brother, let the two of us unite to save this man,
or he will sack the mighty city of king priam, and the trojans will not
hold out against him. help me at once; fill your streams with water
from their sources, rouse all your torrents to a fury; raise your wave
on high, and let snags and stones come thundering down you that we may
make an end of this savage creature who is now lording it as though he
were a god. nothing shall serve him longer, not strength nor
comeliness, nor his fine armour, which forsooth shall soon be lying low
in the deep waters covered over with mud. i will wrap him i
 
 ___________________________
 
re, before its hour had
come; but the rest of the ever-living gods went back, some angry and
some triumphant to olympus, where they took their seats beside jove
lord of the storm cloud, while achilles still kept on dealing out death
alike on the trojans and on their horses. as when the smoke from some
burning city ascends to heaven when the anger of the gods has kindled
it--there is then toil for all, and sorrow for not a few--even so did
achilles bring toil and sorrow on the trojans.

old king priam stood on a high tower of the wall looking down on huge
achilles as the trojans fled panic-stricken before him, and there was
none to help them. presently he came down from off the tower and with
many a groan went along the wall to give orders to the brave warders of
the gate. "keep the gates," said he, "wide open till the people come
flying into the city, for achilles is hard by and is driving them in
rout before him. i see we are in great peril. as soon as our people are
inside and in safety, 
 
 ___________________________
 
from the
wall, where many another man would have bitten the dust ere he got
within ilius; you have robbed me of great glory and have saved the
trojans at no risk to yourself, for you have nothing to fear, but i
would indeed have my revenge if it were in my power to do so."

on this, with fell intent he made towards the city, and as the winning
horse in a chariot race strains every nerve when he is flying over the
plain, even so fast and furiously did the limbs of achilles bear him
onwards. king priam was first to note him as he scoured the plain, all
radiant as the star which men call orion's hound, and whose beams blaze
forth in time of harvest more brilliantly than those of any other that
shines by night; brightest of them all though he be, he yet bodes ill
for mortals, for he brings fire and fever in his train--even so did
achilles' armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. priam raised a
cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted
out to his dear son, impl
 
 ___________________________
 
ther giving chase behind him: good was the man that fled, but
better far was he that followed after, and swiftly indeed did they run,
for the prize was no mere beast for sacrifice or bullock's hide, as it
might be for a common foot-race, but they ran for the life of hector.
as horses in a chariot race speed round the turning-posts when they are
running for some great prize--a tripod or woman--at the games in honour
of some dead hero, so did these two run full speed three times round
the city of priam. all the gods watched them, and the sire of gods and
men was the first to speak.

"alas," said he, "my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued
round the walls of troy; my heart is full of pity for hector, who has
burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my honour, one while on the
crests of many-valleyed ida, and again on the citadel of troy; and now
i see noble achilles in full pursuit of him round the city of priam.
what say you? consider among yourselves and decide whether we sha
 
 ___________________________
 
his
father, aegis-bearing jove, hector cannot escape us longer. stay here
and take breath, while i go up to him and persuade him to make a stand
and fight you."

thus spoke minerva. achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while minerva left him and
went after hector in the form and with the voice of deiphobus. she came
close up to him and said, "dear brother, i see you are hard pressed by
achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of priam, let
us await his onset and stand on our defence."

and hector answered, "deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of
all my brothers, children of hecuba and priam, but henceforth i shall
rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the
wall for my sake when all the others remain inside."

then minerva said, "dear brother, my father and mother went down on
their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but
 
 ___________________________
 
 beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we may
learn whether achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to the
ships, or whether he shall fall before you."

thus did minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were now
close to one another great hector was first to speak. "i will no longer
fly you, son of peleus," said he, "as i have been doing hitherto. three
times have i fled round the mighty city of priam, without daring to
withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for i am in the
mind to face you. let us, then, give pledges to one another by our
gods, who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let
it be agreed between us that if jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and
i take your life, i am not to treat your dead body in any unseemly
fashion, but when i have stripped you of your armour, i am to give up
your body to the achaeans. and do you likewise."

achilles gl
 
 ___________________________
 
d send my body home, that
the trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when i am dead."

achilles glared at him and answered, "dog, talk not to me neither of
knees nor parents; would that i could be as sure of being able to cut
your flesh into pieces and eat it raw, for the ill you have done me, as
i am that nothing shall save you from the dogs--it shall not be, though
they bring ten or twenty-fold ransom and weigh it out for me on the
spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. though priam son of dardanus
should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall
never lay you out and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and
vultures shall eat you utterly up."

hector with his dying breath then said, "i know you what you are, and
was sure that i should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron;
look to it that i bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day when
paris and phoebus apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the
scaean gates."

when he ha
 
 ___________________________
 
and his head once so comely was laid low on earth, for jove had
now delivered him into the hands of his foes to do him outrage in his
own land.

thus was the head of hector being dishonoured in the dust. his mother
tore her hair, and flung her veil from her with a loud cry as she
looked upon her son. his father made piteous moan, and throughout the
city the people fell to weeping and wailing. it was as though the whole
of frowning ilius was being smirched with fire. hardly could the people
hold priam back in his hot haste to rush without the gates of the city.
he grovelled in the mire and besought them, calling each one of them by
his name. "let be, my friends," he cried, "and for all your sorrow,
suffer me to go single-handed to the ships of the achaeans. let me
beseech this cruel and terrible man, if maybe he will respect the
feeling of his fellow-men, and have compassion on my old age. his own
father is even such another as myself--peleus, who bred him and reared
him to be the bane of us
 
 ___________________________
 
hat he was now beyond the
reach of baths, and that minerva had laid him low by the hands of
achilles. she heard the cry coming as from the wall, and trembled in
every limb; the shuttle fell from her hands, and again she spoke to her
waiting-women. "two of you," she said, "come with me that i may learn
what it is that has befallen; i heard the voice of my husband's
honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it would come into my
mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great misfortune for
priam's children must be at hand. may i never live to hear it, but i
greatly fear that achilles has cut off the retreat of brave hector and
has chased him on to the plain where he was singlehanded; i fear he may
have put an end to the reckless daring which possessed my husband, who
would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in
front, foremost of them all in valour."

her heart beat fast, and as she spoke she flew from the house like a
maniac, with her waiting-women following a
 
 ___________________________
 
h golden venus had given her on the day when hector took
her with him from the house of eetion, after having given countless
gifts of wooing for her sake. her husband's sisters and the wives of
his brothers crowded round her and supported her, for she was fain to
die in her distraction; when she again presently breathed and came to
herself, she sobbed and made lament among the trojans saying, "woe is
me, o hector; woe, indeed, that to share a common lot we were born, you
at troy in the house of priam, and i at thebes under the wooded
mountain of placus in the house of eetion who brought me up when i was
a child--ill-starred sire of an ill-starred daughter--would that he had
never begotten me. you are now going into the house of hades under the
secret places of the earth, and you leave me a sorrowing widow in your
house. the child, of whom you and i are the unhappy parents, is as yet
a mere infant. now that you are gone, o hector, you can do nothing for
him nor he for you. even though he esc
 
 ___________________________
 
put twelve brave sons of noble trojans
to the sword and laid them with the rest, for he was full of bitterness
and fury. then he committed all to the resistless and devouring might
of the fire; he groaned aloud and called on his dead comrade by name.
"fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in the house of hades; i am now
doing all that i have promised you. twelve brave sons of noble trojans
shall the flames consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall
devour the flesh of hector son of priam."

thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of hector, for
jove's daughter venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him
with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when
achilles was dragging him about. phoebus apollo moreover sent a dark
cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

now the pyre about dead patroclus would not kindle. achilles therefore
bethought him
 
 ___________________________
 
e had said, and put on their
shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.

the son of peleus then offered prizes for speed in running--a
mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. it would hold six
measures, and far exceeded all others in the whole world for beauty; it
was the work of cunning artificers in sidon, and had been brought into
port by phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it
to thoas. eueneus son of jason had given it to patroclus in ransom of
priam's son lycaon, and achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of
his comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. for the second
prize he offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there
was to be half a talent of gold. he then rose and said among the
argives, "stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

forthwith uprose fleet ajax son of oileus, with cunning ulysses, and
nestor's son antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of his
time. they stood side by side 
 
 ___________________________
 
e son of
atreus, king of men agamemnon, and meriones, stalwart squire of
idomeneus. but achilles spoke saying, "son of atreus, we know how far
you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take
the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let
us give the spear to meriones; this at least is what i should myself
wish."

king agamemnon assented. so he gave the bronze spear to meriones, and
handed the goodly cauldron to talthybius his esquire.



book xxiv

  priam ransoms the body of hector--hector's funeral.

the assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to his
own ship. there they made ready their supper, and then bethought them
of the blessed boon of sleep; but achilles still wept for thinking of
his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could take no
hold upon him. this way and that did he turn as he yearned after the
might and manfulness of patroclus; he thought of all they had done
together, and all they had gone thro
 
 ___________________________
 
e disfigured, for he
pitied the man, dead though he now was; therefore he shielded him with
his golden aegis continually, that he might take no hurt while achilles
was dragging him.

thus shamefully did achilles in his fury dishonour hector; but the
blessed gods looked down in pity from heaven, and urged mercury, slayer
of argus, to steal the body. all were of this mind save only juno,
neptune, and jove's grey-eyed daughter, who persisted in the hate which
they had ever borne towards ilius with priam and his people; for they
forgave not the wrong done them by alexandrus in disdaining the
goddesses who came to him when he was in his sheepyards, and preferring
her who had offered him a wanton to his ruin.

when, therefore, the morning of the twelfth day had now come, phoebus
apollo spoke among the immortals saying, "you gods ought to be ashamed
of yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. did not hector burn you
thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished goats? and now dare you not
rescue ev
 
 ___________________________
 
en his dead body, for his wife to look upon, with his mother
and child, his father priam, and his people, who would forthwith commit
him to the flames, and give him his due funeral rites? so, then, you
would all be on the side of mad achilles, who knows neither right nor
ruth? he is like some savage lion that in the pride of his great
strength and daring springs upon men's flocks and gorges on them. even
so has achilles flung aside all pity, and all that conscience which at
once so greatly banes yet greatly boons him that will heed it. a man
may lose one far dearer than achilles ha
 
 ___________________________
 
arest to the gods,
as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. never was my
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we claim of right. i shall therefore permit the body of
mighty hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without achilles
coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside him. let
some one of you, therefore, send thetis to me, and i will impart my
counsel to her, namely that achilles is to accept a ransom from priam,
and give up the body."

on this iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message. down
she plunged into the dark sea midway between samos and rocky imbrus;
the waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank into the bottom
as the lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is sped to carry death to
fishes. she found thetis sitting in a great cave with the other
sea-goddesses gathered round her; there she sat in the midst of them
weeping for her noble son who was to fall far from his own lan
 
 ___________________________
 
of cities and the
body of hector. the gods would have mercury slayer of argus steal the
body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, i will
concede such honour to your son as i will now tell you. go, then, to
the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry
with him, and that i am myself more angry than them all, in that he
keeps hector at the ships and will not give him up. he may thus fear me
and let the body go. at the same time i will send iris to great priam
to bid him go to the ships of the achaeans, and ransom his son, taking
with him such gifts for achilles as may give him satisfaction."

silver-footed thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down
she darted from the topmost summits of olympus. she went to her son's
tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades
round him were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had
killed a great woolly sheep. his mother sat down beside him and
caressed him with he
 
 ___________________________
 
an them all, in that you keep hector
at the ships and will not give him up. therefore let him go, and accept
a ransom for his body."

and achilles answered, "so be it. if olympian jove of his own motion
thus commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the body away."

thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long discourse
with one another. meanwhile the son of saturn sent iris to the strong
city of ilius. "go," said he, "fleet iris, from the mansions of
olympus, and tell king priam in ilius, that he is to go to the ships of
the achaeans and free the body of his dear son. he is to take such
gifts with him as shall give satisfaction to achilles, and he is to go
alone, with no other trojan, save only some honoured servant who may
drive his mules and waggon, and bring back the body of him whom noble
achilles has slain. let him have no thought nor fear of death in his
heart, for we will send the slayer of argus to escort him, and bring
him within the tent of achilles. achilles
 
 ___________________________
 
 will not kill him nor let
another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he
will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

on this iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her message. she
went to priam's house, and found weeping and lamentation therein. his
sons were seated round their father in the outer courtyard, and their
raiment was wet with tears: the old man sat in the midst of them with
his mantle wrapped close about his body, and his head and neck all
covered with the filth which he had clutched as he lay grovelling in
the mire. his daughters and his sons' wives went wailing about the
house, as they thought of the many and brave men who lay dead, slain by
the argives. the messenger o
 
 ___________________________
 
f jove stood by priam and spoke softly to
him, but fear fell upon him as she did so. "take heart," she said,
"priam offspring of dardanus, take heart and fear not. i bring no evil
tidings, but am minded well towards you. i come as a messenger from
jove, who though he be not near, takes thought for you and pities you.
the lord of olympus bids you go and ransom noble hector, and take with
you such gifts as shall give satisfaction to achilles. you are to go
alone, with no trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive
your mules and waggon, and bring back to the city the body of him whom
noble achilles h
 
 ___________________________
 
as slain. you are to have no thought, nor fear of
death, for jove will send the slayer of argus to escort you. when he
has brought you within achilles' tent, achilles will not kill you nor
let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and
he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and priam told his sons to
get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast upon
the top of its bed. then he went down into his fragrant store-room,
high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were
kept, and he called hecuba his wife. "wife," said he, "a messenger has
come to me from olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of the
achaeans to ransom my dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall give
satisfaction to achilles. what think you of this matter? for my ow
 
 ___________________________
 
 he will know neither respect nor pity.
let us then weep hector from afar here in our own house, for when i
gave him birth the threads of overruling fate were spun for him that
dogs should eat his flesh far from his parents, in the house of that
terrible man on whose liver i would fain fasten and devour it. thus
would i avenge my son, who showed no cowardice when achilles slew him,
and thought neither of flight nor of avoiding battle as he stood in
defence of trojan men and trojan women."

then priam said, "i would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as a bird
of ill omen in my house, for you will not move me. had it been some
mortal man who had sent me some prophet or priest who divines from
sacrifice--i should have deemed him false and have given him no heed;
but now i have heard the goddess and seen her face to face, therefore i
will go and her saying shall not be in vain. if it be my fate to die at
the ships of the achaeans even so would i have it; let achilles slay
me, if i may but fir
 
 ___________________________
 
nd eleven cubits
long, to bind the yoke to the pole; they bound it on at the far end of
the pole, and put the ring over the upright pin making it fast with
three turns of the band on either side the knob, and bending the thong
of the yoke beneath it. this done, they brought from the store-chamber
the rich ransom that was to purchase the body of hector, and they set
it all orderly on the waggon; then they yoked the strong harness-mules
which the mysians had on a time given as a goodly present to priam; but
for priam himself they yoked horses which the old king had bred, and
kept for his own use.

thus heedfully did priam and his servant see to the yolking of their
cars at the palace. then hecuba came to them all sorrowful, with a
golden goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might make a
drink-offering before they set out. she stood in front of the horses
and said, "take this, make a drink-offering to father jove, and since
you are minded to go to the ships in spite of me, pray that you
 
 ___________________________
 
ack from the hands of your enemies. pray to the son of
saturn lord of the whirlwind, who sits on ida and looks down over all
troy, pray him to send his swift messenger on your right hand, the bird
of omen which is strongest and most dear to him of all birds, that you
may see it with your own eyes and trust it as you go forth to the ships
of the danaans. if all-seeing jove will not send you this messenger,
however set upon it you may be, i would not have you go to the ships of
the argives."

and priam answered, "wife, i will do as you desire me; it is well to
lift hands in prayer to jove, if so be he may have mercy upon me."

with this the old man bade the serving-woman pour pure water over his
hands, and the woman came, bearing the water in a bowl. he washed his
hands and took the cup from his wife; then he made the drink-offering
and prayed, standing in the middle of the courtyard and turning his
eyes to heaven. "father jove," he said, "that rulest from ida, most
glorious and most great, g
 
 ___________________________
 
er gateway and under
the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. before him went the mules
drawing the four-wheeled waggon, and driven by wise idaeus; behind
these were the horses, which the old man lashed with his whip and drove
swiftly through the city, while his friends followed after, wailing and
lamenting for him as though he were on his road to death. as soon as
they had come down from the city and had reached the plain, his sons
and sons-in-law who had followed him went back to ilius.

but priam and idaeus as they showed out upon the plain did not escape
the ken of all-seeing jove, who looked down upon the old man and pitied
him; then he spoke to his son mercury and said, "mercury, for it is you
who are the most disposed to escort men on their way, and to hear those
whom you will hear, go, and so conduct priam to the ships of the
achaeans that no other of the danaans shall see him nor take note of
him until he reach the son of peleus."

thus he spoke and mercury, guide and guardian, sl
 
 ___________________________
 
ayer of argus, did as
he was told. forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with
which he could fly like the wind over land and sea; he took the wand
with which he seals men's eyes in sleep, or wakes them just as he
pleases, and flew holding it in his hand till he came to troy and to
the hellespont. to look at, he was like a young man of noble birth in
the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
face.

now when priam and idaeus had driven past the great tomb of ilius, they
stayed their mules and horses that they might drink in the river, for
the shades of night were falling, when, therefore, idaeus saw mercury
standing near them he said to priam, "take heed, descendant of
dardanus; here is matter which demands consideration. i see a man who i
think will presently fall upon us; let us fly with our horses, or at
least embrace his knees and implore him to take compassion upon us?"

when he heard this the old m
 
 ___________________________
 
rses in the dead of night when other men are asleep?
are you not afraid of the fierce achaeans who are hard by you, so cruel
and relentless? should some one of them see you bearing so much
treasure through the darkness of the flying night, what would not your
state then be? you are no longer young, and he who is with you is too
old to protect you from those who would attack you. for myself, i will
do you no harm, and i will defend you from any one else, for you remind
me of my own father."

and priam answered, "it is indeed as you say, my dear son; nevertheless
some god has held his hand over me, in that he has sent such a wayfarer
as yourself to meet me so opportunely; you are so comely in mien and
figure, and your judgement is so excellent that you must come of
blessed parents."

then said the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, "sir, all that you
have said is right; but tell me and tell me true, are you taking this
rich treasure to send it to a foreign people where it may be safe, or
ar
 
 ___________________________
 
e you all leaving strong ilius in dismay now that your son has fallen
who was the bravest man among you and was never lacking in battle with
the achaeans?"

and priam said, "who are you, my friend, and who are your parents, that
you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy son?"

the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, answered him, "sir, you would
prove me, that you question me about noble hector. many a time have i
set eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the argives to their
ships and putting them to the sword. we stood still and marvelled, for
achilles in his anger with the son of atreus suffered us not to fight.
i am his squire, and came with
 
 ___________________________
 
 him in the same ship. i am a myrmidon,
and my father's name is polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as
you are; he has six sons besides myself, and i am the seventh. we cast
lots, and it fell upon me to sail hither with achilles. i am now come
from the ships on to the plain, for with daybreak the achaeans will set
battle in array about the city. they chafe at doing nothing, and are so
eager that their princes cannot hold them back."

then answered priam, "if you are indeed the squire of achilles son of
peleus, tell me now the whole truth. is my son still at the ships, or
has achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him to his hounds?"

"sir," replied the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, "neither hounds
nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying at the tents
by the ship of achilles, and though it is now twelve days that he has
lain there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the worms eaten him
although they feed on warriors.
 
 ___________________________
 
u so carefully whether by sea or land, that no one
should attack you through making light of him who was with you."

the bringer of good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing the
whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses. when
they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships, those
who were on guard had just been getting their suppers, and the slayer
of argus threw them all into a deep sleep. then he drew back the bolts
to open the gates, and took priam inside with the treasure he had upon
his waggon. ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of
peleus for which the myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built
for their king; when they had built it they thatched it with coarse
tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and all round it
they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes set close
together. the gate was barred with a single bolt of pine which it took
three men to force into its place, and three to dr
 
 ___________________________
 
eleus. then he sprang from the chariot on to
the ground and said, "sir, it is i, immortal mercury, that am come with
you, for my father sent me to escort you. i will now leave you, and
will not enter into the presence of achilles, for it might anger him
that a god should befriend mortal men thus openly. go you within, and
embrace the knees of the son of peleus: beseech him by his father, his
lovely mother, and his son; thus you may move him."

with these words mercury went back to high olympus. priam sprang from
his chariot to the ground, leaving idaeus where he was, in charge of
the mules and horses. the old man went straight into the house where
achilles, loved of the gods, was sitting. there he found him with his
men seated at a distance from him: only two, the hero automedon, and
alcimus of the race of mars, were busy in attendance about his person,
for he had but just done eating and drinking, and the table was still
there. king priam entered without their seeing him, and going right u
 
 ___________________________
 
p
to achilles he clasped his knees and kissed the dread murderous hands
that had slain so many of his sons.

as when some cruel spite has befallen a man that he should have killed
some one in his own country, and must fly to a great man's protection
in a land of strangers, and all marvel who see him, even so did
achilles marvel as he beheld priam. the others looked one to another
and marvelled also, but priam besought achilles saying, "think of your
father, o achilles like unto the gods, who is such even as i am, on the
sad threshold of old age. it may be that those who dwell near him
harass him, and there is none to keep war and ruin from him. yet when
he hears of you being still alive, he is glad, and his days are full of
hope that he shall see his dear son come home to him from troy; but i,
wretched man that i am, had the bravest in all troy for my sons, and
there is not one of them left. i had f
 
 ___________________________
 
mars laid low, and hector, him who was alone left, him who was
the guardian of the city and ourselves, him have you lately slain;
therefore i am now come to the ships of the achaeans to ransom his body
from you with a great ransom. fear, o achilles, the wrath of heaven;
think on your own father and have compassion upon me, who am the more
pitiable, for i have steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled
himself before me, and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew
my son."

thus spoke priam, and the heart of achilles yearned as he bethought him
of his father. he took the old man's hand and moved him gently away.
the two wept bitterly--priam, as he lay at achilles' feet, weeping for
hector, and achilles now for his father and now for patroclus, till the
house was filled with their lamentation. but when achilles was now
sated with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he
left his seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white
hair and beard; then he
 
 ___________________________
 
endowed him with all good things from
his birth upwards, for he reigned over the myrmidons excelling all men
in prosperity and wealth, and mortal though he was they gave him a
goddess for his bride. but even on him too did heaven send misfortune,
for there is no race of royal children born to him in his house, save
one son who is doomed to die all untimely; nor may i take care of him
now that he is growing old, for i must stay here at troy to be the bane
of you and your children. and you too, o priam, i have heard that you
were aforetime happy. they say that in wealth and plenitude of
offspring you surpassed all that is in lesbos, the realm of makar to
the northward, phrygia that is more inland, and those that dwell upon
the great hellespont; but from the day when the dwellers in heaven sent
this evil upon you, war and slaughter have been about your city
continually. bear up against it, and let there be some intervals in
your sorrow. mourn as you may for your brave son, you will take nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
g
by it. you cannot raise him from the dead, ere you do so yet another
sorrow shall befall you."

and priam answered, "o king, bid me not be seated, while hector is
still lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great ransom
which i have brought you, and give him to me at once that i may look
upon him. may you prosper with the ransom and reach your own land in
safety, seeing that you have suffered me to live and to look upon the
light of the sun."

achilles looked at him sternly and said, "vex me, sir, no longer; i am
of myself minded to give up the body of hector. my mother, daughter of
the o
 
 ___________________________
 
ld man of the sea, came to me from jove to bid me deliver it to
you. moreover i know well, o priam, and you cannot hide it, that some
god has brought you to the ships of the achaeans, for else, no man
however strong and in his prime would dare to come to our host; he
could neither pass our guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus
easily; therefore, provoke me no further, lest i sin against the word
of jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within my tents."

the old man feared him and obeyed. then the son of peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not al
 
 ___________________________
 
one, but with him went his
two squires automedon and alcimus who were closer to him than any
others of his comrades now that patroclus was no more. these unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. they lifted the ransom for hector's body from the
waggon, but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. then he
called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint it,
but he first took it to a place where priam should not see it, lest if
he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of his grief, and
enrage achilles, who might then kill him and sin a
 
 ___________________________
 
r, and he and his men then laid it on the waggon. he cried aloud
as he did so and called on the name of his dear comrade, "be not angry
with me, patroclus," he said, "if you hear even in the house of hades
that i have given hector to his father for a ransom. it has been no
unworthy one, and i will share it equitably with you."

achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right
angles to the one against which priam was sitting. "sir," he said,
"your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to
desire; you shall look upon him when you take him away at daybreak; for
the present let us prepare our supper. even lovely niobe had to think
about eating, though her twelve children--six daughters and six lusty
sons--had been all slain in her house. apollo killed the sons with
arrows from his silver bow, to punish niobe, and diana slew the
daughters, because niobe had vaunted herself against leto; she
 
 ___________________________
 
 he cost you."

with this achilles sprang from his seat and killed a sheep of silvery
whiteness, which his followers skinned and made ready all in due order.
they cut the meat carefully up into smaller pieces, spitted them, and
drew them off again when they were well roasted. automedon brought
bread in fair baskets and served it round the table, while achilles
dealt out the meat, and they laid their hands on the good things that
were before them. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
priam, descendant of dardanus, marvelled at the strength and beauty of
achilles for he was as a god to see, and achilles marvelled at priam as
he listened to him and looked upon his noble presence. when they had
gazed their fill priam spoke first. "and now, o king," he said, "take
me to my couch that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of
sleep. never once have my eyes been closed from the day your hands took
the life of my son; i have grovelled without ceasing in the mire of my
stable-yard, m
 
 ___________________________
 
aking moan and brooding over my countless sorrows. now,
moreover, i have eaten bread and drunk wine; hitherto i have tasted
nothing."

as he spoke achilles told his men and the women-servants to set beds in
the room that was in the gatehouse, and make them with good red rugs,
and spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for priam
and idaeus to wear. so the maids went out carrying a torch and got the
two beds ready in all haste. then achilles said laughingly to priam,
"dear sir, you shall lie outside, lest some counsellor of those who in
due course keep coming to advise with me should see you here in the
darkness of the flying night, and tell it to agamemnon. this might
cause delay in the delivery of the body. and now tell me and tell me
true, for how many days would you celebrate the funeral rites of noble
hector? tell me, that i may hold aloof from war and restrain the host."

and priam answered, "since, then, you suffer me to bury my noble son
with all d
 
 ___________________________
 
ue rites, do thus, achilles, and i shall be grateful. you
know how we are pent up within our city; it is far for us to fetch wood
from the mountain, and the people live in fear. nine days, therefore,
will we mourn hector in my house; on the tenth day we will bury him and
there shall be a public feast in his honour; on the eleventh we will
build a mound over his ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be need, we
will fight."

and achilles answered, "all, king priam, shall be as you have said. i
will stay our fighting for as long a time as you have named."

as he spoke he laid his hand on the old man's right wrist, in token
that he should have no fear; thus then did priam and his attendant
sleep there in the forecourt, full of thought, while achilles lay in an
inner room of the house, with fair briseis by his side.

and now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the livelong
night, but upon mercury alone, the bringer of good luck, sleep could
take 
 
 ___________________________
 
no hold for he was thinking all the time how to get king priam
away from the ships without his being seen by the strong force of
sentinels. he hovered therefore over priam's head and said, "sir, now
that achilles has spared your life, you seem to have no fear about
sleeping in the thick of your foes. you have paid a great ransom, and
have received the body of your son; were you still alive and a prisoner
the sons whom you have left at home would have to give three times as
much to free you; and so it would be if agamemnon and the other
achaeans were to know of your being here."

when he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant.
mercury then yoked 
 
 ___________________________
 
their horses and mules, and drove them quickly
through the host so that no man perceived them. when they came to the
ford of eddying xanthus, begotten of immortal jove, mercury went back
to high olympus, and dawn in robe of saffron began to break over all
the land. priam and idaeus then drove on toward the city lamenting and
making moan, and the mules drew the body of hector. no one neither man
nor woman saw them, till cassandra, fair as golden venus standing on
pergamus, caught sight of her dear father in his chariot, and his
servant that was the city's herald with him. then she saw him that was
lying upon the bier, drawn by the mules, and with a loud cry she went
about the city saying, "come hither trojans, men and women, and look on
hector; if ever you rejoi
 
 ___________________________
 
ced to see him coming from battle when he was
alive, look now on him that was the glory of our city and all our
people."

at this there was not man nor woman left in the city, so great a sorrow
had possessed them. hard by the gates they met priam as he was bringing
in the body. hector's wife and his mother were the first to mourn him:
they flew towards the waggon and laid their hands upon his head, while
the crowd stood weeping round them. they would have stayed before the
gates, weeping and lamenting the livelong day to the going down of the
sun, had not priam spoken to them from the chariot and said, "make way
for the mules to pass you. afterwards when i have taken the body home
you shall have your fill of weeping."

on this the peopl
 
 ___________________________
 
 and then
helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "hector,"
said she, "dearest of all my brothers-in-law--for i am wife to
alexandrus who brought me hither to troy--would that i had died ere he
did so--twenty years are come and gone since i left my home and came
from over the sea, but i have never heard one word of insult or
unkindness from you. when another would chide with me, as it might be
one of your brothers or sisters or of your brothers' wives, or my
mother-in-law--for priam was as kind to me as though he were my own
father--you would rebuke and check them with words of gentleness and
goodwill. therefore my tears flow both for you and for my unhappy self,
for there is no one else in troy who is kind to me, but all shrink and
shudder as they go by me."

she wept as she spoke and the vast crowd that was gathered round her
joined in her lament. then king priam spoke to them saying, "bring
wood, o trojans, to the city, and fear no cunning ambush of the
argives, for ach
 
 ___________________________
 
hen his brothers and
comrades with many a bitter tear gathered his white bones, wrapped them
in soft robes of purple, and laid them in a golden urn, which they
placed in a grave and covered over with large stones set close
together. then they built a barrow hurriedly over it keeping guard on
every side lest the achaeans should attack them before they had
finished. when they had heaped up the barrow they went back again into
the city, and being well assembled they held high feast in the house of
priam their king.

thus, then, did they celebrate the funeral of hector tamer of horses.
