; coronea, and the pastures of haliartus; plataea and glisas; the
fortress of thebes the less; holy onchestus with its famous grove of
neptune; arne rich in vineyards; midea, sacred nisa, and anthedon upon
the sea. from these there came fifty ships, and in each there were a
hundred and twenty young men of the boeotians.

ascalaphus and ialmenus, sons of mars, led the people that dwelt in
aspledon and orchomenus the realm of minyas. astyoche a noble maiden
bore them in the house of actor son of azeus; for she had gone with
mars secretly into an upper chamber, and he had lain with her. with
these there came thirty ships.

the phoceans were led by schedius and epistrophus, sons of mighty
iphitus the son of naubolus. these were they that held cyparissus,
rocky pytho, holy crisa, daulis, and panopeus; they also that dwelt in
anemorea and hyampolis, and about the waters of the river cephissus,
and lilaea by the springs of the cephissus; with their chieftains came
forty ships, and they marshalled
 
 ___________________________
 
in the crush, for he was
enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his
back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his
eyes turned dizzy. phoebus apollo beat the helmet from off his head,
and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where its horse-hair
plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. never indeed had that
helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect the head and
comely forehead of the godlike hero achilles. now, however, zeus
delivered it over to be worn by hector. nevertheless the end of hector
also was near. the bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was
broken in the hand of patroclus, while his shield that covered him from
head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and
apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.

on this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as
one dazed; whereon euphorbus son of panthous a dardanian, the best
spearman of his time, as also the fi