eadiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in
full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning. the
chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but
these came up presently. the son of saturn sent a portent of evil sound
about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to
send many a brave man hurrying down to hades.

the trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great hector, noble polydamas, aeneas who was honoured
by the trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of antenor,
polybus, agenor, and young acamas beauteous as a god. hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in
the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of
aegis-bearing jove.

and now as a band of reapers mow swathes o
 
 ___________________________
 
cross the trench.

but the horses dared not do so, and stood neighing upon its brink, for
the width frightened them. they could neither jump it nor cross it, for
it had overhanging banks all round upon either side, above which there
were the sharp stakes that the sons of the achaeans had planted so
close and strong as a defence against all who would assail it; a horse,
therefore, could not get into it and draw his chariot after him, but
those who were on foot kept trying their very utmost. then polydamas
went up to hector and said, "hector, and you other captains of the
trojans and allies, it is madness for us to try and drive our horses
across the trench; it will be very hard to cross, for it is full of
sharp stakes, and beyond these there is the wall. our horses therefore
cannot get down into it, and would be of no use if they did; moreover
it is a narrow place and we should come to harm. if, indeed, great jove
is minded to help the trojans, and in his anger will utterly destroy
the achaeans,
 
 ___________________________
 
 i would myself gladly see them perish now and here far
from argos; but if they should rally and we are driven back from the
ships pell-mell into the trench there will be not so much as a man get
back to the city to tell the tale. now, therefore, let us all do as i
say; let our squires hold our horses by the trench, but let us follow
hector in a body on foot, clad in full armour, and if the day of their
doom is at hand the achaeans will not be able to withstand us."

thus spoke polydamas and his saying pleased hector, who sprang in full
armour to the ground, and all the other trojans, when they saw him do
so, also left their chariots. each man then gave his horses over to his
charioteer in charge to hold them ready for him at the trench. then
they formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in
five bodies followed their leaders. those that went with hector and
polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined
to break through the wall and f
 
 ___________________________
 
and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man of them all. these
helped to array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged
straight at the danaans, for they felt sure that they would not hold
out longer and that they should themselves now fall upon the ships.

the rest of the trojans and their allies now followed the counsel of
polydamas but asius, son of hyrtacus, would not leave his horses and
his esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness he took them on with him
towards the ships, nor did he fail to come by his end in consequence.
nevermore was he to return to wind-beaten ilius, exulting in his
chariot and his horses; ere he could do so, death of ill-omened name
had overshadowed him and he had fallen by the spear of idomeneus the
noble son of deucalion. he had driven towards the left wing of the
ships, by which way the achaea
 
 ___________________________
 
de was scattered about, and he died fighting. he then slew
pylon and ormenus. leonteus, of the race of mars, killed hippomachus
the son of antimachus by striking him with his spear upon the girdle.
he then drew his sword and sprang first upon antiphates whom he killed
in combat, and who fell face upwards on the earth. after him he killed
menon, iamenus, and orestes, and laid them low one after the other.

while they were busy stripping the armour from these heroes, the youths
who were led on by polydamas and hector (and these were the greater
part and the most valiant of those that were trying to break through
the wall and fire the ships) were still standing by the trench,
uncertain what they should do; for they had seen a sign from heaven
when they had essayed to cross it--a soaring eagle that flew skirting
the left wing of their host, with a monstrous blood-red snake in its
talons still alive and struggling to escape. the snake was still bent
on revenge, wriggling and twisting itself backward
 
 ___________________________
 
s till it struck the
bird that held it, on the neck and breast; whereon the bird being in
pain, let it fall, dropping it into the middle of the host, and then
flew down the wind with a sharp cry. the trojans were struck with
terror when they saw the snake, portent of aegis-bearing jove, writhing
in the midst of them, and polydamas went up to hector and said,
"hector, at our councils of war you are ever given to rebuke me, even
when i speak wisely, as though it were not well, forsooth, that one of
the people should cross your will either in the field or at the council
board; you would have them support you always: nevertheless i will say
what i think will be best; let us not now go on to fight the danaans at
their ships, for i know what will happen if this soaring eagle which
skirted the left wing of our host with a monst
 
 ___________________________
 
t succeed in taking it home to her little ones, and so
will it be--with ourselves; even though by a mighty effort we break
through the gates and wall of the achaeans, and they give way before
us, still we shall not return in good order by the way we came, but
shall leave many a man behind us whom the achaeans will do to death in
defence of their ships. thus would any seer who was expert in these
matters, and was trusted by the people, read the portent."

hector looked fiercely at him and said, "polydamas, i like not of your
reading. you can find a better saying than this if you will. if,
however, you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed
you of your reason. you would have me pay no heed to the counsels of
jove, nor to the promises he made me--and he bowed his head in
confirmation; you bid me be ruled rather by the flight of wild-fowl.
what care i whether they fly towards dawn or dark, and whether they be
on my right hand or on my left? let us put our trust rather in the
cou
 
 ___________________________
 
had come to troy armed with bows, and with slings of twisted wool
from which they showered their missiles to break the ranks of the
trojans. the others, therefore, with their heavy armour bore the brunt
of the fight with the trojans and with hector, while the locrians shot
from behind, under their cover; and thus the trojans began to lose
heart, for the arrows threw them into confusion.

the trojans would now have been driven in sorry plight from the ships
and tents back to windy ilius, had not polydamas presently said to
hector, "hector, there is no persuading you to take advice. because
heaven has so richly endowed you with the arts of war, you think that
you must therefore excel others in counsel; but you cannot thus claim
preeminence in all things. heaven has made one man an excellent
soldier; of another it has made a dancer or a singer and player on the
lyre; while yet in another jove has implanted a wise understanding of
which men reap fruit to the saving of many, and he himself knows mor
 
 ___________________________
 
rmour, while others are fighting scattered and outnumbered near the
ships. draw back, therefore, and call your chieftains round you, that
we may advise together whether to fall now upon the ships in the hope
that heaven may vouchsafe us victory, or to beat a retreat while we can
yet safely do so. i greatly fear that the achaeans will pay us their
debt of yesterday in full, for there is one abiding at their ships who
is never weary of battle, and who will not hold aloof much longer."

thus spoke polydamas, and his words pleased hector well. he sprang in
full armour from his chariot and said, "polydamas, gather the
chieftains here; i will go yonder into the fight, but will return at
once when i have given them their orders."

he then sped onward, towering like a snowy mountain, and with a loud
cry flew through the ranks of the trojans and their allies. when they
heard his voice they all hastened to gather round polydamas, the
excellent son of panthous, but hector kept on among the foremost,
looki
 
 ___________________________
 
s and king helenus alone have left the
field, wounded both of them in the hand, but the son of saturn saved
them alive. now, therefore, lead on where you would have us go, and we
will follow with right goodwill; you shall not find us fail you in so
far as our strength holds out, but no man can do more than in him lies,
no matter how willing he may be."

with these words he satisfied his brother, and the two went towards the
part of the battle where the fight was thickest, about cebriones, brave
polydamas, phalces, orthaeus, godlike polyphetes, palmys, ascanius, and
morys son of hippotion, who had come from fertile ascania on the
preceding day to relieve other troops. then jove urged them on to
fight. they flew forth like the blasts of some fierce wind that strike
earth in the van of a thunderstorm--they buffet the salt sea into an
uproar; many and mighty are the great waves that come crashing in one
after the other upon the shore with their arching heads all crested
with foam--even so did rank 
 
 ___________________________
 
no man can help being dismayed if he is standing
near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing--even so did hector
fall to earth and bite the dust. his spear fell from his hand, but his
shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze armour
rang about him.

the sons of the achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him,
hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the trojans,
but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered
by the princes polydamas, aeneas, agenor, sarpedon captain of the
lycians, and noble glaucus. of the others, too, there was not one who
was unmindful of him, and they held their round shields over him to
cover him. his comrades then lifted him off the ground and bore him
away from the battle to the place where his horses stood waiting for
him at the rear of the fight with their driver and the chariot; these
then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. when they
reached the ford of the fair stream of xanth
 
 ___________________________
 
for he was still stunned by the blow.

when the argives saw hector leaving the field, they took heart and set
upon the trojans yet more furiously. ajax fleet son of oileus began by
springing on satnius son of enops, and wounding him with his spear: a
fair naiad nymph had borne him to enops as he was herding cattle by the
banks of the river satnioeis. the son of oileus came up to him and
struck him in the flank so that he fell, and a fierce fight between
trojans and danaans raged round his body. polydamas son of panthous
drew near to avenge him, and wounded prothoenor son of areilycus on the
right shoulder; the terrible spear went right through his shoulder, and
he clutched the earth as he fell in the dust. polydamas vaunted loudly
over him saying, "again i take it that the spear has not sped in vain
from the strong hand of the son of panthous; an argive has caught it in
his body, and it will serve him for a staff as he goes down into the
house of hades."

the argives were maddened by this boast
 
 ___________________________
 
ing. ajax son of telamon was
more angry than any, for the man had fallen close beside him; so he
aimed at polydamas as he was retreating, but polydamas saved himself by
swerving aside and the spear struck archelochus son of antenor, for
heaven counselled his destruction; it struck him where the head springs
from the neck at the top joint of the spine, and severed both the
tendons at the back of the head. his head, mouth, and nostrils reached
the ground long before his legs and knees could do so, and ajax shouted
to polydamas saying, "think, polydamas, and tell me truly whether this
man is not as well worth killing as prothoenor was: he seems r
 
 ___________________________
 
re scattered and they killed one another where
they best could. hector killed stichius and arcesilaus, the one, leader
of the boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of menestheus.
aeneas killed medon and iasus. the first was bastard son to oileus, and
brother to ajax, but he lived in phylace away from his own country, for
he had killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother eriopis whom oileus
had married. iasus had become a leader of the athenians, and was son of
sphelus the son of boucolos. polydamas killed mecisteus, and polites
echius, in the front of the battle, while agenor slew clonius. paris
struck deiochus from behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as he
was flying among the foremost, and the point of the spear went clean
through him.

while they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the achaeans
were flying pell-mell to the trench and the set stakes, and were forced
back within their wall. hector then cried out to the trojans, "forward
to the ships, and let the spoils be. 
 
 ___________________________
 
eft in him. ajax shook with
rage and said to his brother, "teucer, my good fellow, our trusty
comrade the son of mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from
cythera and whom we honoured as much as our own parents. hector has
just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which
phoebus apollo gave you."

teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver in
his hands. forthwith he showered his arrows on the trojans, and hit
cleitus the son of pisenor, comrade of polydamas the noble son of
panthous, with the reins in his hands as he was attending to his
horses; he was in the middle of the very thickest part of the fight,
doing good service to hector and the trojans, but evil had now come
upon him, and not one of those who were fain to do so could avert it,
for the arrow struck him on the back of the neck. he fell from his
chariot and his horses shook the empty car as they swerved aside. king
polydamas saw what had happened, and was the first to come up to the
hor
 
 ___________________________
 
ing on his whole host to
fire our fleet, and bidding them remember that they are not at a dance
but in battle? our only course is to fight them with might and main; we
had better chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and
without issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves."

with these words he put life and soul into them all. hector then killed
schedius son of perimedes, leader of the phoceans, and ajax killed
laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to antenor. polydamas killed
otus of cyllene a comrade of the son of phyleus and chief of the proud
epeans. when meges saw this he sprang upon him, but polydamas crouched
down, and he missed him, for apollo would not suffer the son of
panthous to fall in battle; but the spear hit croesmus in the middle of
his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and meges stripped
him of his armour. at that moment the valiant soldier dolops son of
lampus sprang upon lampus was son of laomedon and noted for his valour,
while
 
 ___________________________
 
 and grant me strength both to cheer on the lycians and to fight
along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the lycian
captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. sarpedon leader of the lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of lycia; mars has laid
him low by the spear of patroclus. stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat 
 
 ___________________________
 
k cloud of grief fell upon hector as he heard, and he made his way
to the front clad in full armour. thereon the son of saturn seized his
bright tasselled aegis, and veiled ida in cloud: he sent forth his
lightnings and his thunders, and as he shook his aegis he gave victory
to the trojans and routed the achaeans.

the panic was begun by peneleos the boeotian, for while keeping his
face turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear on the
upper part of the shoulder; a spear thrown by polydamas had grazed the
top of the bone, for polydamas had come up to him and struck him from
close at hand. then hector in close combat struck leitus son of noble
alectryon in the hand by the wrist, and disabled him from fighting
further. he looked about him in dismay, knowing that never again should
he wield spear in battle with the trojans. while hector was in pursuit
of leitus, idomeneus struck him on the breastplate over his chest near
the nipple; but the spear broke in the shaft, and the trojans c
 
 ___________________________
 
s into
battle, but his return he was not to welcome.

then juno sent the busy sun, loth though he was, into the waters of
oceanus; so he set, and the achaeans had rest from the tug and turmoil
of war.

now the trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoked their
horses and gathered in assembly before preparing their supper. they
kept their feet, nor would any dare to sit down, for fear had fallen
upon them all because achilles had shown himself after having held
aloof so long from battle. polydamas son of panthous was first to
speak, a man of judgement, who alone among them could look both before
and after. he was comrade to hector, and they had been born upon the
same night; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed
them thus:--

"look to it well, my friends; i would urge you to go back now to your
city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from
our walls. so long as this man was at enmity with agamemnon the
achaeans were easier to deal with, and i wo
 
 ___________________________
 
ngth in counsel during the night, and
the great gates with the doors that close them will protect the city.
at dawn we can arm and take our stand on the walls; he will then rue it
if he sallies from the ships to fight us. he will go back when he has
given his horses their fill of being driven all whithers under our
walls, and will be in no mind to try and force his way into the city.
neither will he ever sack it, dogs shall devour him ere he do so."

hector looked fiercely at him and answered, "polydamas, your words are
not to my liking in that you bid us go back and be pent within the
city. have you not had enough of being cooped up behind walls? in the
old-days the city of priam was famous the whole world over for its
wealth of gold and bronze, but our treasures are wasted out of our
houses, and much goods have been sold away to phrygia and fair meonia,
for the hand of jove has been laid heavily upon us. now, therefore,
that the son of scheming saturn has vouchsafed me to win glory here and
t
 
 ___________________________
 
will arm and fight about the ships;
granted that achilles has again come forward to defend them, let it be
as he will, but it shall go hard with him. i shall not shun him, but
will fight him, to fall or conquer. the god of war deals out like
measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain."

thus spoke hector; and the trojans, fools that they were, shouted in
applause, for pallas minerva had robbed them of their understanding.
they gave ear to hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words of
polydamas no man would heed. they took their supper throughout the
host, and meanwhile through the whole night the achaeans mourned
patroclus, and the son of peleus led them in their lament. he laid his
murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again and
again as a bearded lion when a man who was chasing deer has robbed him
of his young in some dense forest; when the lion comes back he is
furious, and searches dingle and dell to track the hunter if he can
find him, for he is mad with rage-
 
 ___________________________
 
moved not
the heart of hector, and he stood his ground awaiting huge achilles as
he drew nearer towards him. as a serpent in its den upon the mountains,
full fed with deadly poisons, waits for the approach of man--he is
filled with fury and his eyes glare terribly as he goes writhing round
his den--even so hector leaned his shield against a tower that jutted
out from the wall and stood where he was, undaunted.

"alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, "if i go
within the gates, polydamas will be the first to heap reproach upon me,
for it was he that urged me to lead the trojans back to the city on
that awful night when achilles again came forth against us. i would not
listen, but it would have been indeed better if i had done so. now that
my folly has destroyed the host, i dare not look trojan men and trojan
women in the face, lest a worse man should say, 'hector has ruined us
by his self-confidence.' surely it would be better for me to return
after having fought achilles and s