r horses stood each by his own
chariot, champing lotus and wild celery. the chariots were housed under
cover, but their owners, for lack of leadership, wandered hither and
thither about the host and went not forth to fight.

thus marched the host like a consuming fire, and the earth groaned
beneath them when the lord of thunder is angry and lashes the land
about typhoeus among the arimi, where they say typhoeus lies. even so
did the earth groan beneath them as they sped over the plain.

and now iris, fleet as the wind, was sent by jove to tell the bad news
among the trojans. they were gathered in assembly, old and young, at
priam's gates, and iris came close up to priam, speaking with the voice
of priam's son polites, who, being fleet of foot, was stationed as
watchman for the trojans on the tomb of old aesyetes, to look out for
any sally of the achaeans. in his likeness iris spoke, saying, "old
man, you talk idly, as in time of peace, while war is at hand. i have
been in many a battle, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
"

the trojans and achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they
thought that they should now have rest. they backed their chariots
toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying it
down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a
little space between them. hector sent two messengers to the city to
bring the lambs and to bid priam come, while agamemnon told talthybius
to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as agamemnon had
said.

meanwhile iris went to helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of
the son of antenor, for helicaon, son of antenor, had married laodice,
the fairest of priam's daughters. she found her in her own room,
working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering
the battles between trojans and achaeans, that mars had made them fight
for her sake. iris then came close up to her and said, "come hither,
child, and see the strange doings of the trojans and achaeans. till now
they have been warring u
 
 ___________________________
 
s ours, and are
immortal. venus screamed aloud, and let her son fall, but phoebus
apollo caught him in his arms, and hid him in a cloud of darkness, lest
some danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him; and
diomed shouted out as he left her, "daughter of jove, leave war and
battle alone, can you not be contented with beguiling silly women? if
you meddle with fighting you will get what will make you shudder at the
very name of war."

the goddess went dazed and discomfited away, and iris, fleet as the
wind, drew her from the throng, in pain and with her fair skin all
besmirched. she found fierce mars waiting on the left of the battle,
with his spear and his two fleet steeds resting on a cloud; whereon she
fell on her knees before her brother and implored him to let her have
his horses. "dear brother," she cried, "save me, and give me your
horses to take me to olympus where the gods dwell. i am badly wounded
by a mortal, the son of tydeus, who would now fight even with father
jo
 
 ___________________________
 
ve."

thus she spoke, and mars gave her his gold-bedizened steeds. she
mounted the chariot sick and sorry at heart, while iris sat beside her
and took the reins in her hand. she lashed her horses on and they flew
forward nothing loth, till in a trice they were at high olympus, where
the gods have their dwelling. there she stayed them, unloosed them from
the chariot, and gave them their ambrosial forage; but venus flung
herself on to the lap of her mother dione, who threw her arms about her
and caressed her, saying, "which of the heavenly beings has been
treating you in this way, as though you had been doing something w
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
they spilled the wine from their cups on to the ground, nor did any
dare drink till he had made offerings to the most mighty son of saturn.
then they laid themselves down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.



book viii

  jove forbids the gods to interfere further--there is an even
  fight till midday, but then jove inclines the scales of victory
  in favour of the trojans, who eventually chase the achaeans
  within their wall--juno and minerva set out to help the
  trojans: jove sends iris to turn them back, but later on
  he promises juno that she shall have her way in the end--hector's
  triumph is stayed by nightfall--the trojans bivouac on the plain.

now when morning, clad in her robe of saffron, had begun to suffuse
light over the earth, jove called the gods in council on the topmost
crest of serrated olympus. then he spoke and all the other gods gave
ear. "hear me," said he, "gods and goddesses, that i may speak even as
i am minded. let none of you neither goddess nor god 
 
 ___________________________
 
ming chariot, and grasped the spear so stout and sturdy and strong
with which she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. juno
lashed her horses, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew open
of their own accord--gates over which the hours preside, in whose hands
are heaven and olympus, either to open the dense cloud that hides them
or to close it. through these the goddesses drove their obedient steeds.

but father jove when he saw them from ida was very angry, and sent
winged iris with a message to them. "go," said he, "fleet iris, turn
them back, and see that they do not come near me, for if we come to
fighting there will be mischief. this is what i say, and this is what i
mean to do. i will lame their horses for them; i will hurl them from
their chariot, and will break it in pieces. it will take them all ten
years to heal the wounds my lightning shall inflict upon them; my
grey-eyed daughter will then learn what quarrelling with her father
means. i am less surprised an
 
 ___________________________
 
d angry with juno, for whatever i say she
always contradicts me."

with this iris went her way, fleet as the wind, from the heights of ida
to the lofty summits of olympus. she met the goddesses at the outer
gates of its many valleys and gave them her message. "what," said she,
"are you about? are you mad? the son of saturn forbids going. this is
what he says, and this is what he means to do, he will lame your horses for
you, he will hurl you from your chariot, and will break it in pieces.
it will take you all ten years to heal the wounds his lightning will
inflict upon you, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ps up her blood and gorges himself
upon her entrails--even so did king agamemnon son of atreus pursue the
foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell before him.
many a man was flung headlong from his chariot by the hand of the son
of atreus, for he wielded his spear with fury.

but when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the
father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat,
thunderbolt in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained ida. he then
told iris of the golden wings to carry a message for him. "go," said
he, "fleet iris, and speak thus to hector--say that so long as he sees
agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the trojan ranks, he is
to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when
agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his
chariot, then will i vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the
ships and night falls at the going down of the sun."

iris hearkened and obeyed. down she wen
 
 ___________________________
 
. then she said, "hector son of priam, peer of gods in
counsel, father jove has sent me to bear you this message--so long as
you see agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the trojan ranks,
you are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle,
but when agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to
his chariot, then will jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you
reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of the sun."

when she had thus spoken iris left him, and hector sprang full armed
from his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he went about
everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to fight, and stirring
the dread strife of battle. the trojans then wheeled round, and again
met the achaeans, while the argives on their part strengthened their
battalions. the battle was now in array and they stood face to face
with one another, agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness to
be ahead of all others.

tell me now ye mu
 
 ___________________________
 
h any doing of mine; it is
all of his own mere motion because he was sorry to see the achaeans
hard pressed at their ships: if i were advising him, i should tell him
to do as you bid him."

the sire of gods and men smiled and answered, "if you, juno, were
always to support me when we sit in council of the gods, neptune, like
it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of thinking. if,
then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the
rank and file of the gods, and tell iris and apollo lord of the bow,
that i want them--iris, that she may go to the achaean host and tell
neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and apollo, that he may send
hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of achilles son of peleus. achilles will
then send his comrade patroclus into battle, and hector will kill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warrior
 
 ___________________________
 
after having caused infinite mischief to all us others? jove would
instantly leave the trojans and achaeans to themselves; he would come
to olympus to punish us, and would grip us up one after another, guilty
or not guilty. therefore lay aside your anger for the death of your
son; better men than he have either been killed already or will fall
hereafter, and one cannot protect every one's whole family."

with these words she took mars back to his seat. meanwhile juno called
apollo outside, with iris the messenger of the gods. "jove," she said
to them, "desires you to go to him at once on mt. ida; when you have
seen him you are to do as he may then bid you."

thereon juno left them and resumed her seat inside, while iris and
apollo made all haste on their way. when they reached many-fountained
ida, mother of wild beasts, they found jove seated on topmost gargarus
with a fragrant cloud encircling his head as with a diadem. they stood
before his presence, and he was pleased with them for havi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng been so
quick in obeying the orders his wife had given them.

he spoke to iris first. "go," said he, "fleet iris, tell king neptune
what i now bid you--and tell him true. bid him leave off fighting, and
either join the company of the gods, or go down into the sea. if he
takes no heed and disobeys me, let him consider well whether he is
strong enough to hold his own against me if i attack him. i am older
and much stronger than he is; yet he is not afraid to set himself up as
on a level with myself, of whom all the other gods stand in awe."

iris, fleet as the wind, obeyed him, and as the cold hail or snowf
 
 ___________________________
 
my
dwelling in the sea for evermore; hades took the darkness of the realms
under the earth, while air and sky and clouds were the portion that
fell to jove; but earth and great olympus are the common property of
all. therefore i will not walk as jove would have me. for all his
strength, let him keep to his own third share and be contented without
threatening to lay hands upon me as though i were nobody. let him keep
his bragging talk for his own sons and daughters, who must perforce
obey him."

iris fleet as the wind then answered, "am i really, neptune, to take
this daring and unyielding message to jove, or will you reconsider your
answer? sensible people are open to argument, and you know that the
erinyes always range themselves on the side of the older person."

neptune answered, "goddess iris, your words have been spoken in season.
it is well when a messenger shows so much discretion. nevertheless it
cuts me to the very heart that any one should rebuke so angrily another
who is his own
 
 ___________________________
 
 the trojans, and thrice did the two
ajaxes, clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him from off the
body; but all undaunted he would now charge into the thick of the
fight, and now again he would stand still and cry aloud, but he would
give no ground. as upland shepherds that cannot chase some famished
lion from a carcase, even so could not the two ajaxes scare hector son
of priam from the body of patroclus.

and now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable
glory, had not iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger from
olympus to the son of peleus and bidden him arm. she came secretly
without the knowledge of jove and of the other gods, for juno sent her,
and when she had got close to him she said, "up, son of peleus,
mightiest of all mankind; rescue patroclus about whom this fearful
fight is now raging by the ships. men are killing one another, the
danaans in defence of the dead body, while the trojans are trying to
hale it away, and take it to windy ilius:
 
 ___________________________
 
 hector is the most furious of
them all; he is for cutting the head from the body and fixing it on the
stakes of the wall. up, then, and bide here no longer; shrink from the
thought that patroclus may become meat for the dogs of troy. shame on
you, should his body suffer any kind of outrage."

and achilles said, "iris, which of the gods was it that sent you to me?"

iris answered, "it was juno the royal spouse of jove, but the son of
saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of the
immortals who dwell on the snowy summits of olympus."

then fleet achilles answered her saying, "how can i go up into the
battle? they have my armour. my mother forbade me to arm till i should
see her come, for she promised to bring me goodly armour from vulcan; i
know no man whose arms i can put on, save only the shield of ajax son
of telamon, and he surely must be f
 
 ___________________________
 
ighting in the front rank and
wielding his spear about the body of dead patroclus."

iris said, "we know that your armour has been taken, but go as you are;
go to the deep trench and show yourself before the trojans, that they
may fear you and cease fighting. thus will the fainting sons of the
achaeans gain some brief breathing-time, which in battle may hardly be."

iris left him when she had so spoken. but achilles dear to jove arose,
and minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong shoulders; she
crowned his head with a halo of golden cloud from which she kindled a
glow of gleaming fire. as the smoke that goes up into heaven from some
city that is being beleaguered on an island far out at sea--all day
long do men sally from the city and fight their hardest, and at the
going down of the sun the line of beacon-fires blazes forth, flaring
high for those th
 
 ___________________________
 
ud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

now the pyre about dead patroclus would not kindle. achilles therefore
bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two
winds boreas and zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. he made them
many drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come and
help him that the wood might make haste to kindle and the dead bodies
be consumed. fleet iris heard him praying and started off to fetch the
winds. they were holding high feast in the house of boisterous zephyrus
when iris came running up to the stone threshold of the house and stood
there, but as soon as they set eyes on her they all came towards her
and each of them called her to him, but iris would not sit down. "i
cannot stay," she said, "i must go back to the streams of oceanus and
the land of the ethiopians who are offering hecatombs to the immortals,
and i would have my share; bu
 
 ___________________________
 
or his offerings never failed me. never was my
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we claim of right. i shall therefore permit the body of
mighty hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without achilles
coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside him. let
some one of you, therefore, send thetis to me, and i will impart my
counsel to her, namely that achilles is to accept a ransom from priam,
and give up the body."

on this iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message. down
she plunged into the dark sea midway between samos and rocky imbrus;
the waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank into the bottom
as the lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is sped to carry death to
fishes. she found thetis sitting in a great cave with the other
sea-goddesses gathered round her; there she sat in the midst of them
weeping for her noble son who was to fall far from his own land, on the
rich plains of troy. iris we
 
 ___________________________
 
nt up to her and said, "rise thetis; jove,
whose counsels fail not, bids you come to him." and thetis answered,
"why does the mighty god so bid me? i am in great grief, and shrink
from going in and out among the immortals. still, i will go, and the
word that he may speak shall not be spoken in vain."

the goddess took her dark veil, than which there can be no robe more
sombre, and went forth with fleet iris leading the way before her. the
waves of the sea opened them a path, and when they reached the shore
they flew up into the heavens, where they found the all-seeing son of
saturn with the blessed gods that live for ever assembled near him.
minerva gave up her seat to her, and she sat down by the side of father
jove. juno then placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and spoke to her
in words of comfort, whereon thetis drank and gave her back the cup;
and the sire of gods and men was the first to sp
 
 ___________________________
 
hilles waster of cities and the
body of hector. the gods would have mercury slayer of argus steal the
body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, i will
concede such honour to your son as i will now tell you. go, then, to
the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry
with him, and that i am myself more angry than them all, in that he
keeps hector at the ships and will not give him up. he may thus fear me
and let the body go. at the same time i will send iris to great priam
to bid him go to the ships of the achaeans, and ransom his son, taking
with him such gifts for achilles as may give him satisfaction."

silver-footed thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down
she darted from the topmost summits of olympus. she went to her son's
tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades
round him were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had
killed a great woolly sheep. his mother sat down beside him and
cares
 
 ___________________________
 
,
for i come as a messenger from jove; he says that the gods are angry
with you, and himself more angry than them all, in that you keep hector
at the ships and will not give him up. therefore let him go, and accept
a ransom for his body."

and achilles answered, "so be it. if olympian jove of his own motion
thus commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the body away."

thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long discourse
with one another. meanwhile the son of saturn sent iris to the strong
city of ilius. "go," said he, "fleet iris, from the mansions of
olympus, and tell king priam in ilius, that he is to go to the ships of
the achaeans and free the body of his dear son. he is to take such
gifts with him as shall give satisfaction to achilles, and he is to go
alone, with no other trojan, save only some honoured servant who may
drive his mules and waggon, and bring back the body of him whom noble
achilles has slain. let him have no thought nor fear of death in his
hea
 
 ___________________________
 
rt, for we will send the slayer of argus to escort him, and bring
him within the tent of achilles. achilles will not kill him nor let
another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he
will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

on this iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her message. she
went to priam's house, and found weeping and lamentation therein. his
sons were seated round their father in the outer courtyard, and their
raiment was wet with tears: the old man sat in the midst of them with
his mantle wrapped close about his body, and his head and neck all
covered with the filth which he had clutched as he lay grovelling in
the mire. his daughters and his sons' wives went wailing about the
house, as they thought of t
 
 ___________________________
 
 achilles. you are to go
alone, with no trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive
your mules and waggon, and bring back to the city the body of him whom
noble achilles has slain. you are to have no thought, nor fear of
death, for jove will send the slayer of argus to escort you. when he
has brought you within achilles' tent, achilles will not kill you nor
let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and
he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and priam told his sons to
get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast upon
the top of its bed. then he went down into his fragrant store-room,
high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were
kept, and he called hecuba his wife. "wife," said he, "a messenger has
come to me from olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of the
achaeans to ransom my dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall give
satisfaction to a