nd most
valiant of those who were longing for the fray.

the dardanians were led by brave aeneas, whom venus bore to anchises,
when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain
slopes of ida. he was not alone, for with him were the two sons of
antenor, archilochus and acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.

they that dwelt in telea under the lowest spurs of mt. ida, men of
substance, who drink the limpid waters of the aesepus, and are of
trojan blood--these were led by pandarus son of lycaon, whom apollo had
taught to use the bow.

they that held adresteia and the land of apaesus, with pityeia, and the
high mountain of tereia--these were led by adrestus and amphius, whose
breastplate was of linen. these were the sons of merops of percote, who
excelled in all kinds of divination. he told them not to take part in
the war, but they gave him no heed, for fate lured them to destruction.

they that dwelt about percote and practius, with sestos, abydos, and
arisbe--these wer
 
 ___________________________
 
rilliant meteor which the son of scheming saturn has sent as a sign to
mariners or to some great army, and a fiery train of light follows in
its wake. the trojans and achaeans were struck with awe as they beheld,
and one would turn to his neighbour, saying, "either we shall again
have war and din of combat, or jove the lord of battle will now make
peace between us."

thus did they converse. then minerva took the form of laodocus, son of
antenor, and went through the ranks of the trojans to find pandarus,
the redoubtable son of lycaon. she found him standing among the
stalwart heroes who had followed him from the banks of the aesopus, so
she went close up to him and said, "brave son of lycaon, will you do as
i tell you? if you dare send an arrow at menelaus you will win honour
and thanks from all the trojans, and especially from prince
alexandrus--he would be the first to requite you very handsomely if he
could see menelaus mount his funeral pyre, slain by an arrow from your
hand. take your hom
 
 ___________________________
 
w that when you get home to your strong city of zelea you
will offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour."

his fool's heart was persuaded, and he took his bow from its case. this
bow was made from the horns of a wild ibex which he had killed as it
was bounding from a rock; he had stalked it, and it had fallen as the
arrow struck it to the heart. its horns were sixteen palms long, and a
worker in horn had made them into a bow, smoothing them well down, and
giving them tips of gold. when pandarus had strung his bow he laid it
carefully on the ground, and his brave followers held their shields
before him lest the achaeans should set upon him before he had shot
menelaus. then he opened the lid of his quiver and took out a winged
arrow that had not yet been shot, fraught with the pangs of death. he
laid the arrow on the string and prayed to lycian apollo, the famous
archer, vowing that when he got home to his strong city of zelea he
would offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour. 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed on earth near to one another, the one captain of
the thracians and the other of the epeans; and many another fell round
them.

and now no man would have made light of the fighting if he could have
gone about among it scatheless and unwounded, with minerva leading him
by the hand, and protecting him from the storm of spears and arrows.
for many trojans and achaeans on that day lay stretched side by side
face downwards upon the earth.



book v

  the exploits of diomed, who, though wounded by pandarus,
  continues fighting--he kills pandarus and wounds aeneas--venus
  rescues aeneas, but being wounded by diomed, commits him
  to the care of apollo and goes to olympus, where she is tended
  by her mother dione--mars encourages the trojans, and
  aeneas returns to the fight cured of his wound--minerva and
  juno help the achaeans, and by the advice of the former
  diomed wounds mars, who returns to olympus to get cured.

then pallas minerva put valour into the heart of diomed, son of tydeus,
t
 
 ___________________________
 
wo sons of priam, echemmon and chromius, as they
were both in one chariot. he sprang upon them as a lion fastens on the
neck of some cow or heifer when the herd is feeding in a coppice. for
all their vain struggles he flung them both from their chariot and
stripped the armour from their bodies. then he gave their horses to his
comrades to take them back to the ships.

when aeneas saw him thus making havoc among the ranks, he went through
the fight amid the rain of spears to see if he could find pandarus.
when he had found the brave son of lycaon he said, "pandarus, where is
now your bow, your winged arrows, and your renown as an archer, in
respect of which no man here can rival you nor is there any in lycia
that can beat you? lift then your hands to jove and send an arrow at
this fellow who is going so masterfully about, and has done such deadly
work among the trojans. he has killed many a brave man--unless indeed
he is some god who is angry with the trojans about their sacrifices,
and and has
 
 ___________________________
 
they expect
it they may be frightened, and refuse to take us out of the fight. the
son of tydeus will then kill both of us and take the horses. therefore
drive them yourself and i will be ready for him with my spear."

they then mounted the chariot and drove full-speed towards the son of
tydeus. sthenelus, son of capaneus, saw them coming and said to diomed,
"diomed, son of tydeus, man after my own heart, i see two heroes
speeding towards you, both of them men of might the one a skilful
archer, pandarus son of lycaon, the other, aeneas, whose sire is
anchises, while his mother is venus. mount the chariot and let us
retreat. do not, i pray you, press so furiously forward, or you may get
killed."

diomed looked angrily at him and answered: "talk not of flight, for i
shall not listen to you: i am of a race that knows neither flight nor
fear, and my limbs are as yet unwearied. i am in no mind to mount, but
will go against them even as i am; pallas minerva bids me be afraid of
no man, and even thou
 
 ___________________________
 
hield of the son of tydeus; the bronze point pierced it and passed on
till it reached the breastplate. thereon the son of lycaon shouted out
and said, "you are hit clean through the belly; you will not stand out
for long, and the glory of the fight is mine."

but diomed all undismayed made answer, "you have missed, not hit, and
before you two see the end of this matter one or other of you shall
glut tough-shielded mars with his blood."

with this he hurled his spear, and minerva guided it on to pandarus's
nose near the eye. it went crashing in among his white teeth; the
bronze point cut through the root of his tongue, coming out under his
chin, and his glistening armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground. the horses started aside for fear, and he was
reft of life and strength.

aeneas sprang from his chariot armed with shield and spear, fearing
lest the achaeans should carry off the body. he bestrode it as a lion
in the pride of strength, with shield and spear before him 
 
 ___________________________
 
 was as loud as that of fifty men together.
"argives," she cried; "shame on cowardly creatures, brave in semblance
only; as long as achilles was fighting, if his spear was so deadly that
the trojans dared not show themselves outside the dardanian gates, but
now they sally far from the city and fight even at your ships."

with these words she put heart and soul into them all, while minerva
sprang to the side of the son of tydeus, whom she found near his
chariot and horses, cooling the wound that pandarus had given him. for
the sweat caused by the hand that bore the weight of his shield
irritated the hurt: his arm was weary with pain, and he was lifting up
the strap to wipe away the blood. the goddess laid her hand on the yoke
of his horses and said, "the son of tydeus is not such another as his
father. tydeus was a little man, but he could fight, and rushed madly
into the fray even when i told him not to do so. when he went all
unattended as envoy to the city of thebes among the cadmeans, i bad