ged through them, horse and foot, with the tramp as
of a great multitude.

now there is a high mound before the city, rising by itself upon the
plain. men call it batieia, but the gods know that it is the tomb of
lithe myrine. here the trojans and their allies divided their forces.

priam's son, great hector of the gleaming helmet, commanded the
trojans, and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most
valiant of those who were longing for the fray.

the dardanians were led by brave aeneas, whom venus bore to anchises,
when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain
slopes of ida. he was not alone, for with him were the two sons of
antenor, archilochus and acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.

they that dwelt in telea under the lowest spurs of mt. ida, men of
substance, who drink the limpid waters of the aesepus, and are of
trojan blood--these were led by pandarus son of lycaon, whom apollo had
taught to use the bow.

they that held adresteia and the
 
 ___________________________
 
ians and the other of the epeans; and many another fell round
them.

and now no man would have made light of the fighting if he could have
gone about among it scatheless and unwounded, with minerva leading him
by the hand, and protecting him from the storm of spears and arrows.
for many trojans and achaeans on that day lay stretched side by side
face downwards upon the earth.



book v

  the exploits of diomed, who, though wounded by pandarus,
  continues fighting--he kills pandarus and wounds aeneas--venus
  rescues aeneas, but being wounded by diomed, commits him
  to the care of apollo and goes to olympus, where she is tended
  by her mother dione--mars encourages the trojans, and
  aeneas returns to the fight cured of his wound--minerva and
  juno help the achaeans, and by the advice of the former
  diomed wounds mars, who returns to olympus to get cured.

then pallas minerva put valour into the heart of diomed, son of tydeus,
that he might excel all the other argives, and cover himself
 
 ___________________________
 
he
nevermore saw them come home from battle alive, and his kinsmen divided
his wealth among themselves.

then he came upon two sons of priam, echemmon and chromius, as they
were both in one chariot. he sprang upon them as a lion fastens on the
neck of some cow or heifer when the herd is feeding in a coppice. for
all their vain struggles he flung them both from their chariot and
stripped the armour from their bodies. then he gave their horses to his
comrades to take them back to the ships.

when aeneas saw him thus making havoc among the ranks, he went through
the fight amid the rain of spears to see if he could find pandarus.
when he had found the brave son of lycaon he said, "pandarus, where is
now your bow, your winged arrows, and your renown as an archer, in
respect of which no man here can rival you nor is there any in lycia
that can beat you? lift then your hands to jove and send an arrow at
this fellow who is going so masterfully about, and has done such deadly
work among the trojans. 
 
 ___________________________
 
he has killed many a brave man--unless indeed
he is some god who is angry with the trojans about their sacrifices,
and and has set his hand against them in his displeasure."

and the son of lycaon answered, "aeneas, i take him for none other than
the son of tydeus. i know him by his shield, the visor of his helmet,
and by his horses. it is possible that he may be a god, but if he is
the man i say he is, he is not making all this havoc without heaven's
help, but has some god by his side who is shrouded in a cloud of
darkness, and who turned my arrow aside when it had hit him. i have
taken aim at him already and hit him on the right shoulder; my arrow
went through the breastpiece of his cuirass; and i made 
 
 ___________________________
 
f no use, for i have
already hit two chieftains, the sons of atreus and of tydeus, and
though i drew blood surely enough, i have only made them still more
furious. i did ill to take my bow down from its peg on the day i led my
band of trojans to ilius in hector's service, and if ever i get home
again to set eyes on my native place, my wife, and the greatness of my
house, may some one cut my head off then and there if i do not break
the bow and set it on a hot fire--such pranks as it plays me."

aeneas answered, "say no more. things will not mend till we two go
against this man with chariot and horses and bring him to a trial of
arms. mount my chariot, and note how cleverly the horses of tros can
speed hither and thither over the plain in pursuit or flight. if jove
again vouchsafes glory to the son of tydeus they will carry us safely
back to the city. take hold, then, of the whip and reins while i stand
upon the car to fight, or else do you wait this man's onset while i
look after the horses.
 
 ___________________________
 
"

"aeneas," replied the son of lycaon, "take the reins and drive; if we
have to fly before the son of tydeus the horses will go better for
their own driver. if they miss the sound of your voice when they expect
it they may be frightened, and refuse to take us out of the fight. the
son of tydeus will then kill both of us and take the horses. therefore
drive them yourself and i will be ready for him with my spear."

they then mounted the chariot and drove full-speed towards the son of
tydeus. sthenelus, so
 
 ___________________________
 
n of capaneus, saw them coming and said to diomed,
"diomed, son of tydeus, man after my own heart, i see two heroes
speeding towards you, both of them men of might the one a skilful
archer, pandarus son of lycaon, the other, aeneas, whose sire is
anchises, while his mother is venus. mount the chariot and let us
retreat. do not, i pray you, press so furiously forward, or you may get
killed."

diomed looked angrily at him and answered: "talk not of flight, for i
shall not listen to you: i am of a race that knows neither flight nor
fear, and my limbs are as yet unwearied. i am in no mind to mount, but
will go against them even as i am; pallas minerva bids me be afraid of
no man, and even though one of them escape, their stee
 
 ___________________________
 
ds shall not take
both back again. i say further, and lay my saying to your heart--if
minerva sees fit to vouchsafe me the glory of killing both, stay your
horses here and make the reins fast to the rim of the chariot; then be
sure you spring aeneas' horses and drive them from the trojan to the
achaean ranks. they are of the stock that great jove gave to tros in
payment for his son ganymede, and are the finest that live and move
under the sun. king anchises stole the blood by putting his mares to
them without laomedon's knowledge, and they bore him six foals. four
are still in his stables, but he gave the other two to aeneas. we shall
win great glory if we can take them."

thus did they converse, but the other two had now driven close up t
 
 ___________________________
 
ssed, not hit, and
before you two see the end of this matter one or other of you shall
glut tough-shielded mars with his blood."

with this he hurled his spear, and minerva guided it on to pandarus's
nose near the eye. it went crashing in among his white teeth; the
bronze point cut through the root of his tongue, coming out under his
chin, and his glistening armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground. the horses started aside for fear, and he was
reft of life and strength.

aeneas sprang from his chariot armed with shield and spear, fearing
lest the achaeans should carry off the body. he bestrode it as a lion
in the pride of strength, with shield and spear before him and a cry of
battle on his lips resolute to kill the first that should dare face
him. but the son of tydeus caught up a mighty stone, so huge and great
that as men now are it would take two to lift it; nevertheless he bore
it aloft with ease unaided, and with this he struck aeneas on the groin
where the hip 
 
 ___________________________
 
turns in the joint that is called the "cup-bone." the
stone crushed this joint, and broke both the sinews, while its jagged
edges tore away all the flesh. the hero fell on his knees, and propped
himself with his hand resting on the ground till the darkness of night
fell upon his eyes. and now aeneas, king of men, would have perished
then and there, had not his mother, jove's daughter venus, who had
conceived him by anchises when he was herding cattle, been quick to
mark, and thrown her two white arms about the body of her dear son. she
protected him by covering him with a fold of her own fair garment, lest
some danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him.

thus, then, did she bear her dear son out of the fight. but the son of
capaneus was not unmindful of the orders that diome
 
 ___________________________
 
d had given him. he
made his own horses fast, away from the hurly-burly, by binding the
reins to the rim of the chariot. then he sprang upon aeneas's horses
and drove them from the trojan to the achaean ranks. when he had so
done he gave them over to his chosen comrade deipylus, whom he valued
above all others as the one who was most like-minded with himself, to
take them on to the ships. he then remounted his own chariot, seized
the reins, and drove with all speed in search of the son of tydeus.

now the son of tydeus was in pursuit of the cyprian goddess, spear in
hand, for he knew her to be feeble and not one of those goddesses that
can
 
 ___________________________
 
 olympus, where
the gods have their dwelling. there she stayed them, unloosed them from
the chariot, and gave them their ambrosial forage; but venus flung
herself on to the lap of her mother dione, who threw her arms about her
and caressed her, saying, "which of the heavenly beings has been
treating you in this way, as though you had been doing something wrong
in the face of day?"

and laughter-loving venus answered, "proud diomed, the son of tydeus,
wounded me because i was bearing my dear son aeneas, whom i love best
of all mankind, out of the fight. the war is no longer one between
trojans and achaeans, for the danaans have now taken to fighting with
the immortals."

"bear it, my child," replied dione, "and make the best of it. we
dwellers in olympus have to put up with much at the hands of men, and
we lay much suffering on one another. mars had to suffer when otus and
ephialtes, children of aloeus, bound him in cruel bonds, so that he lay
thirteen months imprisoned in a vessel of bronze.
 
 ___________________________
 
me one of the achaean women to go with the trojans of whom she is so
very fond, and while caressing one or other of them she must have torn
her delicate hand with the gold pin of the woman's brooch."

the sire of gods and men smiled, and called golden venus to his side.
"my child," said he, "it has not been given you to be a warrior.
attend, henceforth, to your own delightful matrimonial duties, and
leave all this fighting to mars and to minerva."

thus did they converse. but diomed sprang upon aeneas, though he knew
him to be in the very arms of apollo. not one whit did he fear the
mighty god, so set was he on killing aeneas and stripping him of his
armour. thrice did he spring forward with might and main to slay him,
and thrice did apollo beat back his gleaming shield. when he was coming
on for the fourth time, as though he were a god, apollo shouted to him
with an awful voice and said, "take heed, son of tydeus, and draw off;
think not to match yourself against gods, for men that walk the
 
 ___________________________
 
 earth
cannot hold their own with the immortals."

the son of tydeus then gave way for a little space, to avoid the anger
of the god, while apollo took aeneas out of the crowd and set him in
sacred pergamus, where his temple stood. there, within the mighty
sanctuary, latona and diana healed him and made him glorious to behold,
while apollo of the silver bow fashioned a wraith in the likeness of
aeneas, and armed as he was. round this the trojans and achaeans hacked
at the bucklers about one another's breasts, hewing each other's round
shields and light hide-covered targets. then phoebus apollo said to
mars, "mars, mars, bane of men, blood-stained stormer of cities, can
you not go to this man, the son of tydeus, who would now fight even
with father jove, and draw him out of the battle? he first went up to
the cyprian and wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and afterwards
sprang upon me to
 
 ___________________________
 
o, as though he were a god."

he then took his seat on the top of pergamus, while murderous mars went
about among the ranks of the trojans, cheering them on, in the likeness
of fleet acamas chief of the thracians. "sons of priam," said he, "how
long will you let your people be thus slaughtered by the achaeans?
would you wait till they are at the walls of troy? aeneas the son of
anchises has fallen, he whom we held in as high honour as hector
himself. help me, then, to rescue our brave comrade from the stress of
the fight."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. then sarpedon
rebuked hector very sternly. "hector," said he, "where is your prowess
now? you used to say that though you had neither people nor allies you
could hold the town alone with your brothers and brothers-in-law. i see
not one of them here; they cower as hounds before a lion;
 
 ___________________________
 
en
so did the achaeans whiten in the dust which the horses' hoofs raised
to the firmament of heaven, as their drivers turned them back to
battle, and they bore down with might upon the foe. fierce mars, to
help the trojans, covered them in a veil of darkness, and went about
everywhere among them, inasmuch as phoebus apollo had told him that
when he saw pallas minerva leave the fray he was to put courage into
the hearts of the trojans--for it was she who was helping the danaans.
then apollo sent aeneas forth from his rich sanctuary, and filled his
heart with valour, whereon he took his place among his comrades, who
were overjoyed at seeing him alive, sound, and of a good courage; but
they could not ask him how it had all happened, for they were too busy
with the turmoil raised by mars and by strife, who raged insatiably in
their midst.

the two ajaxes, ulysses and diomed, cheered the danaans on, fearless of
the fury and onset of the trojans. they stood as still as clouds which
the son of satu
 
 ___________________________
 
asts scatter the clouds in all directions--even so did the
danaans stand firm and unflinching against the trojans. the son of
atreus went about among them and exhorted them. "my friends," said he,
"quit yourselves like brave men, and shun dishonour in one another's
eyes amid the stress of battle. they that shun dishonour more often
live than get killed, but they that fly save neither life nor name."

as he spoke he hurled his spear and hit one of those who were in the
front rank, the comrade of aeneas, deicoon son of pergasus, whom the
trojans held in no less honour than the sons of priam, for he was ever
quick to place himself among the foremost. the spear of king agamemnon
struck his shield and went right through it, for the shield stayed it
not. it drove through his belt into the lower part of his belly, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.

then aeneas killed two champions of the danaans, crethon and
orsilochus. their father was a rich man who lived in
 
 ___________________________
 
o
ruled over much people and was father to diocles, who in his turn begat
twin sons, crethon and orsilochus, well skilled in all the arts of war.
these, when they grew up, went to ilius with the argive fleet in the
cause of menelaus and agamemnon sons of atreus, and there they both of
them fell. as two lions whom their dam has reared in the depths of some
mountain forest to plunder homesteads and carry off sheep and cattle
till they get killed by the hand of man, so were these two vanquished
by aeneas, and fell like high pine-trees to the ground.

brave menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the
front, clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for mars
egged him on to do so with intent that he should be killed by aeneas;
but antilochus the son of nestor saw him and sprang forward, fearing
that the king might come to harm and thus bring all their labour to
nothing; when, therefore aeneas and menelaus were setting their hands
and spears against one another eager to do
 
 ___________________________
 
 battle, antilochus placed
himself by the side of menelaus. aeneas, bold though he was, drew back
on seeing the two heroes side by side in front of him, so they drew the
bodies of crethon and orsilochus to the ranks of the achaeans and
committed the two poor fellows into the hands of their comrades. they
then turned back and fought in the front ranks.

they killed pylaemenes peer of mars, leader of the paphlagonian
warriors. menelaus struck him on the collar-bone as he was standing on
his chariot, while antilochus hit his charioteer and squire mydon, the
son o
 
 ___________________________
 
 the body.

meanwhile nestor shouted to the argives, saying, "my friends, danaan
warriors, servants of mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead,
and bring back much booty to the ships. let us kill as many as we can;
the bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them later at
your leisure."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. and now the
trojans would have been routed and driven back into ilius, had not
priam's son helenus, wisest of augurs, said to hector and aeneas,
"hector and aeneas, you two are the mainstays of the trojans and
lycians, for you are foremost at all times, alike in fight and counsel;
hold your ground here, and go about among the host to rally them in
front of the gates, or they will fling themselves into the arms of
their wives, to the great joy of our foes. then, when you have put
heart into all our companies, we will stand firm here and fight the
danaans however hard they press us, for there is nothing else to be
done. meanwhile do you,
 
 ___________________________
 
to the ships of the
achaeans, and the son of tydeus flinging himself alone into the thick
of the fight took his stand before the horses of the son of neleus.
"sir," said he, "these young warriors are pressing you hard, your force
is spent, and age is heavy upon you, your squire is naught, and your
horses are slow to move. mount my chariot and see what the horses of
tros can do--how cleverly they can scud hither and thither over the
plain either in flight or in pursuit. i took them from the hero aeneas.
let our squires attend to your own steeds, but let us drive mine
straight at the trojans, that hector may learn how furiously i too can
wield my spear."

nestor knight of gerene hearkened to his words. thereon the doughty
squires, sthenelus and kind-hearted eurymedon, saw to nestor's horses,
while the two both mounted diomed's chariot. nestor took the reins in
his hands and lashed the horses on; they were soon close up with
hector, and the son of tydeus aimed a spear at him as he was charging

 
 ___________________________
 
 the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in
full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning. the
chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but
these came up presently. the son of saturn sent a portent of evil sound
about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to
send many a brave man hurrying down to hades.

the trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great hector, noble polydamas, aeneas who was honoured
by the trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of antenor,
polybus, agenor, and young acamas beauteous as a god. hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in
the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of
aegis-bearing jove.

and now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat 
 
 ___________________________
 
est and most in number, and the most determined
to break through the wall and fight at the ships. cebriones was also
joined with them as third in command, for hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man of them all. these
helped to array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged
straight at the danaans, for they felt sure that they would not hold
out longer and that they should themselves now 
 
 ___________________________
 
ve-begotten man am i that have come
hither. jove first begot minos, chief ruler in crete, and minos in his
turn begot a son, noble deucalion. deucalion begot me to be a ruler
over many men in crete, and my ships have now brought me hither, to be
the bane of yourself, your father, and the trojans."

thus did he speak, and deiphobus was in two minds, whether to go back
and fetch some other trojan to help him, or to take up the challenge
single-handed. in the end, he deemed it best to go and fetch aeneas,
whom he found standing in the rear, for he had long been aggrieved with
priam because in spite of his brave deeds he did not give him his due
share of honour. deiphobus went up to him and said, "aeneas, prince
among the trojans, if you know any ties of kinship, help me now to
defend the body of your sister's husband; come with me to the rescue of
alcathous, who being husband to your sister brought you up when you
were a child in his house, and now idomeneus has slain him."

with these words he
 
 ___________________________
 
 moved the heart of aeneas, and he went in pursuit
of idomeneus, big with great deeds of valour; but idomeneus was not to
be thus daunted as though he were a mere child; he held his ground as a
wild boar at bay upon the mountains, who abides the coming of a great
crowd of men in some lonely place--the bristles stand upright on his
back, his eyes flash fire, and he whets his tusks in his eagerness to
defend himself against hounds and men--even so did famed idomeneus hold
his ground and budge not at the coming of aeneas. h
 
 ___________________________
 
e cried aloud to his
comrades looking towards ascalaphus, aphareus, deipyrus, meriones, and
antilochus, all of them brave soldiers--"hither my friends," he cried,
"and leave me not single-handed--i go in great fear by fleet aeneas,
who is coming against me, and is a redoubtable dispenser of death
battle. moreover he is in the flower of youth when a man's strength is
greatest; if i was of the same age as he is and in my present mind,
either he or i should soon bear away the prize of victory."

on this, all of them as one man stood near him, shield on shoulder.
aeneas on the other side called to his comrades, looking towards
deiphobus, paris, and agenor, who were leaders of the trojans along
with himself, and the people fo
 
 ___________________________
 
llowed them as sheep follow the ram when
they go down to drink after they have been feeding, and the heart of
the shepherd is glad--even so was the heart of aeneas gladdened when he
saw his people follow him.

then they fought furiously in close combat about the body of alcathous,
wielding their long spears; and the bronze armour about their bodies
rang fearfully as they took aim at one another in the press of the
fight, while the two heroes aeneas and idomeneus, peers of mars,
outvied everyone in their desire to hack at each other with sword and
spear. aeneas took aim first, but idomeneus was on the lookout and
avoided the spear, so that it sped from aeneas' strong hand in vain,
and fell quivering in the ground. idomeneus meanwhile smote oenomaus in
the middle of his belly, and broke the plate of his corslet, whereon
his bowels came gushing out and he clutched the earth in the palms of
his hands as he fell sprawling in the dust. idomeneu
 
 ___________________________
 
riones sprang upon him like a vulture, drew the spear from his
shoulder, and fell back under cover of his men. then polites, own
brother of deiphobus passed his arms around his waist, and bore him
away from the battle till he got to his horses that were standing in
the rear of the fight with the chariot and their driver. these took him
towards the city groaning and in great pain, with the blood flowing
from his arm.

the others still fought on, and the battle-cry rose to heaven without
ceasing. aeneas sprang on aphareus son of caletor, and struck him with
a spear in his throat which was turned towards him; his head fell on
one side, his helmet and shield came down along with him, and death,
life's foe, was shed around him. antilochus spied his chance, flew
forward towards thoon, and wounded him as he was turning round. he laid
open the vein that runs all the way up the back to the neck; he cut
this vein clean away throughout its whole course, and thoon fell in the
dust face upwards, stretchi
 
 ___________________________
 
help being dismayed if he is standing
near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing--even so did hector
fall to earth and bite the dust. his spear fell from his hand, but his
shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze armour
rang about him.

the sons of the achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him,
hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the trojans,
but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered
by the princes polydamas, aeneas, agenor, sarpedon captain of the
lycians, and noble glaucus. of the others, too, there was not one who
was unmindful of him, and they held their round shields over him to
cover him. his comrades then lifted him off the ground and bore him
away from the battle to the place where his horses stood waiting for
him at the rear of the fight with their driver and the chariot; these
then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. when they
reached the ford of the fair stream of xanthus, bego
 
 ___________________________
 
 and they forgot their
former prowess. as when two wild beasts spring in the dead of night on
a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep when the herdsman is not
there--even so were the danaans struck helpless, for apollo filled them
with panic and gave victory to hector and the trojans.

the fight then became more scattered and they killed one another where
they best could. hector killed stichius and arcesilaus, the one, leader
of the boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of menestheus.
aeneas killed medon and iasus. the first was bastard son to oileus, and
brother to ajax, but he lived in phylace away from his own country, for
he had killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother eriopis whom oileus
had married. iasus had become a leader of the athenians, and was son of
sphelus the son of boucolos. polydamas killed mecisteus, and polites
echius, in the front of the battle, while agenor slew clonius. paris
struck deiochus from behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as he
was flying amo
 
 ___________________________
 

along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the lycian
captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. sarpedon leader of the lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of lycia; mars has laid
him low by the spear of patroclus. stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body
with contumely in revenge for all the danaans whom w
 
 ___________________________
 
 fall of so good a man filled the
achaeans with dismay, while the trojans were exultant, and came up in a
body round the corpse. nevertheless the achaeans, mindful of their
prowess, bore straight down upon them.

meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the trojans, laogonus son of
onetor, who was priest of jove of mt. ida, and was honoured by the
people as though he were a god. meriones struck him under the jaw and
ear, so that life went out of him and the darkness of death laid hold
upon him. aeneas then aimed a spear at meriones, hoping to hit him
under the shield as he was advancing, but meriones saw it coming and
stooped forward to avoid it, whereon the spear flew past him and the
point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till
mars robbed it of its force. the spear, therefore, sped from aeneas's
hand in vain and fell quivering to the ground. aeneas was angry and
said, "meriones, you are a good dancer, but if i had hit you my spear
would soon have made an end of you
 
 ___________________________
 
."

and meriones answered, "aeneas, for all your bravery, you will not be
able to make an end of every one who comes against you. you are only a
mortal like myself, and if i were to hit you in the middle of your
shield with my spear, however strong and self-confident you may be, i
should soon vanquish you, and you would yield your life to hades of the
noble steeds."

on this the son of menoetius rebuked him and said, "meriones, hero
though you be, you should not speak thus; taunting speeches, my good
friend, will not make the tr
 
 ___________________________
 
is palm as he fell to earth.
hector and those who were in the front rank then gave ground, while the
argives raised a loud cry of triumph, and drew off the bodies of
phorcys and hippothous which they stripped presently of their armour.

the trojans would now have been worsted by the brave achaeans and
driven back to ilius through their own cowardice, while the argives, so
great was their courage and endurance, would have achieved a triumph
even against the will of jove, if apollo had not roused aeneas, in the
likeness of periphas son of epytus, an attendant who had grown old in
the service of aeneas' aged father, and was at all times devoted to
him. in his likeness, then, apollo said, "aeneas, can you not manage,
even though heaven be against us, to save high ilius? i have known men,
whose numbers, courage, and self-reliance have saved their people in
spite of jove, whereas in this case he would much rather give victory
to us than to the danaans, if you would only fight instead of being so
t
 
 ___________________________
 
erribly afraid."

aeneas knew apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to
hector saying, "hector and all other trojans and allies, shame on us if
we are beaten by the achaeans and driven back to ilius through our own
cowardice. a god has just come up to me and told me that jove the
supreme disposer will be with us. therefore let us make for the
danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they bear away dead
patroclus to the ships."

as he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied
and aga
 
 ___________________________
 
in faced the achaeans. aeneas speared leiocritus son of arisbas,
a valiant follower of lycomedes, and lycomedes was moved with pity as
he saw him fall; he therefore went close up, and speared apisaon son of
hippasus shepherd of his people in the liver under the midriff, so that
he died; he had come from fertile paeonia and was the best man of them
all after asteropaeus. asteropaeus flew forward to avenge him and
attack the danaans, but this might no longer be, inasmuch as those
about patroclus were well covered by their shi
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
hector plumes himself on being armed in the armour of the descendant of
aeacus."

automedon son of diores answered, "alcimedon, there is no one else who
can control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you can, save only
patroclus--while he was alive--peer of gods in counsel. take then the
whip and reins, while i go down from the car and fight."

alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and reins,
while automedon leaped from off the car. when hector saw him he said to
aeneas who was near him, "aeneas, counsellor of the mail-clad trojans,
i see the steeds of the fleet son of aeacus come into battle with weak
hands to drive them. i am sure, if you think well, that we might take
them; they will not dare face us if we both attack them."

the valiant son of anchises was of the same mind, and the pair went
right on, with their shoulders covered under shields of tough dry
ox-hide, overlaid with much bronze. chromius and aretus went also with
them, and their hearts beat hi
 
 ___________________________
 
ep your horses so close up that i may feel their breath
upon my back; i doubt that we shall not stay hector son of priam till
he has killed us and mounted behind the horses; he will then either
spread panic among the ranks of the achaeans, or himself be killed
among the foremost."

on this he cried out to the two ajaxes and menelaus, "ajaxes captains
of the argives, and menelaus, give the dead body over to them that are
best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for hector
and aeneas who are the two best men among the trojans, are pressing us
hard in the full tide of war. nevertheless the issue lies on the lap of
heaven, i will therefore hurl my spear and leave the rest to jove."

he poised and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the round
shield of aretus, and went right through it for the shield stayed it
not, so that it was driven through his belt into the lower part of his
belly. as when some sturdy youth, axe in hand, deals his blow behind
the horns of an ox a
 
 ___________________________
 
 fall on his back the spear quivering in his body till it
made an end of him. hector then aimed a spear at automedon but he saw
it coming and stooped forward to avoid it, so that it flew past him and
the point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering
till mars robbed it of its force. they would then have fought hand to
hand with swords had not the two ajaxes forced their way through the
crowd when they heard their comrade calling, and parted them for all
their fury--for hector, aeneas, and chromius were afraid and drew back,
leaving aretus to lie there struck to the heart. automedon, peer of
fleet mars, then stripped him of his armour and vaunted over him
saying, "i have done little to assuage my sorrow for the son of
menoetius, for the man i have killed is not so good as he was."

as he spoke he took the blood-stained spoils and laid them upon his
chariot; then he mounted the car with his hands and feet all steeped in
gore as a lion that has been gorging upon a bull.

and n
 
 ___________________________
 
untain-track, and
they pant and sweat as they go--even so did menelaus and pant and sweat
as they bore the body of patroclus. behind them the two ajaxes held
stoutly out. as some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain
will turn water and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there
any stream strong enough to break through it--even so did the two
ajaxes face the trojans and stem the tide of their fighting though they
kept pouring on towards them and foremost among them all was aeneas son
of anchises with valiant hector. as a flock of daws or starlings fall
to screaming and chattering when they see a falcon, foe to all small
birds, come soaring near them, even so did the achaean youth raise a
babel of cries as they fled before aeneas and hector, unmindful of
their former prowess. in the rout of the danaans much goodly armour
fell round about the trench, and of fighting there was no end.



book xviii

  the grief of achilles over patroclus--the visit of thetis
  to vulcan an
 
 ___________________________
 
red him in great sadness, saying, "why, o xanthus, do you thus
foretell my death? you need not do so, for i well know that i am to
fall here, far from my dear father and mother; none the more, however,
shall i stay my hand till i have given the trojans their fill of
fighting."

so saying, with a loud cry he drove his horses to the front.



book xx

  the gods hold a council and determine to watch the fight, from
  the hill callicolone, and the barrow of hercules--a fight
  between achilles and aeneas is interrupted by neptune, who
  saves aeneas--achilles kills many trojans.

thus, then, did the achaeans arm by their ships round you, o son of
peleus, who were hungering for battle; while the trojans over against
them armed upon the rise of the plain.

meanwhile jove from the top of many-delled olympus, bade themis gather
the gods in council, whereon she went about and called them to the
house of jove. there was not a river absent except oceanus, nor a
single one of the nymphs that haunt fair
 
 ___________________________
 
r; the archer-goddess diana with
her golden arrows, sister of far-darting apollo, stood to face juno;
mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced leto, while the mighty
eddying river whom men can scamander, but gods xanthus, matched himself
against vulcan.

the gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. but the heart of
achilles was set on meeting hector son of priam, for it was with his
blood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of
battle. meanwhile apollo set aeneas on to attack the son of peleus, and
put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of lycaon son of
priam. in his likeness therefore, he said to aeneas, "aeneas,
counsellor of the trojans, where are now the brave words with which you
vaunted over your wine before the trojan princes, saying that you would
fight achilles son of peleus in single combat?"

and aeneas answered, "why do you thus bid me fight the proud son of
peleus, when i am in no mind to do so? were i to face him now, it would
 
 ___________________________
 
re, your spear to bear upon him, and let him not scare you with
his taunts and menaces."

as he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his
people, and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the foremost
fighters. nor did the son of anchises escape the notice of white-armed
juno, as he went forth into the throng to meet achilles. she called the
gods about her, and said, "look to it, you two, neptune and minerva,
and consider how this shall be; phoebus apollo has been sending aeneas
clad in full armour to fight achilles. shall we turn him back at once,
or shall one of us stand by achilles and endow him with strength so
that his heart fail not, and he may learn that the chiefs of the
immortals are on his side, while the others who have all along been
defending the trojans are but vain helpers? let us all come down from
olympus and join in the fight, that this day he may take no hurt at the
hands of the trojans. hereafter let him suffer whatever fate may have
spun out for hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 round
you, o phoebus, and mars the waster of cities.

thus did the gods sit apart and form their plans, but neither side was
willing to begin battle with the other, and jove from his seat on high
was in command over them all. meanwhile the whole plain was alive with
men and horses, and blazing with the gleam of armour. the earth rang
again under the tramp of their feet as they rushed towards each other,
and two champions, by far the foremost of them all, met between the
hosts to fight--to wit, aeneas son of anchises, and noble achilles.

aeneas was first to stride forward in attack, his doughty helmet
tossing defiance as he came on. he held his strong shield before his
breast, and brandished his bronze spear. the son of peleus from the
other side sprang forth to meet him, like some fierce lion that the
whole country-side has met to hunt and kill--at first he bodes no ill,
but when some daring youth has struck him with a spear, he crouches
openmouthed, his jaws foam, he roars with fury, he l
 
 ___________________________
 
ashes his tail from
side to side about his ribs and loins, and glares as he springs
straight before him, to find out whether he is to slay, or be slain
among the foremost of his foes--even with such fury did achilles burn
to spring upon aeneas.

when they were now close up with one another achilles was first to
speak. "aeneas," said he, "why do you stand thus out before the host to
fight me? is it that you hope to reign over the trojans in the seat of
priam? nay, though you kill me priam will not hand his kingdom over to
you. he is a man of sound judgement, and he has sons of his own. or
have the trojans been allotting you a demesne of passing richness, fair
with orchard lawns and corn lands, if you should slay me? this you
shall hardly do. i have discomfited you once already. have you
forgotten how when you were al
 
 ___________________________
 
one i chased you from your herds
helter-skelter down the slopes of ida? you did not turn round to look
behind you; you took refuge in lyrnessus, but i attacked the city, and
with the help of minerva and father jove i sacked it and carried its
women into captivity, though jove and the other gods rescued you. you
think they will protect you now, but they will not do so; therefore i
say go back into the host, and do not face me, or you will rue it. even
a fool may be wise after the event."

then aeneas answered, "son of peleus, think not that your words can
scare me as though i were a child. i too, if i will, can brag and talk
unseemly. we know one another's race and parentage as matters of common
fame, though neither have you ever seen my parents nor i yours. men say
that you are son to noble peleus, and that your mother is thetis,
fair-haired daughter of the sea. i have noble anchises for my father,
and venus for my mother; the parents of one or other of us shall this
day mourn a son, for i
 
 ___________________________
 
bandying hard like women who when they fall foul
of one another go out and wrangle in the streets, one half true and the
other lies, as rage inspires them? no words of yours shall turn me now
that i am fain to fight--therefore let us make trial of one another
with our spears."

as he spoke he drove his spear at the great and terrible shield of
achilles, which rang out as the point struck it. the son of peleus held
the shield before him with his strong hand, and he was afraid, for he
deemed that aeneas's spear would go through it quite easily, not
reflecting that the god's glorious gifts were little likely to yield
before the blows of mortal men; and indeed aeneas's spear did not
pierce the shield, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the
point. it went through two layers, but the god had made the shield in
five, two of bronze, the two innermost ones of tin, and one of gold; it
was in this that the spear was stayed.

achilles in his turn threw, and struck the round shield of aeneas 
 
 ___________________________
 
at
the very edge, where the bronze was thinnest; the spear of pelian ash
went clean through, and the shield rang under the blow; aeneas was
afraid, and crouched backwards, holding the shield away from him; the
spear, however, flew over his back, and stuck quivering in the ground,
after having gone through both circles of the sheltering shield. aeneas
though he had avoided the spear, stood still, blinded with fear and
grief because the weapon had gone so near him; then achilles sprang
furiously upon him, with a cry as of death and with his keen blade
drawn, and aeneas seized a great stone, so huge that two men, as men
now are, would be unable to lift it, but aeneas wielded it quite easily.

aeneas would then have struck achilles as he was springing towards him,
either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered him, and achilles
would have 
 
 ___________________________
 
closed with him and despatched him with his sword, had not
neptune lord of the earthquake been quick to mark, and said forthwith
to the immortals, "alas, i am sorry for great aeneas, who will now go
down to the house of hades, vanquished by the son of peleus. fool that
he was to give ear to the counsel of apollo. apollo will never save him
from destruction. why should this man suffer when he is guiltless, to
no purpose, and in another's quarrel? has he not at all times offered
acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven? let us then
snatch him from death's jaws, lest the son of saturn be angry should
achilles slay him. it is fated, moreover, that he should escape
 
 ___________________________
 
, and
that the race of dardanus, whom jove loved above all the sons born to
him of mortal women, shall not perish utterly without seed or sign. for
now indeed has jove hated the blood of priam, while aeneas shall reign
over the trojans, he and his children's children that shall be born
hereafter."

then answered juno, "earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself, and
consider concerning aeneas, whether you will save him, or suffer him,
brave though he be, to fall by the hand of achilles son of peleus. for
of a truth we two, i and pallas minerva, have sworn full many a time
before all the immortals, that never would we shield trojans from
destruction, not even when all troy is burning in the flames that the
achaeans shall kindle."

when earth-encircling neptune heard this he went into the battle amid
the clash of spears, and came to the place where achilles and aeneas
were. forthwith 
 
 ___________________________
 
he shed a darkness before the eyes of the son of
peleus, drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of aeneas,
and laid it at the feet of achilles. then he lifted aeneas on high from
off the earth and hurried him away. over the heads of many a band of
warriors both horse and foot did he soar as the god's hand sped him,
till he came to the very fringe of the battle where the cauconians were
arming themselves for fight. neptune, shaker of the earth, then came
near to him and said, "aeneas, what god has egged you on to this folly
in fighting the son of peleus, who is both a mightier man of valour and
more beloved of heaven than you are? give way before him whensoever you
meet him, lest you go down to the house of hades even though fate would
have it otherwise. when achilles is dead you may then fight among the
foremost undaunted, for none other of the achaeans shall slay you."

the god left him when he had given him these instructions, and at once
removed the darkness from before
 
 ___________________________
 
 the eyes of achilles, who opened them
wide indeed and said in great anger, "alas! what marvel am i now
beholding? here is my spear upon the ground, but i see not him whom i
meant to kill when i hurled it. of a truth aeneas also must be under
heaven's protection, although i had thought his boasting was idle. let
him go hang; he will be in no mood to fight me further, seeing how
narrowly he has missed being killed. i will now give my orders to the
danaans and attack some other of the trojans."

he sprang forward along the line and cheered his men on as he did so.
"let not the trojans," he cried, "keep you at arm's length, achaeans,
but go for them and fight them man for man. however valiant i may be, i
cannot give 
 
 ___________________________
 
ping here, with their manes trailing on
the ground in the extremity of their sorrow. but do you others set
yourselves in order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in
his horses and in the strength of his chariot."

thus spoke the son of peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred
themselves. first among them all uprose eumelus, king of men, son of
admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. next to him rose mighty
diomed son of tydeus; he yoked the trojan horses which he had taken
from aeneas, when apollo bore him out of the fight. next to him,
yellow-haired menelaus son of atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses,
agamemnon's mare aethe, and his own horse podargus. the mare had been
given to agamemnon by echepolus son of anchises, that he might not have
to follow him to ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for
jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious sicyon.
this mare, all eager for the race, did menelaus put under the yoke.

fourth in order antiloc