ll,
let us then take our rest, for in rest there is both strength and stay.
but when fair rosy-fingered morn appears, forthwith bring out your host
and your horsemen in front of the ships, urging them on, and yourself
fighting among the foremost."

thus he spoke, and the other chieftains approved his words. they then
made their drink-offerings and went every man to his own tent, where
they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.



book x

  ulysses and diomed go out as spies, and meet dolon, who gives
  them information: they then kill him, and profiting by what
  he had told them, kill rhesus king of the thracians and take
  his horses.

now the other princes of the achaeans slept soundly the whole night
through, but agamemnon son of atreus was troubled, so that he could get
no rest. as when fair juno's lord flashes his lightning in token of
great rain or hail or snow when the snow-flakes whiten the ground, or
again as a sign that he will open the wide jaws of hungry war, even so
 
 ___________________________
 
ell paid if he
will. i will give him a chariot and a couple of horses, the fleetest
that can be found at the ships of the achaeans, if he will dare this
thing; and he will win infinite honour to boot; he must go to the ships
and find out whether they are still guarded as heretofore, or whether
now that we have beaten them the achaeans design to fly, and through
sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches."

they all held their peace; but there was among the trojans a certain
man named dolon, son of eumedes, the famous herald--a man rich in gold
and bronze. he was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son
among five sisters. he it was that now addressed the trojans. "i,
hector," said he, "will to the ships and will exploit them. but first
hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot,
bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of
peleus. i will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. i will go
through the host from one end t
 
 ___________________________
 
o the other till i come to the ship of
agamemnon, where i take it the princes of the achaeans are now
consulting whether they shall fight or fly."

when he had done speaking hector held up his sceptre, and swore him his
oath saying, "may jove the thundering husband of juno bear witness that
no other trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that you
shall have your will with them for ever."

the oath he swore was bootless, but it made dolon more keen on going.
he hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he wore the skin
of a grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of ferret skin. then he
took a pointed javelin, and left the camp for the ships, but he was not
to return with any news for hector. when he had left the horses and the
troops behind him, he made all speed on his way, but ulysses perceived
his coming and said to diomed, "diomed, here is some one from the camp;
i am not sure whether he is a spy, or whether it is
 
 ___________________________
 
 some thief who
would plunder the bodies of the dead; let him get a little past us, we
can then spring upon him and take him. if, however, he is too quick for
us, go after him with your spear and hem him in towards the ships away
from the trojan camp, to prevent his getting back to the town."

with this they turned out of their way and lay down among the corpses.
dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when he had got about
as far as the distance by which a mule-plowed furrow exceeds one that
has been ploughed by oxen (for mules can plow fallow land quicker than
oxen) they ran after him, and when he heard their footsteps he stood
still, for he made sure they were friends from the trojan camp come by
hector's orders to bid him return; when, however, they were only a
spear's cast, or less, away from him, he saw that they were enemies and ran
as fast a
 
 ___________________________
 
s his legs could take him. the others gave chase at once, and as
a couple of well-trained hounds press forward after a doe or hare that
runs screaming in front of them, even so did the son of tydeus and
ulysses pursue dolon and cut him off from his own people. but when he
had fled so far towards the ships that he would soon have fallen in
with the outposts, minerva infused fresh strength into the son of
tydeus for fear some other of the achaeans might have the glory of
being first to hit him, and he might himself be only second; he
therefore sprang forward with his spear and said, "stand, or i shall
throw my spear, and in that case i shall soon make an end of you."

he threw as he spoke, but missed his aim on purp
 
 ___________________________
 
ther will satisfy you with a very large ransom, should he
hear of my being alive at the ships of the achaeans."

"fear not," replied ulysses, "let no thought of death be in your mind;
but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone in
the dead of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while
other men are sleeping? is it to plunder the bodies of the slain, or
did hector send you to spy out what was going on at the ships? or did
you come here of your own mere notion?"

dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: "hector, with his vain
flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. he said he
would give me the horses of the noble son of peleus and his
bronze-bedizened chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the
flying night, get close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships
are still guarded as heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten
them, the achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are
neglecting to keep their watches.
 
 ___________________________
 
rses of the descendant of aeacus are hardly
to be kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than achilles
himself, whose mother was an immortal. but tell me, and tell me true,
where did you leave hector when you started? where lies his armour and
his horses? how, too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the
trojans ordered? what are their plans? will they stay here by the ships
and away from the city, or now that they have worsted the achaeans,
will they retire within their walls?"

and dolon answered, "i will tell you truly all. hector and the other
councillors are now holding conference by the monument of great ilus,
away from the general tumult; as for the guards about which you ask me,
there is no chosen watch to keep guard over the host. the trojans have
their watchfires, for they are bound to have them; they, therefore, are
awake and keep each other to their duty as sentinels; but the allies
who have come from other places are asleep and leave it to the trojans
to keep guard, 
 
 ___________________________
 
for their wives and children are not here."

ulysses then said, "now tell me; are they sleeping among the trojan
troops, or do they lie apart? explain this that i may understand it."

"i will tell you truly all," replied dolon. "to the seaward lie the
carians, the paeonian bowmen, the leleges, the cauconians, and the
noble pelasgi. the lysians and proud mysians, with the phrygians and
meonians, have their place on the side towards thymbra; but why ask
about all this? if you want to find your way into the host of the
trojans, there are the thracians, who have lately come here and lie
apart from the others at the far end of the camp; and they have rhesus
son of eioneus for their king. his horses are the finest and stro
 
 ___________________________
 
ngest
that i have ever seen, they are whiter than snow and fleeter than any
wind that blows. his chariot is bedight with silver and gold, and he
has brought his marvellous golden armour, of the rarest
workmanship--too splendid for any mortal man to carry, and meet only
for the gods. now, therefore, take me to the ships or bind me securely
here, until you come back and have proved my words whether they be
false or true."

diomed looked sternly at him and answered, "think not, dolon, for all
the good information you have given us, that you shall escape now you
are in our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you will come
some second time to the ships of the achaeans either as a spy or as an
open enemy, but if i kill you and an end of you, you will give no more
trouble."

on this dolon would have caught him by the beard to beseech him
further, but diomed struck him in the middle of his neck with his sword
and cut through both sinews so that his head fell rolling in th
 
 ___________________________
 
ds amid the fallen
armour and the blood, and came presently to the company of thracian
soldiers, who were sleeping, tired out with their day's toil; their
goodly armour was lying on the ground beside them all orderly in three
rows, and each man had his yoke of horses beside him. rhesus was
sleeping in the middle, and hard by him his horses were made fast to
the topmost rim of his chariot. ulysses from some way off saw him and
said, "this, diomed, is the man, and these are the horses about which
dolon whom we killed told us. do your very utmost; dally not about your
armour, but loose the horses at once--or else kill the men yourself,
while i see to the horses."

thereon minerva put courage into the heart of diomed, and he smote them
right and left. they made a hideous groaning as they were being hacked
about, and the earth was red with their blood. as a lion springs
furiously upon a flock of sheep or goats when he finds them without
their shepherd, so did the son of tydeus set upon the thrac
 
 ___________________________
 
ith the twelve bravest of his companions. hard by the ships we
took a thirteenth man--a scout whom hector and the other trojans had
sent as a spy upon our ships."

he laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while the
other achaeans followed him gladly. when they reached the strongly
built quarters of the son of tydeus, they tied the horses with thongs
of leather to the manger, where the steeds of diomed stood eating their
sweet corn, but ulysses hung the blood-stained spoils of dolon at the
stern of his ship, that they might prepare a sacred offering to
minerva. as for themselves, they went into the sea and washed the sweat
from their bodies, and from their necks and thighs. when the sea-water
had taken all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. after they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi