 the achaeans. many a brave soul did it send
hurrying down to hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and
vultures, for so were the counsels of jove fulfilled from the day on
which the son of atreus, king of men, and great achilles, first fell
out with one another.

and which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? it was the
son of jove and leto; for he was angry with the king and sent a
pestilence upon the host to plague the people, because the son of
atreus had dishonoured chryses his priest. now chryses had come to the
ships of the achaeans to free his daughter, and had brought with him a
great ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of apollo
wreathed with a suppliant's wreath, and he besought the achaeans, but
most of all the two sons of atreus, who were their chiefs.

"sons of atreus," he cried, "and all other achaeans, may the gods who
dwell in olympus grant you to sack the city of priam, and to reach your
homes in safety; but free my daughter, and accept a
 
 ___________________________
 
s we may perhaps appease
him."

with these words he sat down, and agamemnon rose in anger. his heart
was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he scowled on calchas
and said, "seer of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth things
concerning me, but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. you
have brought me neither comfort nor performance; and now you come
seeing among danaans, and saying that apollo has plagued us because i
would not take a ransom for this girl, the daughter of chryses. i have
set my heart on keeping her in my own house, for i love her better even
than my own wife clytemnestra, whose peer she is alike in form and
feature, in understanding and accomplishments. still i will give her up
if i must, for i would have the people live, not die; but you must find
me a prize instead, or i alone among the argives shall be without one.
this is not well; for you behold, all of you, that my prize is to go
elsewhither."

and achilles answered, "most noble son of atreus, cov
 
 ___________________________
 
aves, sat down
before him as he stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said,
"my son, why are you weeping? what is it that grieves you? keep it not
from me, but tell me, that we may know it together."

achilles drew a deep sigh and said, "you know it; why tell you what you
know well already? we went to thebe the strong city of eetion, sacked
it, and brought hither the spoil. the sons of the achaeans shared it
duly among themselves, and chose lovely chryseis as the meed of
agamemnon; but chryses, priest of apollo, came to the ships of the
achaeans to free his daughter, and brought with him a great ransom:
moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of apollo, wreathed with a
suppliant's wreath, and he besought the achaeans, but most of all the
two sons of atreus who were their chiefs.

"on this the rest of the achaeans with one voice were for respecting
the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so agamemnon,
who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. so he went b
 
 ___________________________
 
ched chryse with the hecatomb.
when they had come inside the harbour they furled the sails and laid
them in the ship's hold; they slackened the forestays, lowered the mast
into its place, and rowed the ship to the place where they would have
her lie; there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast the
hawsers. they then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb
for apollo; chryseis also left the ship, and ulysses led her to the
altar to deliver her into the hands of her father. "chryses," said he,
"king agamemnon has sent me to bring you back your child, and to offer
sacrifice to apollo on behalf of the danaans, that we may propitiate
the god, who has now brought sorrow upon the argives."

so saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly,
and they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the
god. they washed their hands and took up the barley-meal to sprinkle
over the victims, while chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud on
their beha
 
 ___________________________
 
lest tenedos with thy might.
even as thou didst hear me aforetime when i prayed, and didst press
hardly upon the achaeans, so hear me yet again, and stay this fearful
pestilence from the danaans."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. when they had done
praying and sprinkling the barley-meal, they drew back the heads of the
victims and killed and flayed them. they cut out the thigh-bones,
wrapped them round in two layers of fat, set some pieces of raw meat on
the top of them, and then chryses laid them on the wood fire and poured
wine over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged
spits in their hands. when the thigh-bones were burned and they had
tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small, put the pieces
upon the spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off:
then, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, they
ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied.
as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink