e had gone through
the city and had reached the scaean gates through which he would go out
on to the plain, his wife came running towards him, andromache,
daughter of great eetion who ruled in thebe under the wooded slopes of
mt. placus, and was king of the cilicians. his daughter had married
hector, and now came to meet him with a nurse who carried his little
child in her bosom--a mere babe. hector's darling son, and lovely as a
star. hector had named him scamandrius, but the people called him
astyanax, for his father stood alone as chief guardian of ilius. hector
smiled as he looked upon the boy, but he did not speak, and andromache
stood by him weeping and taking his hand in her own. "dear husband,"
said she, "your valour will bring you to destruction; think on your
infant son, and on my hapless self who ere long shall be your
widow--for the achaeans will set upon you in a body and kill you. it
would be better for me, should i lose you, to lie dead and buried, for
i shall have nothing left 
 
 ___________________________
 
he will go about destitute among the
friends of his father, plucking one by the cloak and another by the
shirt. some one or other of these may so far pity him as to hold the
cup for a moment towards him and let him moisten his lips, but he must
not drink enough to wet the roof of his mouth; then one whose parents
are alive will drive him from the table with blows and angry words.
'out with you,' he will say, 'you have no father here,' and the child
will go crying back to his widowed mother--he, astyanax, who erewhile
would sit upon his father's knees, and have none but the daintiest and
choicest morsels set before him. when he had played till he was tired
and went to sleep, he would lie in a bed, in the arms of his nurse, on
a soft couch, knowing neither want nor care, whereas now that he has
lost his father his lot will be full of hardship--he, whom the trojans
name astyanax, because you, o hector, were the only defence of their
gates and battlements. the wriggling writhing worms will now eat