, echepolus, son
of thalysius, fighting in the foremost ranks. he struck at the
projecting part of his helmet and drove the spear into his brow; the
point of bronze pierced the bone, and darkness veiled his eyes;
headlong as a tower he fell amid the press of the fight, and as he
dropped king elephenor, son of chalcodon and captain of the proud
abantes began dragging him out of reach of the darts that were falling
around him, in haste to strip him of his armour. but his purpose was
not for long; agenor saw him haling the body away, and smote him in the
side with his bronze-shod spear--for as he stooped his side was left
unprotected by his shield--and thus he perished. then the fight between
trojans and achaeans grew furious over his body, and they flew upon
each other like wolves, man and man crushing one upon the other.

forthwith ajax, son of telamon, slew the fair youth simoeisius, son of
anthemion, whom his mother bore by the banks of the simois, as she was
coming down from mt. ida, where
 
 ___________________________
 
igh into the dawning. the
chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but
these came up presently. the son of saturn sent a portent of evil sound
about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to
send many a brave man hurrying down to hades.

the trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great hector, noble polydamas, aeneas who was honoured
by the trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of antenor,
polybus, agenor, and young acamas beauteous as a god. hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in
the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of
aegis-bearing jove.

and now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon a rich
man's land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even so did the
trojans
 
 ___________________________
 
arioteer in charge to hold them ready for him at the trench. then
they formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in
five bodies followed their leaders. those that went with hector and
polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined
to break through the wall and fight at the ships. cebriones was also
joined with them as third in command, for hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he w
 
 ___________________________
 
he cried,
"and leave me not single-handed--i go in great fear by fleet aeneas,
who is coming against me, and is a redoubtable dispenser of death
battle. moreover he is in the flower of youth when a man's strength is
greatest; if i was of the same age as he is and in my present mind,
either he or i should soon bear away the prize of victory."

on this, all of them as one man stood near him, shield on shoulder.
aeneas on the other side called to his comrades, looking towards
deiphobus, paris, and agenor, who were leaders of the trojans along
with himself, and the people followed them as sheep follow the ram when
they go down to drink after they have been feeding, and the heart of
the shepherd is glad--even so was the heart of aeneas gladdened when he
saw his people follow him.

then they fought furiously in close combat about the body of alcathous,
wielding their long spears; and the bronze armour about their bodies
rang fearfully as they took aim at one another in the press of the
fight, whil
 
 ___________________________
 
 from off it. as black beans
or pulse come pattering down on to a threshing-floor from the broad
winnowing-shovel, blown by shrill winds and shaken by the shovel--even
so did the arrow glance off and recoil from the shield of menelaus, who
in his turn wounded the hand with which helenus carried his bow; the
spear went right through his hand and stuck in the bow itself, so that
to his life he retreated under cover of his men, with his hand dragging
by his side--for the spear weighed it down till agenor drew it out and
bound the hand carefully up in a woollen sling which his esquire had
with him.

pisander then made straight at menelaus--his evil destiny luring him on
to his doom, for he was to fall in fight with you, o menelaus. when the
two were hard by one another the spear of the son of atreus turned
aside and he missed his aim; pisander then struck the shield of brave
menelaus but could not pierce it, for the shield stayed the spear and
broke the shaft; nevertheless he was glad and made s
 
 ___________________________
 
ng dismayed if he is standing
near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing--even so did hector
fall to earth and bite the dust. his spear fell from his hand, but his
shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze armour
rang about him.

the sons of the achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him,
hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the trojans,
but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered
by the princes polydamas, aeneas, agenor, sarpedon captain of the
lycians, and noble glaucus. of the others, too, there was not one who
was unmindful of him, and they held their round shields over him to
cover him. his comrades then lifted him off the ground and bore him
away from the battle to the place where his horses stood waiting for
him at the rear of the fight with their driver and the chariot; these
then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. when they
reached the ford of the fair stream of xanthus, begotten of 
 
 ___________________________
 
hius and arcesilaus, the one, leader
of the boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of menestheus.
aeneas killed medon and iasus. the first was bastard son to oileus, and
brother to ajax, but he lived in phylace away from his own country, for
he had killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother eriopis whom oileus
had married. iasus had become a leader of the athenians, and was son of
sphelus the son of boucolos. polydamas killed mecisteus, and polites
echius, in the front of the battle, while agenor slew clonius. paris
struck deiochus from behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as he
was flying among the foremost, and the point of the spear went clean
through him.

while they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the achaeans
were flying pell-mell to the trench and the set stakes, and were forced
back within their wall. hector then cried out to the trojans, "forward
to the ships, and let the spoils be. if i see any man keeping back on
the other side the wall away from the ships i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 cheer on the lycians and to fight
along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the lycian
captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. sarpedon leader of the lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of lycia; mars has laid
him low by the spear of patroclus. stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body
with contumely in 
 
 ___________________________
 
od
for pity or forbearance but was in grim earnest. therefore when tros
laid hold of his knees and sought a hearing for his prayers, achilles
drove his sword into his liver, and the liver came rolling out, while
his bosom was all covered with the black blood that welled from the
wound. thus did death close his eyes as he lay lifeless.

achilles then went up to mulius and struck him on the ear with a spear,
and the bronze spear-head came right out at the other ear. he also
struck echeclus son of agenor on the head with his sword, which became
warm with the blood, while death and stern fate closed the eyes of
echeclus. next in order the bronze point of his spear wounded deucalion
in the fore-arm where the sinews of the elbow are united, whereon he
waited achilles' onset with his arm hanging down and death staring him
in the face. achilles cut his head off with a blow from his sword and
flung it helmet and all away from him, and the marrow came oozing out
of his backbone as he lay. he then went
 
 ___________________________
 
y drew back the bolts and opened the gates, and when
these were opened there was a haven of refuge for the trojans. apollo
then came full speed out of the city to meet them and protect them.
right for the city and the high wall, parched with thirst and grimy
with dust, still they fied on, with achilles wielding his spear
furiously behind them. for he was as one possessed, and was thirsting
after glory.

then had the sons of the achaeans taken the lofty gates of troy if
apollo had not spurred on agenor, valiant and noble son to antenor. he
put courage into his heart, and stood by his side to guard him, leaning
against a beech tree and shrouded in thick darkness. when agenor saw
achilles he stood still and his heart was clouded with care. "alas,"
said he to himself in his dismay, "if i fly before mighty achilles, and
go where all the others are being driven in rout, he will none the less
catch me and kill me for a coward. how would it be were i to let
achilles drive the others before him, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
that jove son of saturn vouchsafes him."

so saying he stood on his guard and awaited achilles, for he was now
fain to fight him. as a leopardess that bounds from out a thick covert
to attack a hunter--she knows no fear and is not dismayed by the baying
of the hounds; even though the man be too quick for her and wound her
either with thrust or spear, still, though the spear has pierced her
she will not give in till she has either caught him in her grip or been
killed outright--even so did noble agenor son of antenor refuse to fly
till he had made trial of achilles, and took aim at him with his spear,
holding his round shield before him and crying with a loud voice. "of a
truth," said he, "noble achilles, you deem that you shall this day sack
the city of the proud trojans. fool, there will be trouble enough yet
before it, for there is many a brave man of us still inside who will
stand in front of our dear parents with our wives and children, to
defend ilius. here therefore, huge and mighty wa
 
 ___________________________
 
rrior though you be,
here shall you die."

as he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the spear
struck achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of newly
wrought tin rang loudly, but the spear recoiled from the body of him
whom it had struck, and did not pierce it, for the god's gift stayed
it. achilles in his turn attacked noble agenor, but apollo would not
vouchsafe him glory, for he snatched agenor away and hid him in a thick
mist, sending him out of the battle unmolested. then he craftily drew
the son of peleus away from going after the host, for he put on the
semblance of agenor and stood in front of achilles, who ran towards him
to give him chase and pursued him over the corn lands of the plain,
turning him towards the deep waters of the river scamander. apollo ran
but a little way before him and beguiled achilles by making him think
all the time that he was on the point of overtaking 