ith what heart can any of the achaeans do your bidding,
either on foray or in open fighting? i came not warring here for any
ill the trojans had done me. i have no quarrel with them. they have not
raided my cattle nor my horses, nor cut down my harvests on the rich
plains of phthia; for between me and them there is a great space, both
mountain and sounding sea. we have followed you, sir insolence! for
your pleasure, not ours--to gain satisfaction from the trojans for your
shameless self and for menelaus. you forget this, and threaten to rob
me of the prize for which i have toiled, and which the sons of the
achaeans have given me. never when the achaeans sack any rich city of
the trojans do i receive so good a prize as you do, though it is my
hands that do the better part of the fighting. when the sharing comes,
your share is far the largest, and i, forsooth, must go back to my
ships, take what i can get and be thankful, when my labour of fighting
is done. now, therefore, i shall go back to pht
 
 ___________________________
 
in all directions to their ships. there they lighted their fires
at their tents and got dinner, offering sacrifice every man to one or
other of the gods, and praying each one of them that he might live to
come out of the fight. agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed a fat
five-year-old bull to the mighty son of saturn, and invited the princes
and elders of his host. first he asked nestor and king idomeneus, then
the two ajaxes and the son of tydeus, and sixthly ulysses, peer of gods
in counsel; but menelaus came of his own accord, for he knew how busy
his brother then was. they stood round the bull with the barley-meal in
their hands, and agamemnon prayed, saying, "jove, most glorious,
supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest upon the storm-cloud,
grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace
of priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed with fire. grant that
my sword may pierce the shirt of hector about his heart, and that full
many of his comrades may bite the du
 
 ___________________________
 
t a hundred ships under the command of
king agamemnon, son of atreus. his force was far both finest and most
numerous, and in their midst was the king himself, all glorious in his
armour of gleaming bronze--foremost among the heroes, for he was the
greatest king, and had most men under him.

and those that dwelt in lacedaemon, lying low among the hills, pharis,
sparta, with messe the haunt of doves; bryseae, augeae, amyclae, and
helos upon the sea; laas, moreover, and oetylus; these were led by
menelaus of the loud battle-cry, brother to agamemnon, and of them
there were sixty ships, drawn up apart from the others. among them went
menelaus himself, strong in zeal, urging his men to fight; for he
longed to avenge the toil and sorrow that he had suffered for the sake
of helen.

the men of pylos and arene, and thryum where is the ford of the river
alpheus; strong aipy, cyparisseis, and amphigenea; pteleum, helos, and
dorium, where the muses met thamyris, and stilled his minstrelsy for
ever. he wa
 
 ___________________________
 
iver maeander
and the lofty crests of mt. mycale. these were commanded by nastes and
amphimachus, the brave sons of nomion. he came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to
save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant
of aeacus, and achilles bore away his gold.

sarpedon and glaucus led the lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the xanthus.



book iii

  alexandria, also called paris, challenges menelaus--helen and
  priam view the achaeans from the wall--the covenant--paris
  and menelaus fight, and paris is worsted--venus carries him
  off to save him--scene between him and helen.

when the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream
overhead when rain and winter drive them over the flowing waters of
oceanus to bring death and destruction on the pygmies, and they wrangle
in the air as they fly; but the achaeans m
 
 ___________________________
 
 mountain
tops, bad for shepherds but better than night for thieves, and a man
can see no further than he can throw a stone, even so rose the dust
from under their feet as they made all speed over the plain.

when they were close up with one another, alexandrus came forward as
champion on the trojan side. on his shoulders he bore the skin of a
panther, his bow, and his sword, and he brandished two spears shod with
bronze as a challenge to the bravest of the achaeans to meet him in
single fight. menelaus saw him thus stride out before the ranks, and
was glad as a hungry lion that lights on the carcase of some goat or
horned stag, and devours it there and then, though dogs and youths set
upon him. even thus was menelaus glad when his eyes caught sight of
alexandrus, for he deemed that now he should be revenged. he sprang,
therefore, from his chariot, clad in his suit of armour.

alexandrus quailed as he saw menelaus come forward, and shrank in fear
of his life under cover of his men. as one who 
 
 ___________________________
 
d looked askance at. will not the achaeans mock at us and
say that we have sent one to champion us who is fair to see but who has
neither wit nor courage? did you not, such as you are, get your
following together and sail beyond the seas? did you not from your a
far country carry off a lovely woman wedded among a people of
warriors--to bring sorrow upon your father, your city, and your whole
country, but joy to your enemies, and hang-dog shamefacedness to
yourself? and now can you not dare face menelaus and learn what manner
of man he is whose wife you have stolen? where indeed would be your
lyre and your love-tricks, your comely locks and your fair favour, when
you were lying in the dust before him? the trojans are a weak-kneed
people, or ere this you would have had a shirt of stones for the wrongs
you have done them."

and alexandrus answered, "hector, your rebuke is just. you are hard as
the axe which a shipwright wields at his work, and cleaves the timber
to his liking. as the axe in his h
 
 ___________________________
 
and, so keen is the edge of your
scorn. still, taunt me not with the gifts that golden venus has given
me; they are precious; let not a man disdain them, for the gods give
them where they are minded, and none can have them for the asking. if
you would have me do battle with menelaus, bid the trojans and achaeans
take their seats, while he and i fight in their midst for helen and all
her wealth. let him who shall be victorious and prove to be the better
man take the woman and all she has, to bear them to his home, but let
the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace whereby you trojans shall
stay here in troy, while the others go home to argos and the land of
the achaeans."

when hector heard this he was glad, and went about among the trojan
ranks holding his spear by the m
 
 ___________________________
 
ddle to keep them back, and they all
sat down at his bidding: but the achaeans still aimed at him with
stones and arrows, till agamemnon shouted to them saying, "hold,
argives, shoot not, sons of the achaeans; hector desires to speak."

they ceased taking aim and were still, whereon hector spoke. "hear from
my mouth," said he, "trojans and achaeans, the saying of alexandrus,
through whom this quarrel has come about. he bids the trojans and
achaeans lay their armour upon the ground, while he and menelaus fight
in the midst of you for helen and all her wealth. let him who shall be
victorious and prove to be the better man take the woman and all she
has, to bear them to his own home, but let the rest swear to a solemn
covenant of peace."

thus he spoke, and they all held their peace, till menelaus of the loud
battle-cry addressed them. "and now," he said, "hear me too, for it is
i who am the most aggrieved. i deem that the parting of achaeans and
trojans is at hand, as well it may be, seeing how 
 
 ___________________________
 
r own room,
working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering
the battles between trojans and achaeans, that mars had made them fight
for her sake. iris then came close up to her and said, "come hither,
child, and see the strange doings of the trojans and achaeans. till now
they have been warring upon the plain, mad with lust of battle, but now
they have left off fighting, and are leaning upon their shields,
sitting still with their spears planted beside them. alexandrus and
menelaus are going to fight about yourself, and you are to be the wife
of him who is the victor."

thus spoke the goddess, and helen's heart yearned after her former
husband, her city, and her parents. she threw a white mantle over her
head, and hurried from her room, weeping as she went, not alone, but
attended by two of her handmaids, aethrae, daughter of pittheus, and
clymene. and straightway they were at the scaean gates.

the two sages, ucalegon and antenor, elders of the people, were seated
by the
 
 ___________________________
 
said, "who is that
other, shorter by a head than agamemnon, but broader across the chest
and shoulders? his armour is laid upon the ground, and he stalks in
front of the ranks as it were some great woolly ram ordering his ewes."

and helen answered, "he is ulysses, a man of great craft, son of
laertes. he was born in rugged ithaca, and excels in all manner of
stratagems and subtle cunning."

on this antenor said, "madam, you have spoken truly. ulysses once came
here as envoy about yourself, and menelaus with him. i received them in
my own house, and therefore know both of them by sight and
conversation. when they stood up in presence of the assembled trojans,
menelaus was the broader shouldered, but when both were seated ulysses
had the more royal presence. after a time they delivered their message,
and the speech of menelaus ran trippingly on the tongue; he did not say
much, for he was a man of few words, but he spoke very clearly and to
the point, though he was the younger man of the two; ul
 
 ___________________________
 
from his deep
chest like winter snow before the wind, then there was none to touch
him, and no man thought further of what he looked like."

priam then caught sight of ajax and asked, "who is that great and
goodly warrior whose head and broad shoulders tower above the rest of
the argives?"

"that," answered helen, "is huge ajax, bulwark of the achaeans, and on
the other side of him, among the cretans, stands idomeneus looking like
a god, and with the captains of the cretans round him. often did
menelaus receive him as a guest in our house when he came visiting us
from crete. i see, moreover, many other achaeans whose names i could
tell you, but there are two whom i can nowhere find, castor, breaker of
horses, and pollux the mighty boxer; they are children of my mother,
and own brothers to myself. either they have not left lacedaemon, or
else, though they have brought their ships, they will not show
themselves in battle for the shame and disgrace that i have brought
upon them."

she knew not th
 
 ___________________________
 
at both these heroes were already lying under the earth
in their own land of lacedaemon.

meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy oath-offerings through the
city--two lambs and a goatskin of wine, the gift of earth; and idaeus
brought the mixing bowl and the cups of gold. he went up to priam and
said, "son of laomedon, the princes of the trojans and achaeans bid you
come down on to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant. alexandrus
and menelaus are to fight for helen in single combat, that she and all
her wealth may go with him who is the victor. we are to swear to a
solemn covenant of peace whereby we others shall dwell here in troy,
while the achaeans return to argos and the land of the achaeans."

the old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the
horses, and they made all haste to do so. he mounted the chariot,
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor took his seat beside him;
they then drove through the scaean g
 
 ___________________________
 
e
dagger that hung by his sword, and cut wool from the lambs' heads; this
the men-servants gave about among the trojan and achaean princes, and
the son of atreus lifted up his hands in prayer. "father jove," he
cried, "that rulest in ida, most glorious in power, and thou oh sun,
that seest and givest ear to all things, earth and rivers, and ye who
in the realms below chastise the soul of him that has broken his oath,
witness these rites and guard them, that they be not vain. if
alexandrus kills menelaus, let him keep helen and all her wealth, while
we sail home with our ships; but if menelaus kills alexandrus, let the
trojans give back helen and all that she has; let them moreover pay
such fine to the achaeans as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among
those that shall be born hereafter. and if priam and his sons refuse
such fine when alexandrus has fallen, then will i stay here and fight
on till i have got satisfaction."

as he spoke he drew his knife across the throats of the victims, and
l
 
 ___________________________
 
d ye
other everlasting gods, grant that the brains of them who shall first
sin against their oaths--of them and their children--may be shed upon
the ground even as this wine, and let their wives become the slaves of
strangers."

thus they prayed, but not as yet would jove grant them their prayer.
then priam, descendant of dardanus, spoke, saying, "hear me, trojans
and achaeans, i will now go back to the wind-beaten city of ilius: i
dare not with my own eyes witness this fight between my son and
menelaus, for jove and the other immortals alone know which shall fall."

on this he laid the two lambs on his chariot and took his seat. he
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor sat beside him; the two
then went back to ilius. hector and ulysses measured the ground, and
cast lots from a helmet of bronze to see which should take aim first.
meanwhile the two hosts lifted up their hands and prayed saying,
"father jove, that rulest from ida, most glorious in power, grant that
he who first brought abo
 
 ___________________________
 
of lovely helen, put on his goodly armour.
first he greaved his legs with greaves of good make and fitted with
ancle-clasps of silver; after this he donned the cuirass of his brother
lycaon, and fitted it to his own body; he hung his silver-studded sword
of bronze about his shoulders, and then his mighty shield. on his
comely head he set his helmet, well-wrought, with a crest of horse-hair
that nodded menacingly above it, and he grasped a redoubtable spear
that suited his hands. in like fashion menelaus also put on his armour.

when they had thus armed, each amid his own people, they strode fierce
of aspect into the open space, and both trojans and achaeans were
struck with awe as they beheld them. they stood near one another on the
measured ground, brandishing their spears, and each furious against the
other. alexandrus aimed first, and struck the round shield of the son
of atreus, but the spear did not pierce it, for the shield turned its
point. menelaus next took aim, praying to father jove
 
 ___________________________
 
of
his helmet, but the sword fell shivered in three or four pieces from
his hand, and he cried, looking towards heaven, "father jove, of all
gods thou art the most despiteful; i made sure of my revenge, but the
sword has broken in my hand, my spear has been hurled in vain, and i
have not killed him."

with this he flew at alexandrus, caught him by the horsehair plume of
his helmet, and began dragging him towards the achaeans. the strap of
the helmet that went under his chin was choking him, and menelaus would
have dragged him off to his own great glory had not jove's daughter
venus been quick to mark and to break the strap of oxhide, so that the
empty helmet came away in his hand. this he flung to his comrades among
the achaeans, and was again springing upon alexandrus to run him
through with a spear, but venus snatched him up in a moment (as a god
can do), hid him under a cloud of darkness, and conveyed him to his own
bedchamber.

then she went to call helen, and found her on a high tower wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h beauty and dressed in
gorgeous apparel. no one would think he had just come from fighting,
but rather that he was going to a dance, or had done dancing and was
sitting down."

with these words she moved the heart of helen to anger. when she marked
the beautiful neck of the goddess, her lovely bosom, and sparkling
eyes, she marvelled at her and said, "goddess, why do you thus beguile
me? are you going to send me afield still further to some man whom you
have taken up in phrygia or fair meonia? menelaus has just vanquished
alexandrus, and is to take my hateful self back with him. you are come
here to betray me. go sit with alexandrus yourself; henceforth be
goddess no longer; never let your feet carry you back to olympus; worry
about him and look after him till he make you his wife, or, for the
matter of that, his slave--but me? i shall not go; i can garnish his
bed no longer; i should be a by-word among all the women of troy.
besides, i have trouble on my mind."

venus was very angry, and sai
 
 ___________________________
 
hey came to the house of alexandrus the maid-servants set about
their work, but helen went into her own room, and the laughter-loving
goddess took a seat and set it for her facing alexandrus. on this
helen, daughter of aegis-bearing jove, sat down, and with eyes askance
began to upbraid her husband.

"so you are come from the fight," said she; "would that you had fallen
rather by the hand of that brave man who was my husband. you used to
brag that you were a better man with hands and spear than menelaus. go,
then, and challenge him again--but i should advise you not to do so,
for if you are foolish enough to meet him in single combat, you will
soon fall by his spear."

and paris answered, "wife, do not vex me with your reproaches. this
time, with the help of minerva, menelaus has vanquished me; another
time i may myself be victor, for i too have gods that will stand by me.
come, let us lie down together and make friends. never yet was i so
passionately enamoured of you as at this moment--not e
 
 ___________________________
 
u as now." on this he led her
towards the bed, and his wife went with him.

thus they laid themselves on the bed together; but the son of atreus
strode among the throng, looking everywhere for alexandrus, and no man,
neither of the trojans nor of the allies, could find him. if they had
seen him they were in no mind to hide him, for they all of them hated
him as they did death itself. then agamemnon, king of men, spoke,
saying, "hear me, trojans, dardanians, and allies. the victory has been
with menelaus; therefore give back helen with all her wealth, and pay
such fine as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among them that shall
be born hereafter."

thus spoke the son of atreus, and the achaeans shouted in applause.



book iv

  a quarrel in olympus--minerva goes down and persuades fandarus
  to violate the oaths by wounding menelaus with an arrow--agamemnon
  makes a speech and sends for machaon--he then
  goes about among his captains and upbraids ulysses and
  sthenelus, who each of them ret
 
 ___________________________
 
ort fiercely--diomed checks
  sthenelus, and the two hosts then engage, with great slaughter
  on either side.

now the gods were sitting with jove in council upon the golden floor
while hebe went round pouring out nectar for them to drink, and as they
pledged one another in their cups of gold they looked down upon the
town of troy. the son of saturn then began to tease juno, talking at
her so as to provoke her. "menelaus," said he, "has two good friends
among the goddesses, juno of argos, and minerva of alalcomene, but they
only sit still and look on, while venus keeps ever by alexandrus' side
to defend him in any danger; indeed she has just rescued him when he
made sure that it was all over with him--for the victory really did lie
with menelaus. we must consider what we shall do about all this; shall
we set them fighting anew or make peace between them? if you will agree
to this last menelaus can take back hel
 
 ___________________________
 
"either we shall again
have war and din of combat, or jove the lord of battle will now make
peace between us."

thus did they converse. then minerva took the form of laodocus, son of
antenor, and went through the ranks of the trojans to find pandarus,
the redoubtable son of lycaon. she found him standing among the
stalwart heroes who had followed him from the banks of the aesopus, so
she went close up to him and said, "brave son of lycaon, will you do as
i tell you? if you dare send an arrow at menelaus you will win honour
and thanks from all the trojans, and especially from prince
alexandrus--he would be the first to requite you very handsomely if he
could see menelaus mount his funeral pyre, slain by an arrow from your
hand. take your home aim then, and pray to lycian apollo, the famous
archer; vow that when you get home to your strong city of zelea you
will offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour."

his fool's heart was persuaded, and he took his bow from its case. this
bow was ma
 
 ___________________________
 
de from the horns of a wild ibex which he had killed as it
was bounding from a rock; he had stalked it, and it had fallen as the
arrow struck it to the heart. its horns were sixteen palms long, and a
worker in horn had made them into a bow, smoothing them well down, and
giving them tips of gold. when pandarus had strung his bow he laid it
carefully on the ground, and his brave followers held their shields
before him lest the achaeans should set upon him before he had shot
menelaus. then he opened the lid of his quiver and took out a winged
arrow that had not yet been shot, fraught with the pangs of death. he
laid the arrow on the string and prayed to lycian apollo, the famous
archer, vowing that when he got home to his strong city of zelea he
would offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour. he laid the
notch of the arrow on the oxhide bowstring, and drew both notch and
string to his breast till the arrow-head was near the bow; then when
the bow was arched into a 
 
 ___________________________
 
half-circle he let fly, and the bow twanged,
and the string sang as the arrow flew gladly on over the heads of the
throng.

but the blessed gods did not forget thee, o menelaus, and jove's
daughter, driver of the spoil, was the first to stand before thee and
ward off the piercing arrow. she turned it from his skin as a mother
whisks a fly from off her child when it is sleeping sweetly; she guided
it to the part where the golden buckles of the belt that passed over
his double cuirass were fastened, so the arrow struck the belt that
went tightly round him. it went right through this and through the
cuirass of cunning workmanship; it also pierced the belt beneath it,
whi
 
 ___________________________
 
re next his skin to keep out darts or arrows; it was this
that served him in the best stead, nevertheless the arrow went through
it and grazed the top of the skin, so that blood began flowing from the
wound.

as when some woman of meonia or caria strains purple dye on to a piece
of ivory that is to be the cheek-piece of a horse, and is to be laid up
in a treasure house--many a knight is fain to bear it, but the king
keeps it as an ornament of which both horse and driver may be
proud--even so, o menelaus, were your shapely thighs and your legs down
to your fair ancles stained with blood.

when king agamemnon saw the blood flowing from the wound he was afraid,
and so was brave menelaus himself till he saw that the barbs of the
arrow and the thread that bound the arrow-head to the shaft were still
outside the wound. then he took heart, but agamemnon heaved a deep sigh
as he held menelaus's hand in his own, and his comrades made moan in
concert. "dear brother," he cried, "i have been the death of 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the
right hands of fellowship in which we have put our trust shall not be
vain. if he that rules olympus fulfil it not here and now, he will yet
fulfil it hereafter, and they shall pay dearly with their lives and
with their wives and children. the day will surely come when mighty
ilius shall be laid low, with priam and priam's people, when the son of
saturn from his high throne shall overshadow them with his awful aegis
in punishment of their present treachery. this shall surely be; but
how, menelaus, shall i mourn you, if it be your lot now to die? i
should return to argos as a by-word, for the achaeans will at once go
home. we shall leave priam and the trojans the glory of still keeping
helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie here at troy with
your purpose not fulfilled. then shall some braggart trojan leap upon
your tomb and say, 'ever thus may agamemnon wreak his vengeance; he
brought his army in vain; he is gone home to his own land with empty
ships, and has left menelaus b
 
 ___________________________
 
ehind him.' thus will one of them say,
and may the earth then swallow me."

but menelaus reassured him and said, "take heart, and do not alarm the
people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal part, for my outer belt
of burnished metal first stayed it, and under this my cuirass and the
belt of mail which the bronze-smiths made me."

and agamemnon answered, "i trust, dear menelaus, that it may be even
so, but the surgeon shall examine your wound and lay herbs upon it to
relieve your pain."

he then said to talthybius, "talthybius, tell machaon, son to the great
physician, aesculapius, to come and see menelaus immediately. some
trojan or lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our dismay,
and to his own great glory."

talthybius did as he was told, and went about the host trying to find
machaon. presently he found standing amid the brave warriors who had
followed h
 
 ___________________________
 
im from tricca; thereon he went up to him and said, "son of
aesculapius, king agamemnon says you are to come and see menelaus
immediately. some trojan or lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow
to our dismay and to his own great glory."

thus did he speak, and machaon was moved to go. they passed through the
spreading host of the achaeans and went on till they came to the place
where menelaus had been wounded and was lying with the chieftains
gathered in a circle round him. machaon passed into the middle of the
ring and at once drew the arrow from the belt, bending its barbs back
through the force with which he pulled it out. he undid the burnished
belt, and beneath this the cuirass and the belt of mail which the
bronze-smiths had made; then, when he had seen the wound, he wiped away
the blood and applied some soothing drugs which chiron had given to
aesculapius out of the good will
 
 ___________________________
 
 he bore him.

while they were thus busy about menelaus, the trojans came forward
against them, for they had put on their armour, and now renewed the
fight.

you would not have then found agamemnon asleep nor cowardly and
unwilling to fight, but eager rather for the fray. he left his chariot
rich with bronze and his panting steeds in charge of eurymedon, son of
ptolemaeus the son of peiraeus, and bade him hold them in readiness
against the time his limbs should weary of going about and giving
orders to so many, for he went among the ranks on foot. w
 
 ___________________________
 
 the broad of his back,
just as he was turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders
and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground.

then idomeneus killed phaesus, son of borus the meonian, who had come
from varne. mighty idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as he
was mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshrouded him as
he fell heavily from the car.

the squires of idomeneus spoiled him of his armour, while menelaus, son
of atreus, killed scamandrius the son of strophius, a mighty huntsman
and keen lover of the chase. diana herself had taught him how to kill
every kind of wild creature that is bred in mountain forests, but
neither she nor his famed skill in archery could now save him, for the
spear of menelaus struck him in the back as he was flying; it struck
him between the shoulders and went right through his chest, so that he
fell headlong and his armour rang rattling round him.

meriones then killed p
 
 ___________________________
 
ound.

then aeneas killed two champions of the danaans, crethon and
orsilochus. their father was a rich man who lived in the strong city of
phere and was descended from the river alpheus, whose broad stream
flows through the land of the pylians. the river begat orsilochus, who
ruled over much people and was father to diocles, who in his turn begat
twin sons, crethon and orsilochus, well skilled in all the arts of war.
these, when they grew up, went to ilius with the argive fleet in the
cause of menelaus and agamemnon sons of atreus, and there they both of
them fell. as two lions whom their dam has reared in the depths of some
mountain forest to plunder homesteads and carry off sheep and cattle
till they get killed by the hand of man, so were these two vanquished
by aeneas, and fell like high pine-trees to the ground.

brave menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the
front, clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for mars
egged him on to do so with intent that he sho
 
 ___________________________
 
uld be killed by aeneas;
but antilochus the son of nestor saw him and sprang forward, fearing
that the king might come to harm and thus bring all their labour to
nothing; when, therefore aeneas and menelaus were setting their hands
and spears against one another eager to do battle, antilochus placed
himself by the side of menelaus. aeneas, bold though he was, drew back
on seeing the two heroes side by side in front of him, so they drew the
bodies of crethon and orsilochus to the ranks of the achaeans and
committed the two poor fellows into the hands of their comrades. they
then turned back and fought in the front ranks.

they killed pylaemenes peer of mars, leader of the paphlagonian
warriors. menelaus struck him on the collar-bone as he was standing on
his chariot, while antilochus hit his charioteer and squire mydon, t
 
 ___________________________
 
ho last to be slain by mars
and hector? they were valiant teuthras, and orestes the renowned
charioteer, trechus the aetolian warrior, oenomaus, helenus the son of
oenops, and oresbius of the gleaming girdle, who was possessed of great
wealth, and dwelt by the cephisian lake with the other boeotians who
lived near him, owners of a fertile country.

now when the goddess juno saw the argives thus falling, she said to
minerva, "alas, daughter of aegis-bearing jove, unweariable, the
promise we made menelaus that he should not return till he had sacked
the city of ilius will be of no effect if we let mars rage thus
furiously. let us go into the fray at once."

minerva did not gainsay her. thereon the august goddess, daughter of
great saturn, began to harness her gold-bedizened steeds. hebe with all
speed fitted on the eight-spoked wheels of bronze that were on either
side of the iron axle-tree. the felloes of the wheels were of gold,
imperishable, and over these there was a tire of bronze, wondrous
 
 ___________________________
 
e was a bastard.
while tending his sheep he had converse with the nymph, and she
conceived twin sons; these the son of mecisteus now slew, and he
stripped the armour from their shoulders. polypoetes then killed
astyalus, ulysses pidytes of percote, and teucer aretaon. ablerus fell
by the spear of nestor's son antilochus, and agamemnon, king of men,
killed elatus who dwelt in pedasus by the banks of the river satnioeis.
leitus killed phylacus as he was flying, and eurypylus slew melanthus.

then menelaus of the loud war-cry took adrestus alive, for his horses
ran into a tamarisk bush, as they were flying wildly over the plain,
and broke the pole from the car; they went on towards the city along
with the others in full flight, but adrestus rolled out, and fell in
the dust flat on his face by the wheel of his chariot; menelaus came up
to him spear in hand, but adrestus caught him by the knees begging for
his life. "take me alive," he cried, "son of atreus, and you shall have
a full ransom for me:
 
 ___________________________
 
 my father is rich and has much treasure of gold,
bronze, and wrought iron laid by in his house. from this store he will
give you a large ransom should he hear of my being alive and at the
ships of the achaeans."

thus did he plead, and menelaus was for yielding and giving him to a
squire to take to the ships of the achaeans, but agamemnon came running
up to him and rebuked him. "my good menelaus," said he, "this is no
time for giving quarter. has, then, your house fared so well at the
hands of the trojans? let us not spare a single one of them--not even
the child unborn and in its mother's womb; let not a man of them be
left alive, but let all in ilius perish, unheeded and forgotten."

thus did he speak, and his brother was persuaded by him, for his words
were just. menelaus, therefore, thrust adrestus from him, whereon king
agamemnon struck him in the flank, and he fell: then the son 
 
 ___________________________
 
 much on
your account. let us be going, and we will make things right hereafter,
should jove vouchsafe us to set the cup of our deliverance before
ever-living gods of heaven in our own homes, when we have chased the
achaeans from troy."



book vii

  hector and ajax fight--hector is getting worsted when night
  comes on and parts them--they exchange presents--the
  burial of the dead, and the building of a wall round their
  ships by the achaeans--the achaeans buy their wine of
  agamemnon and menelaus.

with these words hector passed through the gates, and his brother
alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. as when heaven sends a
breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have
laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome
was the sight of these two heroes to the trojans.

thereon alexandrus killed menesthius the son of areithous; he lived in
arne, and was son of areithous the mace-man, and of phylomedusa. hector
threw a spear at eioneus and stru
 
 ___________________________
 
 it in the temple of apollo, but i will give up
his body, that the achaeans may bury him at their ships, and the build
him a mound by the wide waters of the hellespont. then will one say
hereafter as he sails his ship over the sea, 'this is the monument of
one who died long since a champion who was slain by mighty hector.'
thus will one say, and my fame shall not be lost."

thus did he speak, but they all held their peace, ashamed to decline
the challenge, yet fearing to accept it, till at last menelaus rose and
rebuked them, for he was angry. "alas," he cried, "vain braggarts,
women forsooth not men, double-dyed indeed will be the stain upon us if
no man of the danaans will now face hector. may you be turned every man
of you into earth and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious in
your places. i will myself go out against this man, but the upshot of
the fight will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods."

with these words he put on his armour; and then, o menelaus, your life
wo
 
 ___________________________
 
uld have come to an end at the hands of hands of hector, for he was
far better the man, had not the princes of the achaeans sprung upon you
and checked you. king agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said,
"menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. be patient in spite of
passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself
as hector son of priam, who is feared by many another as well as you.
even achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from
meeting him in battle. sit down your own people, and the achaeans will
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hur
 
 ___________________________
 
 that i brought home with her from argos i
will restore, and will add yet further of my own."

on this, when paris had spoken and taken his seat, priam of the race of
dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: "hear me, trojans, dardanians, and
allies, that i may speak even as i am minded. get your suppers now as
hitherto throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful. at
daybreak let idaeus go to the ships, and tell agamemnon and menelaus
sons of atreus the saying of alexandrus through whom this quarrel has
come about; and let him also be instant with them that they now cease
fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till
heaven decide between us and give victory to one or to the other."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. they took supper
in their companies and at daybreak idaeus went his way to the ships. he
found the danaans, servants of mars, in council at the stern of
agamemnon's ship, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and took his place in the midst of them. "son of
atreus," he said, "and princes of the achaean host, priam and the other
noble trojans have sent me to tell you the saying of alexandrus through
whom this quarrel has come about, if so be that you may find it
acceptable. all the treasure he took with him in his ships to
troy--would that he had sooner perished--he will restore, and will add
yet further of his own, but he will not give up the wedded wife of
menelaus, though the trojans would have him do so. priam bade me
inquire further if you will cease fighting till we burn our dead;
hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give
victory to one or to the other."

they all held their peace, but presently diomed of the loud war-cry
spoke, saying, "let there be no taking, neither treasure, nor yet
helen, for even a child may see that the doom of the trojans is at
hand."

the sons of the achaeans shouted applause at the words that diome
 
 ___________________________
 
g it into the sea; you can cover the beach
with sand again, and the great wall of the achaeans will then be
utterly effaced."

thus did they converse, and by sunset the work of the achaeans was
completed; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got their
supper. many ships had come with wine from lemnos, sent by euneus the
son of jason, born to him by hypsipyle. the son of jason freighted them
with ten thousand measures of wine, which he sent specially to the sons
of atreus, agamemnon and menelaus. from this supply the achaeans bought
their wine, some with bronze, some with iron, some with hides, some
with whole heifers, and some again with captives. they spread a goodly
banquet and feasted the whole night through, as also did the trojans
and their allies in the city. but all the time jove boded them ill and
roared with his portentous thunder. pale fear got hold upon them, and
they spilled the wine from their cups on to the ground, nor did any
dare drink till he had made offerings to the
 
 ___________________________
 
 man of all the many danaans who could then boast that he
had driven his horses over the trench and gone forth to fight sooner
than the son of tydeus; long before any one else could do so he slew an
armed warrior of the trojans, agelaus the son of phradmon. he had
turned his horses in flight, but the spear struck him in the back
midway between his shoulders and went right through his chest, and his
armour rang rattling round him as he fell forward from his chariot.

after him came agamemnon and menelaus, sons of atreus, the two ajaxes
clothed in valour as with a garment, idomeneus and his companion in
arms meriones, peer of murderous mars, and eurypylus the brave son of
euaemon. ninth came teucer with his bow, and took his place under cover
of the shield of ajax son of telamon. when ajax lifted his shield
teucer would peer round, and when he had hit any one in the throng, the
man would fall dead; then teucer would hie back to ajax as a child to
its mother, and again duck down under his shield.
 
 ___________________________
 
hips and hosts of the achaeans, he tore his hair by handfuls before
jove on high, and groaned aloud for the very disquietness of his soul.
in the end he deemed it best to go at once to nestor son of neleus, and
see if between them they could find any way of the achaeans from
destruction. he therefore rose, put on his shirt, bound his sandals
about his comely feet, flung the skin of a huge tawny lion over his
shoulders--a skin that reached his feet--and took his spear in his hand.

neither could menelaus sleep, for he, too, boded ill for the argives
who for his sake had sailed from far over the seas to fight the
trojans. he covered his broad back with the skin of a spotted panther,
put a casque of bronze upon his head, and took his spear in his brawny
hand. then he went to rouse his brother, who was by far the most
powerful of the achaeans, and was honoured by the people as though he
were a god. he found him by the stern of his ship already putting his
goodly array about his shoulders, and righ
 
 ___________________________
 
t glad was he that his
brother had come.

menelaus spoke first. "why," said he, "my dear brother, are you thus
arming? are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit the
trojans? i greatly fear that no one will do you this service, and spy
upon the enemy alone in the dead of night. it will be a deed of great
daring."

and king agamemnon answered, "menelaus, we both of us need shrewd
counsel to save the argives and our ships, for jove has changed his
mind, and inclines towards hector's sacrifices rather than ours. i
never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one
day as hector has now wrought against the sons of the achaeans--and
that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor
goddess. the argives will rue it long and deeply. run, therefore, with
all speed by the line of the ships, and call ajax and idomen
 
 ___________________________
 
eus.
meanwhile i will go to nestor, and bid him rise and go about among the
companies of our sentinels to give them their instructions; they will
listen to him sooner than to any man, for his own son, and meriones
brother in arms to idomeneus, are captains over them. it was to them
more particularly that we gave this charge."

menelaus replied, "how do i take your meaning? am i to stay with them
and wait your coming, or shall i return here as soon as i have given
your orders?" "wait," answered king agamemnon, "for there are so many
paths about the camp that we might miss one another. call every man on
your way, and bid him be stirring; name him by his lineage and by his
father's name, give each all titular observance, and stand not too much
upon your own dignity; we must take our full share of toil, for at our
birth jove laid
 
 ___________________________
 
ght."

nestor replied, "most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon, jove
will not do all for hector that hector thinks he will; he will have
troubles yet in plenty if achilles will lay aside his anger. i will go
with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of tydeus, or
ulysses, or fleet ajax and the valiant son of phyleus. some one had
also better go and call ajax and king idomeneus, for their ships are
not near at hand but the farthest of all. i cannot however refrain from
blaming menelaus, much as i love him and respect him--and i will say so
plainly, even at the risk of offending you--for sleeping and leaving
all this trouble to yourself. he ought to be going about imploring aid
from all the princes of the achaeans, for we are in extreme danger."

and agamemnon answered, "sir, you may sometimes blame him justly, for
he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself--not indeed from
sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and expects me
to take the lead. on this 
 
 ___________________________
 
omed of the loud war-cry spoke saying,
"nestor, gladly will i visit the host of the trojans over against us,
but if another will go with me i shall do so in greater confidence and
comfort. when two men are together, one of them may see some
opportunity which the other has not caught sight of; if a man is alone
he is less full of resource, and his wit is weaker."

on this several offered to go with diomed. the two ajaxes, servants of
mars, meriones, and the son of nestor all wanted to go, so did menelaus
son of atreus; ulysses also wished to go among the host of the trojans,
for he was ever full of daring, and thereon agamemnon king of men spoke
thus: "diomed," said he, "son of tydeus, man after my own heart, choose
your comrade for yourself--take the best man of those that have
offered, for many would now go with you. do not through delicacy reject
the better man, and take the worst out of respect for his lineage,
because he is of more royal blood."

he said this because he feared for menelaus
 
 ___________________________
 
his way back to his lair--the hind can do
nothing for them even though she be close by, for she is in an agony of
fear, and flies through the thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost
speed before the mighty monster--so, no man of the trojans could help
isus and antiphus, for they were themselves flying in panic before the
argives.

then king agamemnon took the two sons of antimachus, pisander and brave
hippolochus. it was antimachus who had been foremost in preventing
helen's being restored to menelaus, for he was largely bribed by
alexandrus; and now agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same
chariot, trying to bring their horses to a stand--for they had lost
hold of the reins and the horses were mad with fear. the son of atreus
sprang upon them like a lion, and the pair besought him from their
chariot. "take us alive," they cried, "son of atreus, and you shall
receive a great ransom for us. our father antimachus has great store of
gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this he will sat
 
 ___________________________
 
isfy you with
a very large ransom should he hear of our being alive at the ships of
the achaeans."

with such piteous words and tears did they beseech the king, but they
heard no pitiful answer in return. "if," said agamemnon, "you are sons
of antimachus, who once at a council of trojans proposed that menelaus
and ulysses, who had come to you as envoys, should be killed and not
suffered to return, you shall now pay for the foul iniquity of your
father."

as he spoke he felled pisander from his chariot to the earth, smiting
him on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face uppermost upon the
ground. hippolochus fled, but him too did agamemnon smite; he cut off
his hands and his head--which he sent rolling in among the crowd as
though it were a ball. there he let them both lie, and wherever the
rank
 
 ___________________________
 
d
devour you. whereas even though i fall the achaeans will give me my due
rites of burial."

so saying he drew socus's heavy spear out of his flesh and from his
shield, and the blood welled forth when the spear was withdrawn so that
he was much dismayed. when the trojans saw that ulysses was bleeding
they raised a great shout and came on in a body towards him; he
therefore gave ground, and called his comrades to come and help him.
thrice did he cry as loudly as man can cry, and thrice did brave
menelaus hear him; he turned, therefore, to ajax who was close beside
him and said, "ajax, noble son of telamon, captain of your people, the
cry of ulysses rings in my ears, as though the trojans had cut him off
and were worsting him while he is single-handed. let us make our way
through the throng; it will be well that we defend him; i fear he may
come to harm for all his valour if he be left without support, and the
danaans would miss him sorely."

he led the way and mighty ajax went with him. the tro
 
 ___________________________
 
d was warm and his strength has lasted, but
when the arrow has overcome him, the savage jackals devour him in the
shady glades of the forest. then heaven sends a fierce lion thither,
whereon the jackals fly in terror and the lion robs them of their
prey--even so did trojans many and brave gather round crafty ulysses,
but the hero stood at bay and kept them off with his spear. ajax then
came up with his shield before him like a wall, and stood hard by,
whereon the trojans fled in all directions. menelaus took ulysses by
the hand, and led him out of the press while his squire brought up his
chariot, but ajax rushed furiously on the trojans and killed doryclus,
a bastard son of priam; then he wounded pandocus, lysandrus, pyrasus,
and pylartes; as some swollen torrent comes rushing in full flood from
the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain of heaven--many a dry
oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much mud does it bring down and
cast into the sea--even so did brave ajax chase the foe f
 
 ___________________________
 
o did he
move convulsively for a while, but not for very long, till meriones
came up and drew the spear out of his body, and his eyes were veiled in
darkness.

helenus then struck deipyrus with a great thracian sword, hitting him
on the temple in close combat and tearing the helmet from his head; the
helmet fell to the ground, and one of those who were fighting on the
achaean side took charge of it as it rolled at his feet, but the eyes
of deipyrus were closed in the darkness of death.

on this menelaus was grieved, and made menacingly towards helenus,
brandishing his spear; but helenus drew his bow, and the two attacked
one another at one and the same moment, the one with his spear, and the
other with his bow and arrow. the son of priam hit the breastplate of
menelaus's corslet, but the arrow glanced from off it. as black beans
or pulse come pattering down on to a threshing-floor from the broad
winnowing-shovel, blown by shrill winds and shaken by the shovel--even
so did the arrow glance off 
 
 ___________________________
 
and recoil from the shield of menelaus, who
in his turn wounded the hand with which helenus carried his bow; the
spear went right through his hand and stuck in the bow itself, so that
to his life he retreated under cover of his men, with his hand dragging
by his side--for the spear weighed it down till agenor drew it out and
bound the hand carefully up in a woollen sling which his esquire had
with him.

pisander then made straight at menelaus--his evil destiny luring him on
to his doom, for he was to fall in fight with you, o menelaus. when the
two were hard by one another the spear of the son of atreus turned
aside and he missed his aim; pisander then struck the shield of brave
menelaus but could not pierce it, for the shield stayed the spear and
broke the shaft; nevertheless he was glad and made sure of victory;
forthwith, however, the son of atreus drew his sword and sprang upon
him. pisander then seized the bronze battle-axe, wi
 
 ___________________________
 
th its long and
polished handle of olive wood that hung by his side under his shield,
and the two made at one another. pisander struck the peak of menelaus's
crested helmet just under the crest itself, and menelaus hit pisander
as he was coming towards him, on the forehead, just at the rise of his
nose; the bones cracked and his two gore-bedrabbled eyes fell by his
feet in the dust. he fell backwards to the ground, and menelaus set his
heel upon him, stripped him of his armour, and vaunted over him saying,
"even thus shall you trojans leave the ships of the achaeans, proud and
insatiate of battle though you be, nor shall you lack any of the
disgrace and shame which you have heaped upon myself. cowardly
she-wolves that you are, you feared not the anger of dread jove,
avenger of violated hospitality, who will one day destroy your city;
you stole my wedded wife and wickedly carried off much treasure when
you were her gue
 
 ___________________________
 
as you may, you shall be
stayed. o father jove, you, who they say art above all, both gods and
men, in wisdom, and from whom all things that befall us do proceed, how
can you thus favour the trojans--men so proud and overweening, that
they are never tired of fighting? all things pall after a while--sleep,
love, sweet song, and stately dance--still these are things of which a
man would surely have his fill rather than of battle, whereas it is of
battle that the trojans are insatiate."

so saying menelaus stripped the blood-stained armour from the body of
pisander, and handed it over to his men; then he again ranged himself
among those who were in the front of the fight.

harpalion son of king pylaemenes then sprang upon him; he had come to
fight at troy along with his father, but he did not go home again. he
struck the middle of menelaus's shield with his spear but could not
pierce it, and to save his life drew back under cover of his men,
looking round him on every side lest he should be wound
 
 ___________________________
 
 quarters, but his good corslet made with plates of metal saved
him; phyleus had brought it from ephyra and the river selleis, where
his host, king euphetes, had given it him to wear in battle and protect
him. it now served to save the life of his son. then meges struck the
topmost crest of dolops's bronze helmet with his spear and tore away
its plume of horse-hair, so that all newly dyed with scarlet as it was
it tumbled down into the dust. while he was still fighting and
confident of victory, menelaus came up to help meges, and got by the
side of dolops unperceived; he then speared him in the shoulder, from
behind, and the point, driven so furiously, went through into his
chest, whereon he fell headlong. the two then made towards him to strip
him of his armour, but hector called on all his brothers for help, and
he especially upbraided brave melanippus son of hiketaon, who erewhile
used to pasture his herds of cattle in percote before the war broke
out; but when the ships of the danaans came
 
 ___________________________
 
hile ajax son of telamon was cheering on the argives. "my
friends," he cried, "be men, and fear dishonour; quit yourselves in
battle so as to win respect from one another. men who respect each
other's good opinion are less likely to be killed than those who do
not, but in flight there is neither gain nor glory."

thus did he exhort men who were already bent upon driving back the
trojans. they laid his words to heart and hedged the ships as with a
wall of bronze, while jove urged on the trojans. menelaus of the loud
battle-cry urged antilochus on. "antilochus," said he, "you are young
and there is none of the achaeans more fleet of foot or more valiant
than you are. see if you cannot spring upon some trojan and kill him."

he hurried away when he had thus spurred antilochus, who at once darted
out from the front ranks and aimed a spear, after looking carefully
round him. the trojans fell back as he threw, and the dart did not
speed from his hand without effect, for it struck melanippus the prou
 
 ___________________________
 
 breath for a little
while; but the fury of the fight was not yet over, for the trojans were
not driven back in utter rout, but still gave battle, and were ousted
from their ground only by sheer fighting.

the fight then became more scattered, and the chieftains killed one
another when and how they could. the valiant son of menoetius first
drove his spear into the thigh of areilycus just as he was turning
round; the point went clean through, and broke the bone so that he fell
forward. meanwhile menelaus struck thoas in the chest, where it was
exposed near the rim of his shield, and he fell dead. the son of
phyleus saw amphiclus about to attack him, and ere he could do so took
aim at the upper part of his thigh, where the muscles are thicker than
in any other part; the spear tore through all the sinews of the leg,
and his eyes were closed in darkness. of the sons of nestor one,
antilochus, speared atymnius, driving the point of the spear through
his throat, and down he fell. maris then sprang o
 
 ___________________________
 
ut achilles, son of lovely thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?"

as he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. he then
went spear in hand after automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of
aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the
gods had given as a rich gift to peleus bore him swiftly from the field.



book xvii

  the fight around the body of patroclus.

brave menelaus son of atreus now came to know that patroclus had
fallen, and made his way through the front ranks clad in full armour to
bestride him. as a cow stands lowing over her first calf, even so did
yellow-haired menelaus bestride patroclus. he held his round shield and
his spear in front of him, resolute to kill any who should dare face
him. but the son of panthous had also noted the body, and came up to
menelaus saying, "menelaus, son of atreus, draw back, leave the body,
and let the bloodstained sp
 
 ___________________________
 
oils be. i was first of the trojans and
their brave allies to drive my spear into patroclus, let me, therefore,
have my full glory among the trojans, or i will take aim and kill you."

to this menelaus answered in great anger "by father jove, boasting is
an ill thing. the pard is not more bold, nor the lion nor savage
wild-boar, which is fiercest and most dauntless of all creatures, than
are the proud sons of panthous. yet hyperenor did not see out the days
of his youth when he made light of me and withstood me, deeming me the
meanest soldier among the danaans. his own feet never bore him back to
gladden his wife and parents. even so shall i make an end of you too,
if you withstand me; get yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u back into the crowd and do not face me, or
it shall be worse for you. even a fool may be wise after the event."

euphorbus would not listen, and said, "now indeed, menelaus, shall you
pay for the death of my brother over whom you vaunted, and whose wife
you widowed in her bridal chamber, while you brought grief unspeakable
on his parents. i shall comfort these poor people if i bring your head
and armour and place them in the hands of panthous and noble phrontis.
the time is come when this matter shall be fought out and settled, for
me or against me."

as he spoke he struck menelaus full on the shield, but the spear did
not go through, for the shield turned its poi
 
 ___________________________
 
nt. menelaus then took
aim, praying to father jove as he did so; euphorbus was drawing back,
and menelaus struck him about the roots of his throat, leaning his
whole weight on the spear, so as to drive it home. the point went clean
through his neck, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground. his hair which was like that of the graces, and
his locks so deftly bound in bands of silver and gold, were all
bedrabbled with blood. as one who has grown a fine young olive tree in
a clear space where there is abundance of water--the plant is full of
promise, and though the winds
 
 ___________________________
 
 beat upon it from every quarter it puts
forth its white blossoms till the blasts of some fierce hurricane sweep
down upon it and level it with the ground--even so did menelaus strip
the fair youth euphorbus of his armour after he had slain him. or as
some fierce lion upon the mountains in the pride of his strength
fastens on the finest heifer in a herd as it is feeding--first he
breaks her neck with his strong jaws, and then gorges on her blood and
entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue and cry against him, but they
stand aloof and will not come close to him, for they are pale with
fear--even so no one had the courage to face valiant menelaus. the son
of atreus wou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld have then carried off the armour of the son of panthous
with ease, had not phoebus apollo been angry, and in the guise of
mentes chief of the cicons incited hector to attack him. "hector," said
he, "you are now going after the horses of the noble son of aeacus, but
you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven by
mortal man, save only by achilles, who is son to an immortal mother.
meanwhile menelaus son of atreus has bestridden the body of patroclus
and killed the noblest of the trojans, euphorbus son of panthous, so
that he can fight no more."

the god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of
hector was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the ranks
and saw euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still flowing from
his wound, and menelaus stripping him of his armour. on this he made
his way to the front like a flame of fire, clad in his gleaming armour,
an
 
 ___________________________
 
him. yet, if i could find ajax, the two of us would
fight hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of
patroclus for achilles son of peleus. this, of many evils would be the
least."

while he was thus in two minds, the trojans came up to him with hector
at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off--even so did menelaus son of atreus turn and leave the body
of patroclus. when among the body of his men, he looked around for
mighty ajax son of telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme left
of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep on
fighting, for phoebus apollo had spread a great panic among them. he
ran up to him and said, "ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to
dead patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to achilles--as for
his armour, hector already has it."

these words 
 
 ___________________________
 
stirred the heart of ajax, and he made his way among the
front ranks, menelaus going with him. hector had stripped patroclus of
his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the
body to fling before the dogs of troy. but ajax came up with his shield
like wall before him, on which hector withdrew under shelter of his
men, and sprang on to his chariot, giving the armour over to the
trojans to take to the city, as a great trophy for himself; ajax,
therefore, covered the body of patroclus with his broad shield and
bestrode him; as a lion stands over his w
 
 ___________________________
 
helps if hunters have come
upon him in a forest when he is with his little ones--in the pride and
fierceness of his strength he draws his knit brows down till they cover
his eyes--even so did ajax bestride the body of patroclus, and by his
side stood menelaus son of atreus, nursing great sorrow in his heart.

then glaucus son of hippolochus looked fiercely at hector and rebuked
him sternly. "hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight
you are sadly wanting. a runaway like yourself has no claim to so great
a reputation. think how you may now save your town and citadel by the
hands of your own people born in ilius; for you will get no lycians to
fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incessant
hardships. are you likely, s
 
 ___________________________
 
ring patroclus, dead though he be, into the hands of the
trojans, and shall make ajax give way before him, i will give him one
half of the spoils while i keep the other. he will thus share like
honour with myself."

when he had thus spoken they charged full weight upon the danaans with
their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran high that
he should force ajax son of telamon to yield up the body--fools that
they were, for he was about to take the lives of many. then ajax said
to menelaus, "my good friend menelaus, you and i shall hardly come out
of this fight alive. i am less concerned for the body of patroclus, who
will shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures of troy, than for
the safety of my own head and yours. hector has wrapped us round in a
storm of battle from every quarter, and our destruction seems now
certain. call then upon the princes of the danaans if there is any who
can hear us."

menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the danaans for help at the top
of hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s voice. "my friends," he cried, "princes and counsellors of the
argives, all you who with agamemnon and menelaus drink at the public
cost, and give orders each to his own people as jove vouchsafes him
power and glory, the fight is so thick about me that i cannot
distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and
think it shame that patroclus should become meat and morsel for trojan
hounds."

fleet ajax son of oileus heard him and was first to force his way
through the fight and run to help him. next came idomeneus and meriones
his esquire, peer of murderous mars. as for the others that
 
 ___________________________
 
ing with automedon, who prayed to
father jove and was forthwith filled with courage and strength
abounding. he turned to his trusty comrade alcimedon and said,
"alcimedon, keep your horses so close up that i may feel their breath
upon my back; i doubt that we shall not stay hector son of priam till
he has killed us and mounted behind the horses; he will then either
spread panic among the ranks of the achaeans, or himself be killed
among the foremost."

on this he cried out to the two ajaxes and menelaus, "ajaxes captains
of the argives, and menelaus, give the dead body over to them that are
best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for hector
and aeneas who are the two best men among the trojans, are pressing us
hard in the full tide of war. nevertheless the issue lies on the lap of
heaven, i will therefore hurl my spear and leave the rest to jove."

he poised and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the round
shield of aretus, and went right through it for the shiel
 
 ___________________________
 
gain raged about patroclus, for
minerva came down from heaven and roused its fury by the command of
far-seeing jove, who had changed his mind and sent her to encourage the
danaans. as when jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token to
mankind either of war or of the chill storms that stay men from their
labour and plague the flocks--even so, wrapped in such radiant raiment,
did minerva go in among the host and speak man by man to each. first
she took the form and voice of phoenix and spoke to menelaus son of
atreus, who was standing near her. "menelaus," said she, "it will be
shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of achilles
under the walls of troy. therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be
so also."

menelaus answered, "phoenix, my good old friend, may minerva vouchsafe
me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall i stand by
patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but hector is
as a raging fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for j
 
 ___________________________
 
elf before any of the other
gods. therefore she put strength into his knees and shoulders, and made
him as bold as a fly, which, though driven off will yet come again and
bite if it can, so dearly does it love man's blood--even so bold as
this did she make him as he stood over patroclus and threw his spear.
now there was among the trojans a man named podes, son of eetion, who
was both rich and valiant. hector held him in the highest honour for he
was his comrade and boon companion; the spear of menelaus struck this
man in the girdle just as he had turned in flight, and went right
through him. whereon he fell heavily forward, and menelaus son of
atreus drew off his body from the trojans into the ranks of his own
people.

apollo then went up to hector and spurred him on to fight, in the
likeness of phaenops son of asius who lived in abydos and was the most
favoured of all hector's guests. in his likeness apollo said, "hector,
who of the achaeans will fear you henceforward now that you have
quail
 
 ___________________________
 
ed before menelaus who has ever been rated poorly as a soldier?
yet he has now got a corpse away from the trojans single-handed, and
has slain your own true comrade, a man brave among the foremost, podes
son of eetion."

a dark cloud of grief fell upon hector as he heard, and he made his way
to the front clad in full armour. thereon the son of saturn seized his
bright tasselled aegis, and veiled ida in cloud: he sent forth his
lightnings and his thunders, and as he shook his aegis he gave victory
to the trojans a
 
 ___________________________
 
f murderous hector. for hector hit him on
the jaw under the ear; the end of the spear drove out his teeth and cut
his tongue in two pieces, so that he fell from his chariot and let the
reins fall to the ground. meriones gathered them up from the ground and
took them into his own hands, then he said to idomeneus, "lay on, till
you get back to the ships, for you must see that the day is no longer
ours."

on this idomeneus lashed the horses to the ships, for fear had taken
hold upon him.

ajax and menelaus noted how jove had turned the scale in favour of the
trojans, and ajax was first to speak. "alas," said he, "even a fool may
see that father jove is helping the trojans. all their weapons strike
home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that hurls them,
jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without
effect. what, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and
our return to the joy of our friends who will be grieving as they look
hitherwards; for they wi
 
 ___________________________
 

dearest of his friends has fallen. but i can see not a man among the
achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in
darkness. o father jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the
achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we
perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight."

father jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. forthwith he
chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and all
the fighting was revealed. ajax then said to menelaus, "look, menelaus,
and if antilochus son of nestor be still living, send him at once to
tell achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his comrades has
fallen."

menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a
stockyard--the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep
watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of
their herd. in his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain,
for darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands w
 
 ___________________________
 
hich daunt
him for all his hunger, so in the morning he slinks sulkily away--even
so did menelaus sorely against his will leave patroclus, in great fear
lest the achaeans should be driven back in rout and let him fall into
the hands of the foe. he charged meriones and the two ajaxes straitly
saying, "ajaxes and meriones, leaders of the argives, now indeed
remember how good patroclus was; he was ever courteous while alive,
bear it in mind now that he is dead."

with this menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an eagle,
whose sight they say is keener than that of any other bird--however
high he may be in the heavens, not a hare that runs can escape him by
crouching under bush or thicket, for he will swoop down upon it and
make an end of it--even so, o menelaus, did your keen eyes range round
the mighty host of your followers to see if you could find the son of
nestor still alive. presently menelaus saw him on the extreme left of
the battle cheering on his men
 
 ___________________________
 
 and exhorting them to fight boldly.
menelaus went up to him and said, "antilochus, come here and listen to
sad news, which i would indeed were untrue. you must see with your own
eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the danaans, and giving
victory to the trojans. patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of
the achaeans, and sorely will the danaans miss him. run instantly to
the ships and tell achilles, that he may come to rescue the body and
bear it to the ships. as for the armour, hector already has it."

antilochus was struck with 
 
 ___________________________
 
horror. for a long time he was speechless;
his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did
as menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his
armour to a comrade, laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round, close
beside him.

thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to
achilles son of peleus. nor were you, o menelaus, minded to succour his
harassed comrades, when antilochus had left the pylians--and greatly
did they miss him--but he sent them noble thrasymedes, and himself went
back to patroclus. he came running up to the two ajaxes and said, "i
have sent antilochus to the ships to tell achilles, but rage against
hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour.
what then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and
our own escape from death amid the battle-cries of the t
 
 ___________________________
 
rojans?"

ajax answered, "menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and
meriones stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while
we two behind you keep off hector and the trojans, one in heart as in
name, and long used to fighting side by side with one another."

on this menelaus and meriones took the dead man in their arms and
lifted him high aloft with a great effort. the trojan host raised a hue
and cry behind them when they saw the achaeans bearing the body away,
and flew after them like hounds attacking a wounded boar at the loo of
a band of young huntsmen. for a while the hounds fly at him as though
they would tear him in pieces, but now and again he turns on them in a
fury, scaring and scattering them in all directions--even so did the
trojans for a while charge 
 
 ___________________________
 
train every nerve to bear the body to
the ships out of the fight. the battle raged round them like fierce
flames that when once kindled spread like wildfire over a city, and the
houses fall in the glare of its burning--even such was the roar and
tramp of men and horses that pursued them as they bore patroclus from
the field. or as mules that put forth all their strength to draw some
beam or great piece of ship's timber down a rough mountain-track, and
they pant and sweat as they go--even so did menelaus and pant and sweat
as they bore the body of patroclus. behind them the two ajaxes held
stoutly out. as some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain
will turn water and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there
any stream strong enough to break through it--even so did the two
ajaxes face the trojans and stem the tide of their fighting though they
kept pouring on towards them and foremost among them all was aeneas son
of anchises with valiant hector. as a flock of daws or star
 
 ___________________________
 
ir sorrow. but do you others set
yourselves in order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in
his horses and in the strength of his chariot."

thus spoke the son of peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred
themselves. first among them all uprose eumelus, king of men, son of
admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. next to him rose mighty
diomed son of tydeus; he yoked the trojan horses which he had taken
from aeneas, when apollo bore him out of the fight. next to him,
yellow-haired menelaus son of atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses,
agamemnon's mare aethe, and his own horse podargus. the mare had been
given to agamemnon by echepolus son of anchises, that he might not have
to follow him to ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for
jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious sicyon.
this mare, all eager for the race, did menelaus put under the yoke.

fourth in order antilochus, son to noble nestor son of neleus, made
ready his horses. these were br
 
 ___________________________
 
iving you the go-by
later, not even though you had adrestus's horse arion behind you--a
horse which is of divine race--or those of laomedon, which are the
noblest in this country."

when nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in his
place, and fifth in order meriones got ready his horses. they then all
mounted their chariots and cast lots. achilles shook the helmet, and
the lot of antilochus son of nestor fell out first; next came that of
king eumelus, and after his, those of menelaus son of atreus and of
meriones. the last place fell to the lot of diomed son of tydeus, who
was the best man of them all. they took their places in line; achilles
showed them the doubling-post round which they were to turn, some way
off upon the plain; here he stationed his father's follower phoenix as
umpire, to note the running, and report truly.

at the same instant they all of them lashed their horses, struck them
with the reins, and shouted at them with all their might. they flew
full speed
 
 ___________________________
 
broke his yoke for him; the mares went one to one
side of the course, and the other to the other, and the pole was broken
against the ground. eumelus was thrown from his chariot close to the
wheel; his elbows, mouth, and nostrils were all torn, and his forehead
was bruised above his eyebrows; his eyes filled with tears and he could
find no utterance. but the son of tydeus turned his horses aside and
shot far ahead, for minerva put fresh strength into them and covered
diomed himself with glory.

menelaus son of atreus came next behind him, but antilochus called to
his father's horses. "on with you both," he cried, "and do your very
utmost. i do not bid you try to beat the steeds of the son of tydeus,
for minerva has put running into them, and has covered diomed with
glory; but you must overtake the horses of the son of atreus and not be
left behind, or aethe who is so fleet will taunt you. why, my good
fellows, are you lagging? i tell you, and it shall surely be--nestor
will keep neither of you
 
 ___________________________
 
, but will put both of you to the sword, if we
win any the worse a prize through your carelessness. fly after them at
your utmost speed; i will hit on a plan for passing them in a narrow
part of the way, and it shall not fail me."

they feared the rebuke of their master, and for a short space went
quicker. presently antilochus saw a narrow place where the road had
sunk. the ground was broken, for the winter's rain had gathered and had
worn the road so that the whole place was deepened. menelaus was making
towards it so as to get there first, for fear of a foul, but antilochus
turned his horses out of the way, and followed him a little on one
side. the son of atreus was afraid and shouted out, "antilochus, you
are driving recklessly; rein in your horses; the road is too narrow
here, it will be wider soon, and you can pass me then; if you foul my
chariot you may bring both of us to a mischief."

but antilochus plied his whip, and drove faster, as though he had not
heard him. they went s
 
 ___________________________
 
ide by side for about as far as a young man can
hurl a disc from his shoulder when he is trying his strength, and then
menelaus's mares drew behind, for he left off driving for fear the
horses should foul one another and upset the chariots; thus, while
pressing on in quest of victory, they might both come headlong to the
ground. menelaus then upbraided antilochus and said, "there is no
greater trickster living than you are; go, and bad luck go with you;
the achaeans say not well that you have understanding, and come what
may you shall not bear away the prize without sworn protest on my part."

then he called on his horses and said to them, "keep your pace, and
slacken not; the limbs of the other horses will weary sooner than
yours, for they are neither of them young."

the horses feared the rebuke of their master, and went fast
 
 ___________________________
 

came flying in at their utmost speed. diomed stayed them in the middle
of the crowd, and the sweat from their manes and chests fell in streams
on to the ground. forthwith he sprang from his goodly chariot, and
leaned his whip against his horses' yoke; brave sthenelus now lost no
time, but at once brought on the prize, and gave the woman and the
ear-handled cauldron to his comrades to take away. then he unyoked the
horses.

next after him came in antilochus of the race of neleus, who had passed
menelaus by a trick and not by the fleetness of his horses; but even so
menelaus came in as close behind him as the wheel is to the horse that
draws both the chariot and its master. the end hairs of a horse's tail
touch the tyre of the wheel, and there is never much space between
wheel and horse when the chariot is going; menelaus was no further than
this behind antilochus, though at first he had been a full disc's throw
behind him. he had soon caught him up again, for agamemnon's mare aethe
kept pullin
 
 ___________________________
 
g stronger and stronger, so that if the course had been
longer he would have passed him, and there would not even have been a
dead heat. idomeneus's brave squire meriones was about a spear's cast
behind menelaus. his horses were slowest of all, and he was the worst
driver. last of them all came the son of admetus, dragging his chariot
and driving his horses on in front. when achilles saw him he was sorry,
and stood up among the argives saying, "the best man is coming in last.
let us give him a prize for it is reasonable. he shall have the second,
but the first must go to the son of tydeus."

thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying, and
were for doing as he had said, but nestor
 
 ___________________________
 
er, let him come on."

achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with antilochus, who
was one of his dearest comrades. so he said--

"antilochus, if you would have me find eumelus another prize, i will
give him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running all round it
which i took from asteropaeus. it will be worth much money to him."

he bade his comrade automedon bring the breastplate from his tent, and
he did so. achilles then gave it over to eumelus, who received it
gladly.

but menelaus got up in a rage, furiously angry with antilochus. an
attendant placed his staff in his hands and bade the argives keep
silence: the hero then addressed them. "antilochus," said he, "what is
this from you who have been so far blameless? you have made me cut a
poor figure and baulked my horses by flinging your own in front of
them, though yours are much worse than mine are; therefore, o princes
and counsellors of the argives, judge between us and show no favour,
lest one of the achaeans say, 'me
 
 ___________________________
 
and corruption; his horses were far inferior to antilochus's, but he
has greater weight and influence.' nay, i will determine the matter
myself, and no man will blame me, for i shall do what is just. come
here, antilochus, and stand, as our custom is, whip in hand before your
chariot and horses; lay your hand on your steeds, and swear by
earth-encircling neptune that you did not purposely and guilefully get
in the way of my horses."

and antilochus answered, "forgive me; i am much younger, king menelaus,
than you are; you stand higher than i do and are the better man of the
two; you know how easily young men are betrayed into indiscretion;
their tempers are more hasty and they have less judgement; make due
allowances therefore, and bear with me; i will of my own accord give up
the mare that i have won, and if you claim any further chattel from my
own possessions, i would rather yield it to you, at once, than fall
from your good graces henceforth, and do wrong in the sight of heaven."

the son 
 
 ___________________________
 
of nestor then took the mare and gave her over to menelaus,
whose anger was thus appeased; as when dew falls upon a field of
ripening corn, and the lands are bristling with the harvest--even so, o
menelaus, was your heart made glad within you. he turned to antilochus
and said, "now, antilochus, angry though i have been, i can give way to
you of my own free will; you have never been headstrong nor
ill-disposed hitherto, but this time your youth has got the better of
your judgement; be careful how you outwit your betters in future; no
one else could have brought me round so easily, but your good father,
your brother, and yourself have all of you had infinite trouble on my
behalf; i therefore yield 