 and swear it with a great oath--nay, by this
my sceptre which shalt sprout neither leaf nor shoot, nor bud anew from
the day on which it left its parent stem upon the mountains--for the
axe stripped it of leaf and bark, and now the sons of the achaeans bear
it as judges and guardians of the decrees of heaven--so surely and
solemnly do i swear that hereafter they shall look fondly for achilles
and shall not find him. in the day of your distress, when your men fall
dying by the murderous hand of hector, you shall not know how to help
them, and shall rend your heart with rage for the hour when you offered
insult to the bravest of the achaeans."

with this the son of peleus dashed his gold-bestudded sceptre on the
ground and took his seat, while the son of atreus was beginning
fiercely from his place upon the other side. then uprose smooth-tongued
nestor, the facile speaker of the pylians, and the words fell from his
lips sweeter than honey. two generations of men born and bred in pylos
had pas
 
 ___________________________
 
 son of tydeus, and sixthly ulysses, peer of gods
in counsel; but menelaus came of his own accord, for he knew how busy
his brother then was. they stood round the bull with the barley-meal in
their hands, and agamemnon prayed, saying, "jove, most glorious,
supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest upon the storm-cloud,
grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace
of priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed with fire. grant that
my sword may pierce the shirt of hector about his heart, and that full
many of his comrades may bite the dust as they fall dying round him."

thus he prayed, but the son of saturn would not fulfil his prayer. he
accepted the sacrifice, yet none the less increased their toil
continually. when they had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal
upon the victim, they drew back its head, killed it, and then flayed
it. they cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped them round in two layers of
fat, and set pieces of raw meat on the top of them. th
 
 ___________________________
 
and iris came close up to priam, speaking with the voice
of priam's son polites, who, being fleet of foot, was stationed as
watchman for the trojans on the tomb of old aesyetes, to look out for
any sally of the achaeans. in his likeness iris spoke, saying, "old
man, you talk idly, as in time of peace, while war is at hand. i have
been in many a battle, but never yet saw such a host as is now
advancing. they are crossing the plain to attack the city as thick as
leaves or as the sands of the sea. hector, i charge you above all
others, do as i say. there are many allies dispersed about the city of
priam from distant places and speaking divers tongues. therefore, let
each chief give orders to his own people, setting them severally in
array and leading them forth to battle."

thus she spoke, but hector knew that it was the goddess, and at once
broke up the assembly. the men flew to arms; all the gates were opened,
and the people thronged through them, horse and foot, with the tramp as
of a great 
 
 ___________________________
 
multitude.

now there is a high mound before the city, rising by itself upon the
plain. men call it batieia, but the gods know that it is the tomb of
lithe myrine. here the trojans and their allies divided their forces.

priam's son, great hector of the gleaming helmet, commanded the
trojans, and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most
valiant of those who were longing for the fray.

the dardanians were led by brave aeneas, whom venus bore to anchises,
when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain
slopes of ida. he was not alone, for with him were the two sons of
antenor, archilochus and acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.

they that dwelt in telea under the lowest spurs of mt. ida, men 
 
 ___________________________
 
 his eyes caught sight of
alexandrus, for he deemed that now he should be revenged. he sprang,
therefore, from his chariot, clad in his suit of armour.

alexandrus quailed as he saw menelaus come forward, and shrank in fear
of his life under cover of his men. as one who starts back affrighted,
trembling and pale, when he comes suddenly upon a serpent in some
mountain glade, even so did alexandrus plunge into the throng of trojan
warriors, terror-stricken at the sight of the son of atreus.

then hector upbraided him. "paris," said he, "evil-hearted paris, fair
to see, but woman-mad, and false of tongue, would that you had never
been born, or that you had died unwed. better so, than live to be
disgraced and looked askance at. will not the achaeans mock at us and
say that we have sent one to champion us who is fair to see but who has
neither wit nor courage? did you not, such as you are, get your
following together and sail beyond the seas? did you not from your a
far country carry off a lovely
 
 ___________________________
 
r father, your city, and your whole
country, but joy to your enemies, and hang-dog shamefacedness to
yourself? and now can you not dare face menelaus and learn what manner
of man he is whose wife you have stolen? where indeed would be your
lyre and your love-tricks, your comely locks and your fair favour, when
you were lying in the dust before him? the trojans are a weak-kneed
people, or ere this you would have had a shirt of stones for the wrongs
you have done them."

and alexandrus answered, "hector, your rebuke is just. you are hard as
the axe which a shipwright wields at his work, and cleaves the timber
to his liking. as the axe in his hand, so keen is the edge of your
scorn. still, taunt me not with the gifts that golden venus has given
me; they are precious; let not a man disdain them, for the gods give
them where they are minded, and none can have them for the asking. if
you would have me do battle with menelaus, bid the trojans and achaeans
take their seats, while he and i fight in t
 
 ___________________________
 
heir midst for helen and all
her wealth. let him who shall be victorious and prove to be the better
man take the woman and all she has, to bear them to his home, but let
the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace whereby you trojans shall
stay here in troy, while the others go home to argos and the land of
the achaeans."

when hector heard this he was glad, and went about among the trojan
ranks holding his spear by the middle to keep them back, and they all
sat down at his bidding: but the achaeans still aimed at him with
stones and arrows, till agamemnon shouted to them saying, "hold,
argives, shoot not, sons of the achaeans; hector desires to speak."

they ceased taking aim and were still, whereon hector spoke. "hear from
my mouth," said he, "trojans and achaeans, the saying of alexandrus,
through whom this quarrel has co
 
 ___________________________
 
oaths of jove must not be transgressed or taken in vain.
young men's minds are light as air, but when an old man comes he looks
before and after, deeming that which shall be fairest upon both sides."

the trojans and achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they
thought that they should now have rest. they backed their chariots
toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying it
down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a
little space between them. hector sent two messengers to the city to
bring the lambs and to bid priam come, while agamemnon told talthybius
to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as agamemnon had
said.

meanwhile iris went to helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of
the son of antenor, for helicaon, son of antenor, had married laodice,
the fairest of priam's daughters. she found her in her own room,
working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering
the battles between trojans and achaeans,
 
 ___________________________
 
they prayed, but not as yet would jove grant them their prayer.
then priam, descendant of dardanus, spoke, saying, "hear me, trojans
and achaeans, i will now go back to the wind-beaten city of ilius: i
dare not with my own eyes witness this fight between my son and
menelaus, for jove and the other immortals alone know which shall fall."

on this he laid the two lambs on his chariot and took his seat. he
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor sat beside him; the two
then went back to ilius. hector and ulysses measured the ground, and
cast lots from a helmet of bronze to see which should take aim first.
meanwhile the two hosts lifted up their hands and prayed saying,
"father jove, that rulest from ida, most glorious in power, grant that
he who first brought about this war between us may die, and enter the
house of hades, while we others remain at peace and abide by our oaths."

great hector now turned his head aside while he shook the helmet, and
the lot of paris flew out first. the other
 
 ___________________________
 
he glared round about him and took aim, and the
trojans fell back as he did so. his dart was not sped in vain, for it
struck democoon, the bastard son of priam, who had come to him from
abydos, where he had charge of his father's mares. ulysses, infuriated
by the death of his comrade, hit him with his spear on one temple, and
the bronze point came through on the other side of his forehead.
thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. hector, and they that were in
front, then gave round while the argives raised a shout and drew off
the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. but apollo looked
down from pergamus and called aloud to the trojans, for he was
displeased. "trojans," he cried, "rush on the foe, and do not let
yourselves be thus beaten by the argives. their skins are not stone nor
iron that when hit them you do them no harm. moreover, achilles, the
son of lovely thetis, is not fighting, but is nursing his anger at t
 
 ___________________________
 
king about the horses, which had been used to eat their fill,
and i was afraid that in such a great gathering of men they might be
ill-fed, so i left them at home and came on foot to ilius armed only
with my bow and arrows. these it seems, are of no use, for i have
already hit two chieftains, the sons of atreus and of tydeus, and
though i drew blood surely enough, i have only made them still more
furious. i did ill to take my bow down from its peg on the day i led my
band of trojans to ilius in hector's service, and if ever i get home
again to set eyes on my native place, my wife, and the greatness of my
house, may some one cut my head off then and there if i do not break
the bow and set it on a hot fire--such pranks as it plays me."

aeneas answered, "say no more. things will not mend till we two go
against this man with chariot and horses and bring him to a trial of
arms. mount my chariot, and note how cleverly the horses of tros can
speed hither and thither over the plain in pursuit or fl
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the hand near her wrist, and afterwards
sprang upon me too, as though he were a god."

he then took his seat on the top of pergamus, while murderous mars went
about among the ranks of the trojans, cheering them on, in the likeness
of fleet acamas chief of the thracians. "sons of priam," said he, "how
long will you let your people be thus slaughtered by the achaeans?
would you wait till they are at the walls of troy? aeneas the son of
anchises has fallen, he whom we held in as high honour as hector
himself. help me, then, to rescue our brave comrade from the stress of
the fight."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. then sarpedon
rebuked hector very sternly. "hector," said he, "where is your prowess
now? you used to say that though you had neither people nor allies you
could hold the town alone with your brothers and brothers-in-law. i see
not one of them here; they cower as hounds before a lion; it is we,
your allies, who bear the brunt of the battle. i have come from a
 
 ___________________________
 
stand my ground against any
who would fight me though i have nothing here for the achaeans to
plunder, while you look on, without even bidding your men stand firm in
defence of their wives. see that you fall not into the hands of your
foes as men caught in the meshes of a net, and they sack your fair city
forthwith. keep this before your mind night and day, and beseech the
captains of your allies to hold on without flinching, and thus put away
their reproaches from you."

so spoke sarpedon, and hector smarted under his words. he sprang from
his chariot clad in his suit of armour, and went about among the host
brandishing his two spears, exhorting the men to fight and raising the
terrible cry of battle. then they rallied and again faced the achaeans,
but the argives stood compact and firm, and were not driven back. as
the breezes sport with the chaff upon some goodly threshing-floor, when
men are winnowing--while yellow ceres blows with the wind to sift the
chaff from the grain, and the chaff
 
 ___________________________
 
hit him with
a stone upon the elbow, and the reins, enriched with white ivory, fell
from his hands into the dust. antilochus rushed towards him and struck
him on the temples with his sword, whereon he fell head first from the
chariot to the ground. there he stood for a while with his head and
shoulders buried deep in the dust--for he had fallen on sandy soil till
his horses kicked him and laid him flat on the ground, as antilochus
lashed them and drove them off to the host of the achaeans.

but hector marked them from across the ranks, and with a loud cry
rushed towards them, followed by the strong battalions of the trojans.
mars and dread enyo led them on, she fraught with ruthless turmoil of
battle, while mars wielded a monstrous spear, and went about, now in
front of hector and now behind him.

diomed shook with passion as he saw them. as a man crossing a wide
plain is dismayed to find himself on the brink of some great river
rolling swiftly to the sea--he sees its boiling waters and star
 
 ___________________________
 
ts back
in fear--even so did the son of tydeus give ground. then he said to his
men, "my friends, how can we wonder that hector wields the spear so
well? some god is ever by his side to protect him, and now mars is with
him in the likeness of mortal man. keep your faces therefore towards
the trojans, but give ground backwards, for we dare not fight with
gods."

as he spoke the trojans drew close up, and hector killed two men, both
in one chariot, menesthes and anchialus, heroes well versed in war.
ajax son of telamon pitied them in their fall; he came close up and
hurled his spear, hitting amphius the son of selagus, a man of great
wealth who lived in paesus and owned much corn-growing land, but his
lot had led him to come to the aid of priam and his sons. ajax struck
him in the belt; the spear pierced the lower part of his belly, and he
fell heavily to the ground. then ajax ran towards him to strip 
 
 ___________________________
 
ghtly. meanwhile the
achaeans carried off the body of tlepolemus, whereon ulysses was moved
to pity, and panted for the fray as he beheld them. he doubted whether
to pursue the son of jove, or to make slaughter of the lycian rank and
file; it was not decreed, however, that he should slay the son of jove;
minerva, therefore, turned him against the main body of the lycians. he
killed coeranus, alastor, chromius, alcandrus, halius, noemon, and
prytanis, and would have slain yet more, had not great hector marked
him, and sped to the front of the fight clad in his suit of mail,
filling the danaans with terror. sarpedon was glad when he saw him
coming, and besought him, saying, "son of priam, let me not be here to
fall into the hands of the danaans. help me, and since i may not return
home to gladden the hearts of my wife and of my infant son, let me die
within the walls of your city."

hector made him no answer, but rushed onward to fall at once upon the
achaeans and kill many among them. his com
 
 ___________________________
 
rades then bore sarpedon away
and laid him beneath jove's spreading oak tree. pelagon, his friend and
comrade, drew the spear out of his thigh, but sarpedon fainted and a
mist came over his eyes. presently he came to himself again, for the
breath of the north wind as it played upon him gave him new life, and
brought him out of the deep swoon into which he had fallen.

meanwhile the argives were neither driven towards their ships by mars
and hector, nor yet did they attack them; when they knew that mars was
with the trojans they retreated, but kept their faces still turned
towards the foe. who, then, was first and who last to be slain by mars
and hector? they were valiant teuthras, and orestes the renowned
charioteer, trechus the aetolian warrior, oenomaus, helenus the son of
oenops, and oresbius of the gleaming girdle, who was possessed of great
wealth, and dwelt by the cephisian lake with the other boeotians who
lived near him, owners o
 
 ___________________________
 
, for he was not of mortal mould. as the
juice of the fig-tree curdles milk, and thickens it in a moment though
it is liquid, even so instantly did paeeon cure fierce mars. then hebe
washed him, and clothed him in goodly raiment, and he took his seat by
his father jove all glorious to behold.

but juno of argos and minerva of alalcomene, now that they had put a
stop to the murderous doings of mars, went back again to the house of
jove.



book vi

  glaucus and diomed--the story of bellerophon--hector
  and andromache.

the fight between trojans and achaeans was now left to rage as it
would, and the tide of war surged hither and thither over the plain as
they aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another between the streams
of simois and xanthus.

first, ajax son of telamon, tower of strength to the achaeans, broke a
phalanx of the trojans, and came to the assistance of his comrades by
killing acamas son of eussorus, the best man among the thracians, being
both brave and of great stature. th
 
 ___________________________
 
 spear from the body.

meanwhile nestor shouted to the argives, saying, "my friends, danaan
warriors, servants of mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead,
and bring back much booty to the ships. let us kill as many as we can;
the bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them later at
your leisure."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. and now the
trojans would have been routed and driven back into ilius, had not
priam's son helenus, wisest of augurs, said to hector and aeneas,
"hector and aeneas, you two are the mainstays of the trojans and
lycians, for you are foremost at all times, alike in fight and counsel;
hold your ground here, and go about among the host to rally them in
front of the gates, or they will fling themselves into the arms of
their wives, to the great joy of our foes. then, when you have put
heart into all our companies, we will stand firm here and fight the
danaans however hard they press us, for there is nothing else to be
done. meanwh
 
 ___________________________
 
ile do you, hector, go to the city and tell our mother what
is happening. tell her to bid the matrons gather at the temple of
minerva in the acropolis; let her then take her key and open the doors
of the sacred building; there, upon the knees of minerva, let her lay
the largest, fairest robe she has in her house--the one she sets most
store by; let her, moreover, promise to sacrifice twelve yearling
heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the temple of the
goddess, if she will take pity on the town, with th
 
 ___________________________
 
e wives and little
ones of the trojans, and keep the son of tydeus from falling on the
goodly city of ilius; for he fights with fury and fills men's souls
with panic. i hold him mightiest of them all; we did not fear even
their great champion achilles, son of a goddess though he be, as we do
this man: his rage is beyond all bounds, and there is none can vie with
him in prowess."

hector did as his brother bade him. he sprang from his chariot, and
went about everywhere among the host, brandishing his spears, urging
the men on to fight, and raising the dread cry of battle. thereon they
rallied and again faced the achaeans, who gave ground and ceased their
murderous onset, for they deemed that some one of the immortals had
come down from starry heaven to help the trojans, so strangely had they
rallied. and hector shouted to the trojans, "trojans and allies, be
men, my friends, an
 
 ___________________________
 
aven delivers them into my hand; so again with
yourself, there are many achaeans whose lives you may take if you can;
we two, then, will exchange armour, that all present may know of the
old ties that subsist between us."

with these words they sprang from their chariots, grasped one another's
hands, and plighted friendship. but the son of saturn made glaucus take
leave of his wits, for he exchanged golden armour for bronze, the worth
of a hundred head of cattle for the worth of nine.

now when hector reached the scaean gates and the oak tree, the wives
and daughters of the trojans came running towards him to ask after
their sons, brothers, kinsmen, and husbands: he told them to set about
praying to the gods, and many were made sorrowful as they heard him.

presently he reached the splendid palace of king priam, adorned with
colonnades of hewn stone. in it there were fifty bedchambers--all of
hewn stone--built near one another, where the sons of priam slept, each
with his wedded wife. opposi
 
 ___________________________
 
te these, on the other side the courtyard,
there were twelve upper rooms also of hewn stone for priam's daughters,
built near one another, where his sons-in-law slept with their wives.
when hector got there, his fond mother came up to him with laodice the
fairest of her daughters. she took his hand within her own and said,
"my son, why have you left the battle to come hither? are the achaeans,
woe betide them, pressing you hard about the city that you have thought
fit to come and uplift your hands to jove from the citadel? wait till i
can bring you wine that you may make offering to jove and to the other
immortals, and may then drink and be refreshed. wine gives a man fresh
strength when
 
 ___________________________
 
 he is wearied, as you now are with fighting on behalf of
your kinsmen."

and hector answered, "honoured mother, bring no wine, lest you unman me
and i forget my strength. i dare not make a drink-offering to jove with
unwashed hands; one who is bespattered with blood and filth may not
pray to the son of saturn. get the matrons together, and go with
offerings to the temple of minerva driver of the spoil; there, upon the
knees of minerva, lay the largest and fairest robe you have in your
house--the one you set most store by; promise, moreover, to sacrifice
twelve yearling heifers
 
 ___________________________
 
f minerva, praying the while to the daughter of great jove.
"holy minerva," she cried, "protectress of our city, mighty goddess,
break the spear of diomed and lay him low before the scaean gates. do
this, and we will sacrifice twelve heifers that have never yet known
the goad, in your temple, if you will have pity upon the town, with the
wives and little ones of the trojans." thus she prayed, but pallas
minerva granted not her prayer.

while they were thus praying to the daughter of great jove, hector went
to the fair house of alexandrus, which he had built for him by the
foremost builders in the land. they had built him his house,
storehouse, and courtyard near those of priam and hector on the
acropolis. here hector entered, with a spear eleven cubits long in his
hand; the bronze point gleamed in front of him, and was fastened to the
shaft of the spear by a ring of gold. he found alexandrus within the
house, busied about his armour, his shield and cuirass, and handling
his curved bow; there
 
 ___________________________
 
, too, sat argive helen with her women, setting
them their several tasks; and as hector saw him he rebuked him with
words of scorn. "sir," said he, "you do ill to nurse this rancour; the
people perish fighting round this our town; you would yourself chide
one whom you saw shirking his part in the combat. up then, or ere long
the city will be in a blaze."

and alexandrus answered, "hector, your rebuke is just; listen
therefore, and believe me when i tell you that i am not here so much
through rancour or ill-will towards the trojans, as from a desire to
indulge my grief. my wife was even now gently urging me to battle, and
i hold it better that i should go, for victory is ever fickle. wait,
then, while i put on my armour, or go first and i will follow. i shall
be sure to overtake you."

hector made no answer, but helen tried to soothe him. "brother," said
she, "to my abhorred and
 
 ___________________________
 
vils, would, at any rate, that i had been wife to a better
man--to one who could smart under dishonour and men's evil speeches.
this fellow was never yet to be depended upon, nor never will be, and
he will surely reap what he has sown. still, brother, come in and rest
upon this seat, for it is you who bear the brunt of that toil that has
been caused by my hateful self and by the sin of alexandrus--both of
whom jove has doomed to be a theme of song among those that shall be
born hereafter."

and hector answered, "bid me not be seated, helen, for all the goodwill
you bear me. i cannot stay. i am in haste to help the trojans, who miss
me greatly when i am not among them; but urge your husband, and of his
own self also let him make haste to overtake me before i am out of the
city. i must go home to see my household, my wife and my little son,
for i know not whether i shall ever again return to them, or whether
the gods will cause me to fill by the hands of the achaeans."

then hector left her, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd forthwith was at his own house. he did not
find andromache, for she was on the wall with her child and one of her
maids, weeping bitterly. seeing, then, that she was not within, he
stood on the threshold of the women's rooms and said, "women, tell me,
and tell me true, where did andromache go when she left the house? was
it to my sisters, or to my brothers' wives? or is she at the temple of
minerva where the other women are propitiating the awful goddess?"

his good housekeeper answered, "hector, since you bid me tell you
truly, she did not go to your sisters nor to your brothers' wives, nor
yet to the temple of minerva, where the other women are propitiating
the awful goddess, but she is on the high wall of ilius, for she had
heard the trojans were being hard pressed, and that the achaeans were
in great force: she went to the wall in frenzied haste, and the nurse
went with her carrying the child."

hector hurried from the house when she had done speaking, and went down
the streets by 
 
 ___________________________
 
the same way that he had come. when he had gone through
the city and had reached the scaean gates through which he would go out
on to the plain, his wife came running towards him, andromache,
daughter of great eetion who ruled in thebe under the wooded slopes of
mt. placus, and was king of the cilicians. his daughter had married
hector, and now came to meet him with a nurse who carried his little
child in her bosom--a mere babe. hector's darling son, and lovely as a
star. hector had named him scamandrius, but the people called him
astyanax, for his father stood alone as chief guardian of ilius. hector
smiled as he looked upon the boy, but he did not speak, and andromache
stood by him weeping and taking his hand in her own. "dear husband,"
said she, "your valour will bring you to destruction; think on your
infant son, and on my hapless self who ere long shall be your
widow--for the achaeans will set upon you in a body and kill you. it
would be better for me, should i lo
 
 ___________________________
 
 raised a barrow over his ashes and the mountain
nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing jove, planted a grove of elms about
his tomb. i had seven brothers in my father's house, but on the same
day they all went within the house of hades. achilles killed them as
they were with their sheep and cattle. my mother--her who had been
queen of all the land under mt. placus--he brought hither with the
spoil, and freed her for a great sum, but the archer-queen diana took
her in the house of your father. nay--hector--you who to me are father,
mother, brother, and dear husband--have mercy upon me; stay here upon
this wall; make not your child fatherless, and your wife a widow; as
for the host, place them near the fig-tree, where the city can be best
scaled, and the wall is weakest. thrice have the bravest of them come
thither and assailed it, under the two ajaxes, idomeneus, the sons of
atreus, and the brave son of tydeus, either of their own bidding, or
because some soothsayer had told them."

and hector a
 
 ___________________________
 
g priam, nor for
my brothers many and brave who may fall in the dust before their
foes--for none of these do i grieve as for yourself when the day shall
come on which some one of the achaeans shall rob you for ever of your
freedom, and bear you weeping away. it may be that you will have to ply
the loom in argos at the bidding of a mistress, or to fetch water from
the springs messeis or hypereia, treated brutally by some cruel
task-master; then will one say who sees you weeping, 'she was wife to
hector, the bravest warrior among the trojans during the war before
ilius.' on this your tears will break forth anew for him who would have
put away the day of captivity from you. may i lie dead under the barrow
that is heaped over my body ere i hear your cry as they carry you into
bondage."

he stretched his arms towards his child, but the boy cried and nestled
in his nurse's bosom, scared at the sight of his father's armour, and
at the horse-hair plume that nodded fiercely from his helmet. his
fathe
 
 ___________________________
 
r and mother laughed to see him, but hector took the helmet from
his head and laid it all gleaming upon the ground. then he took his
darling child, kissed him, and dandled him in his arms, praying over
him the while to jove and to all the gods. "jove," he cried, "grant
that this my child may be even as myself, chief among the trojans; let
him be not less excellent in strength, and let him rule ilius with his
might. then may one say of him as he comes from battle, 'the son is far
better than the father.' may he bring back the blood-staine
 
 ___________________________
 
m when
he has once been born. go, then, within the house, and busy yourself
with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of
your servants; for war is man's matter, and mine above all others of
them that have been born in ilius."

he took his plumed helmet from the ground, and his wife went back again
to her house, weeping bitterly and often looking back towards him. when
she reached her home she found her maidens within, and bade them all
join in her lament; so they mourned hector in his own house though he
was yet alive, for they deemed that they should never see him return
safe from battle, and from the furious hands of the achaeans.

paris did not remain long in his house. he donned his goodly armour
overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast as his feet
could take him. as a horse, stabled and fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to bathe in the
fair-flowing river--he holds his head high, and his mane str
 
 ___________________________
 
eams upon
his shoulders as he exults in his strength and flies like the wind to
the haunts and feeding ground of the mares--even so went forth paris
from high pergamus, gleaming like sunlight in his armour, and he
laughed aloud as he sped swiftly on his way. forthwith he came upon his
brother hector, who was then turning away from the place where he had
held converse with his wife, and he was himself the first to speak.
"sir," said he, "i fear that i have kept you waiting when you are in
haste, and have not come as quickly as you bade me."

"my good brother," answered hector, "you fight bravely, and no man with
any justice can make light of your doings in battle. but you are
careless and wilfully remiss. it grieves me to the heart to hear the
ill that the trojans speak about you, for they 
 
 ___________________________
 
have suffered much on
your account. let us be going, and we will make things right hereafter,
should jove vouchsafe us to set the cup of our deliverance before
ever-living gods of heaven in our own homes, when we have chased the
achaeans from troy."



book vii

  hector and ajax fight--hector is getting worsted when night
  comes on and parts them--they exchange presents--the
  burial of the dead, and the building of a wall round their
  ships by the achaeans--the achaeans buy their wine of
  agamemnon and menelaus.

with these words hector passed through the gates, and his brother
alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. as when heaven sends a
breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have
laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome

 
 ___________________________
 
was the sight of these two heroes to the trojans.

thereon alexandrus killed menesthius the son of areithous; he lived in
arne, and was son of areithous the mace-man, and of phylomedusa. hector
threw a spear at eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in the neck
under the bronze rim of his helmet. glaucus, moreover, son of
hippolochus, captain of the lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight smote
iphinous son of dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing on to his
chariot behind his fleet mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and
there was no life left in him.

when, therefore, minerva saw these men making havoc of the argives, she
darted down to ilius from the summits of olympus, and
 
 ___________________________
 
s of victory in favour of the danaans? let me persuade
you--for it will be better thus--stay the combat for to-day, but let
them renew the fight hereafter till they compass the doom of ilius,
since you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city."

and minerva answered, "so be it, far-darter; it was in this mind that i
came down from olympus to the trojans and achaeans. tell me, then, how
do you propose to end this present fighting?"

apollo, son of jove, replied, "let us incite great hector to challenge
some one of the danaans in single combat; on this the achaeans will be
shamed into finding a man who will fight him."

minerva assented, and helenus son of priam divined the counsel of the
gods; he therefore went up to hector and said, "hector son of priam,
peer of gods in counsel, i am your brother, let me then persuade you.
bid the other trojans and achaeans all of them take their seats, and
challenge the best man among the achaeans to meet you in single combat.
i have heard the 
 
 ___________________________
 
voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your
doom is not yet come."

hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the
trojans, grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and they
all sat down. agamemnon also bade the achaeans be seated. but minerva
and apollo, in the likeness of vultures, perched on father jove's high
oak tree, proud of their men; and the ranks sat close ranged together,
bristling with shield and helmet and spear. as when the rising west
wind furs the face of the sea and the waters grow dark beneath it, so
sat the companies of 
 
 ___________________________
 
trojans and achaeans upon the plain. and hector
spoke thus:--

"hear me, trojans and achaeans, that i may speak even as i am minded;
jove on his high throne has brought our oaths and covenants to nothing,
and foreshadows ill for both of us, till you either take the towers of
troy, or are yourselves vanquished at your ships. the princes of the
achaeans are here present in the midst of you; let him, then, that will
fight me stand forward as your champion against hector. thus i say, and
may jove be witness between us. if your champion slay me, let him strip
me of my armour and take it to your ships, but let him send my body
home that the trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when
i am dead. in like manner, if apollo vouchsafe me glory and i slay your
champion, i will strip him of his armour and take it to the city of
ilius, where i will hang it in the temple of apollo, but i will give up
his body, that the achaeans may bury him at their ships, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d the build
him a mound by the wide waters of the hellespont. then will one say
hereafter as he sails his ship over the sea, 'this is the monument of
one who died long since a champion who was slain by mighty hector.'
thus will one say, and my fame shall not be lost."

thus did he speak, but they all held their peace, ashamed to decline
the challenge, yet fearing to accept it, till at last menelaus rose and
rebuked them, for he was angry. "alas," he cried, "vain braggarts,
women forsooth not men, double-dyed indeed will be the stain upon us if
no man of the danaans will now face hector. may you be turned every man
of you into earth and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious in
your places. i will mysel
 
 ___________________________
 
f go out against this man, but the upshot of
the fight will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods."

with these words he put on his armour; and then, o menelaus, your life
would have come to an end at the hands of hands of hector, for he was
far better the man, had not the princes of the achaeans sprung upon you
and checked you. king agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said,
"menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. be patient in spite of
passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself
as hector son of priam, who is feared by many another as well as you.
even achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from
meeting him in battle. sit down your own people, and the achaeans wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

with these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,
whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders.
then nestor rose and spoke, "of a truth," said he, "the achaean land is
fallen upon evil times. the old knight peleus, counsellor and orator
among the myrmidons, loved when i was in his house to question me
concernin
 
 ___________________________
 
g the race and lineage of all the argives. how would it not
grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before hector? many a
time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave his
body and go down within the house of hades. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo, that i were still young and strong as when the
pylians and arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river celadon
under the walls of pheia, and round about the waters of the river
iardanus. the godlike hero ereuthalion stood forward as their champion,
with the armour of king areithous upon his shoulders--areithous whom
men and 
 
 ___________________________
 
iled, but my high spirit bade me fight him though
none other would venture; i was the youngest man of them all; but when
i fought him minerva vouchsafed me victory. he was the biggest and
strongest man that ever i killed, and covered much ground as he lay
sprawling upon the earth. would that i were still young and strong as i
then was, for the son of priam would then soon find one who would face
him. but you, foremost among the whole host though you be, have none of
you any stomach for fighting hector."

thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to
their feet. foremost of all uprose king agamemnon, and after him brave
diomed the son of tydeus. next were the two ajaxes, men clothed in
valour as with a garment, and then idomeneus, and meriones his brother
in arms. after these eurypylus son of euaemon, thoas the son of
andraemon, and ulysses also rose. then nestor knight of gerene again
spoke, saying: "cast lots among you to see who shall be chosen. if he
come alive out o
 
 ___________________________
 
e very lot which they wanted--the lot of ajax. the
herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the
achaeans, going from left to right; but they none of them owned it.
when, however, in due course he reached the man who had written upon it
and had put it into the helmet, brave ajax held out his hand, and the
herald gave him the lot. when ajax saw his mark he knew it and was
glad; he threw it to the ground and said, "my friends, the lot is mine,
and i rejoice, for i shall vanquish hector. i will put on my armour;
meanwhile, pray to king jove in silence among yourselves that the
trojans may not hear you--or aloud if you will, for we fear no man.
none shall overcome me, neither by force nor cunning, for i was born
and bred in salamis, and can hold my own in all things."

with this they fell praying to king jove the son of saturn, and thus
would one of them say as he looked into the vault of heaven, "father
jove that rulest from ida, most glorious in power, vouchsafe victory to
aj
 
 ___________________________
 
ax, and let him win great glory: but if you wish well to hector also
and would protect him, grant to each of them equal fame and prowess."

thus they prayed, and ajax armed himself in his suit of gleaming
bronze. when he was in full array he sprang forward as monstrous mars
when he takes part among men whom jove has set fighting with one
another--even so did huge ajax, bulwark of the achaeans, spring forward
with a grim smile on his face as he brandished his long spear and
strode onward. the argives were elated as they beheld him, but the
trojans trembled i
 
 ___________________________
 
n every limb, and the heart even of hector beat
quickly, but he could not now retreat and withdraw into the ranks
behind him, for he had been the challenger. ajax came up bearing his
shield in front of him like a wall--a shield of bronze with seven folds
of oxhide--the work of tychius, who lived in hyle and was by far the
best worker in leather. he had made it with the hides of seven full-fed
bulls, and over these he had set an eighth layer of bronze. holding
this shield before him, ajax son of telamon came close up to hector,
and menac
 
 ___________________________
 
ed him saying, "hector, you shall now learn, man to man, what
kind of champions the danaans have among them even besides lion-hearted
achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. he now abides at the ships in
anger with agamemnon shepherd of his people, but there are many of us
who are well able to face you; therefore begin the fight."

and hector answered, "noble ajax, son of telamon, captain of the host,
treat me not as though i were some puny boy or woman that cannot fight.
i have been long used to the blood and butcheries of battle. i am quick
to turn my leathern shield either to right or left, for this i deem the
main thing in battle. i can charge among the chariots and horsemen, and
in hand to hand fighting can delight the heart of mars; howbeit i would
not take such a man as you are off his guard--but i will smite you
openly if i 
 
 ___________________________
 
ear went through his gleaming shield, and
pressed onward through his cuirass of cunning workmanship; it pierced
the shirt against his side, but he swerved and thus saved his life.
they then each of them drew out the spear from his shield, and fell on
one another like savage lions or wild boars of great strength and
endurance: the son of priam struck the middle of ajax's shield, but the
bronze did not break, and the point of his dart was turned. ajax then
sprang forward and pierced the shield of hector; the spear went through
it and staggered him as he was springing forward to attack; it gashed
his neck and the blood came pouring from the wound, but even so hector
did not cease fighting; he gave ground, and with his brawny hand seized
a stone, rugged and huge, that was lying upon the plain; with this he
struck the shield of ajax on the boss that was in its middle, so that
the bronze rang again. but ajax in turn caught up a far larger stone,
swung it aloft, and hurled it with prodigious force.
 
 ___________________________
 
 this millstone of
a rock broke hector's shield inwards and threw him down on his back
with the shield crushing him under it, but apollo raised him at once.
thereon they would have hacked at one another in close combat with
their swords, had not heralds, messengers of gods and men, come
forward, one from the trojans and the other from the
achaeans--talthybius and idaeus both of them honourable men; these
parted them with their staves, and the good herald idaeus said, "my
sons, fight no longer, you are both of you valiant, and both a
 
 ___________________________
 
re dear
to jove; we know this; but night is now falling, and the behests of
night may not be well gainsaid."

ajax son of telamon answered, "idaeus, bid hector say so, for it was he
that challenged our princes. let him speak first and i will accept his
saying."

then hector said, "ajax, heaven has vouchsafed you stature and
strength, and judgement; and in wielding the spear you excel all others
of the achaeans. let us for this day cease fighting; hereafter we will
fight anew till heaven decide between us, and give victory to one or to
the other; night is now falling, and the behests of night may not be
well gainsaid. gladden, then, the hearts of the achaeans at your ships,
and more especially those of your own followers and clansmen, while i,
in the great city of 
 
 ___________________________
 
made offerings to the most mighty son of saturn.
then they laid themselves down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.



book viii

  jove forbids the gods to interfere further--there is an even
  fight till midday, but then jove inclines the scales of victory
  in favour of the trojans, who eventually chase the achaeans
  within their wall--juno and minerva set out to help the
  trojans: jove sends iris to turn them back, but later on
  he promises juno that she shall have her way in the end--hector's
  triumph is stayed by nightfall--the trojans bivouac on the plain.

now when morning, clad in her robe of saffron, had begun to suffuse
light over the earth, jove called the gods in council on the topmost
crest of serrated olympus. then he spoke and all the other gods gave
ear. "hear me," said he, "gods and goddesses, that i may speak even as
i am minded. let none of you neither goddess nor god try to cross me,
but obey me every one of you that i may bring this matter to an end. if
i see any
 
 ___________________________
 
servants of mars, hold their ground. nestor knight of gerene alone
stood firm, bulwark of the achaeans, not of his own will, but one of
his horses was disabled. alexandrus husband of lovely helen had hit it
with an arrow just on the top of its head where the mane begins to grow
away from the skull, a very deadly place. the horse bounded in his
anguish as the arrow pierced his brain, and his struggles threw others
into confusion. the old man instantly began cutting the traces with his
sword, but hector's fleet horses bore down upon him through the rout
with their bold charioteer, even hector himself, and the old man would
have perished there and then had not diomed been quick to mark, and
with a loud cry called ulysses to help him.

"ulysses," he cried, "noble son of laertes where are you flying to,
with your back turned like a coward? see that you are not struck with a
spear between the shoulders. stay here and help me to defend nestor
from this man's furious onset."

ulysses would not give 
 
 ___________________________
 
took his stand before the horses of the son of neleus.
"sir," said he, "these young warriors are pressing you hard, your force
is spent, and age is heavy upon you, your squire is naught, and your
horses are slow to move. mount my chariot and see what the horses of
tros can do--how cleverly they can scud hither and thither over the
plain either in flight or in pursuit. i took them from the hero aeneas.
let our squires attend to your own steeds, but let us drive mine
straight at the trojans, that hector may learn how furiously i too can
wield my spear."

nestor knight of gerene hearkened to his words. thereon the doughty
squires, sthenelus and kind-hearted eurymedon, saw to nestor's horses,
while the two both mounted diomed's chariot. nestor took the reins in
his hands and lashed the horses on; they were soon close up with
hector, and the son of tydeus aimed a spear at him as he was charging
full speed towards them. he missed him, but struck his charioteer and
squire eniopeus son of noble theb
 
 ___________________________
 
aeus in the breast by the nipple while
the reins were in his hands, so that he died there and then, and the
horses swerved as he fell headlong from the chariot. hector was greatly
grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but let him lie for all his
sorrow, while he went in quest of another driver; nor did his steeds
have to go long without one, for he presently found brave archeptolemus
the son of iphitus, and made him get up behind the horses, giving the
reins into his hand.

all had then been lost and no help for it, for they would have been
penned up in ilius like sheep, had not the sire of gods and men been
quick to mark, and hurled a fiery flaming thunderb
 
 ___________________________
 
olt which fell just
in front of diomed's horses with a flare of burning brimstone. the
horses were frightened and tried to back beneath the car, while the
reins dropped from nestor's hands. then he was afraid and said to
diomed, "son of tydeus, turn your horses in flight; see you not that
the hand of jove is against you? to-day he vouchsafes victory to
hector; to-morrow, if it so please him, he will again grant it to
ourselves; no man, however brave, may thwart the purpose of jove, for
he is far stronger than any."

diomed answered, "all that you have said is true; there is a grief
however which pierces me to the very heart, for hector will talk among
the trojans and say, 'the son of tydeus fled before me to the ships.'
this is the vaunt he will make, and may earth then swallow me."

"son of tydeus," replied nestor, "what mean you? though hector say
 
 ___________________________
 
 that
you are a coward the trojans and dardanians will not believe him, nor
yet the wives of the mighty warriors whom you have laid low."

so saying he turned the horses back through the thick of the battle,
and with a cry that rent the air the trojans and hector rained their
darts after them. hector shouted to him and said, "son of tydeus, the
danaans have done you honour hitherto as regards your place at table,
the meals they give you, and the filling of your cup with wine.
henceforth they will despise you, for you are become no better than a
woman. be off, girl and coward that you are, you shall not scale our
walls through any flinching upon my part; neither shall you carry off
our wives in your ships, for i shall kill you with my own hand."

the son of tydeus was in two minds whether or
 
 ___________________________
 
 no to turn his horses
round again and fight him. thrice did he doubt, and thrice did jove
thunder from the heights of ida in token to the trojans that he would
turn the battle in their favour. hector then shouted to them and said,
"trojans, lycians, and dardanians, lovers of close fighting, be men, my
friends, and fight with might and with main; i see that jove is minded
to vouchsafe victory and great glory to myself, while he will deal
destruction upon the danaans. fools, for having thought of building
this weak and worthless wall. it shall not stay my fury; my horses will
spring lightly over their trench, and when i am at their ships forget
not to bring me fire that i may burn them, while
 
 ___________________________
 
ll of
us who are with the danaans were to drive the trojans back and keep
jove from helping them, he would have to sit there sulking alone on
ida."

king neptune was greatly troubled and answered, "juno, rash of tongue,
what are you talking about? we other gods must not set ourselves
against jove, for he is far stronger than we are."

thus did they converse; but the whole space enclosed by the ditch, from
the ships even to the wall, was filled with horses and warriors, who
were pent up there by hector son of priam, now that the hand of jove
was with him. he would even have set fire to the ships and burned them,
had not queen juno put it into the mind of agamemnon, to bestir himself
and to encourage the achaeans. to this end he went round the ships and
tents carrying a great purple cloak, and took his stand by the huge
black hull of ulysses' ship, which was middlemost of all; it was from
this place that his voice would carry farthest, on the one hand towards
the tents of ajax son of telamon, 
 
 ___________________________
 
he two ends of the line. from this
spot then, with a voice that could be heard afar, he shouted to the
danaans, saying, "argives, shame on you cowardly creatures, brave in
semblance only; where are now our vaunts that we should prove
victorious--the vaunts we made so vaingloriously in lemnos, when we ate
the flesh of horned cattle and filled our mixing-bowls to the brim? you
vowed that you would each of you stand against a hundred or two hundred
men, and now you prove no match even for one--for hector, who will be
ere long setting our ships in a blaze. father jove, did you ever so
ruin a great king and rob him so utterly of his greatness? yet, when to
my sorrow i was coming hither, i never let my ship pass your altars
without offering the fat and thigh-bones of heifers upon every one of
them, so eager was i to sack the city of troy. vouchsafe me then this
prayer--suffer us to escape at any rate with our lives, and let not the
achaeans be so utterly vanquished by the trojans."

thus did he pr
 
 ___________________________
 
 honour after my own--a
tripod, or two horses with their chariot, or a woman who shall go up
into your bed."

and teucer answered, "most noble son of atreus, you need not urge me;
from the moment we began to drive them back to ilius, i have never
ceased so far as in me lies to look out for men whom i can shoot and
kill; i have shot eight barbed shafts, and all of them have been buried
in the flesh of warlike youths, but this mad dog i cannot hit."

as he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at hector, for he was bent
on hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow hit priam's
brave son gorgythion in the breast. his mother, fair castianeira,
lovely as a goddess, had been married from aesyme, and now he bowed his
head as a garden poppy in full bloom when it is weighed down by showers
in spring--even thus heavy bowed his head beneath the weight of his
helmet.

again he aimed at hector, for he was longing to hit him, and again his
arrow missed, for apollo turned it aside; but he hit h
 
 ___________________________
 
ector's brave
charioteer archeptolemus in the breast, by the nipple, as he was
driving furiously into the fight. the horses swerved aside as he fell
headlong from the chariot, and there was no life left in him. hector
was greatly grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but for all his
sorrow he let him lie where he fell, and bade his brother cebriones,
who was hard by, take the reins. cebriones did as he had said. hector
thereon with a loud cry sprang from his chariot to the ground, and
seizing a great stone made straight for teucer with intent to kill him.
teucer had just taken an arrow from his quiver and had laid it upon the
bow-string, but hector struck him with the jagged stone as he was
taking aim and drawing the string to his shoulder; he hit him just
where the collar-bone divides the neck from the chest, a very deadly
place, and broke the sinew of his arm so that his wrist was less, and
the bow dropped 
 
 ___________________________
 
from his hand as he fell forward on his knees. ajax saw
that his brother had fallen, and running towards him bestrode him and
sheltered him with his shield. meanwhile his two trusty squires,
mecisteus son of echius, and alastor, came up and bore him to the ships
groaning in his great pain.

jove now again put heart into the trojans, and they drove the achaeans
to their deep trench with hector in all his glory at their head. as a
hound grips a wild boar or lion in flank or buttock when he gives him
chase, and watches warily for his wheeling, even so did hector follow
close upon the achaeans, ever killing the hindmost as they rushed
panic-stricken onwards. when they had fled through the set stakes and
trench and many achaeans had been laid low at the hands of the trojans,
they halted at their ships, calling upon one another and praying every
man instantly as they lifted up their hands
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the gods; but hector
wheeled his horses this way and that, his eyes glaring like those of
gorgo or murderous mars.

juno when she saw them had pity upon them, and at once said to minerva,
"alas, child of aegis-bearing jove, shall you and i take no more
thought for the dying danaans, though it be the last time we ever do
so? see how they perish and come to a bad end before the onset of but a
single man. hector the son of priam rages with intolerable fury, and
has already done great mischief."

minerva answered, "would, indeed, this fellow might die in his own
land, and fall by the hands of the achaeans; but my father jove is mad
with spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and unjust. he forgets
how often i saved his son when he was worn out by the labours
eurystheus had laid on him. he would weep till his cry came up to
heaven, and then jove would send me down to help him; if i had had the
sense to
 
 ___________________________
 
des, to fetch the hell-hound from erebus, he would never have come
back alive out of the deep waters of the river styx. and now jove hates
me, while he lets thetis have her way because she kissed his knees and
took hold of his beard, when she was begging him to do honour to
achilles. i shall know what to do next time he begins calling me his
grey-eyed darling. get our horses ready, while i go within the house of
aegis-bearing jove and put on my armour; we shall then find out whether
priam's son hector will be glad to meet us in the highways of battle,
or whether the trojans will glut hounds and vultures with the fat of
their flesh as they be dead by the ships of the achaeans."

thus did she speak and white-armed juno, daughter of great saturn,
obeyed her words; she set about harnessing her gold-bedizened steeds,
while minerva daughter of aegis-bearing jove flung her richly vesture,
made with her own hands, on to the threshold of her father, and donned
the shirt of jove, arming herself for ba
 
 ___________________________
 
turn,
are you talking about? we know how great your power is, nevertheless we
have compassion upon the danaan warriors who are perishing and coming
to a bad end. we will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from
actual fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to the
argives, that they may not all of them perish in your displeasure."

and jove answered, "to-morrow morning, juno, if you choose to do so,
you will see the son of saturn destroying large numbers of the argives,
for fierce hector shall not cease fighting till he has roused the son
of peleus when they are fighting in dire straits at their ships' sterns
about the body of patroclus. like it or no, this is how it is decreed;
for aught i care, you may go to the lowest depths beneath earth and
sea, where iapetus and saturn dwell in lone tartarus with neither ray
of light nor breath of wind to cheer them. you may go on and on till
you get there, and i shall not care one whit for your displeasure; you
are the greatest vixen liv
 
 ___________________________
 
ing."

juno made him no answer. the sun's glorious orb now sank into oceanus
and drew down night over the land. sorry indeed were the trojans when
light failed them, but welcome and thrice prayed for did darkness fall
upon the achaeans.

then hector led the trojans back from the ships, and held a council on
the open space near the river, where there was a spot clear of corpses.
they left their chariots and sat down on the ground to hear the speech
he made them. he grasped a spear eleven cubits long, the bronze point
of which gleamed in front of it, while the ring round the spear-head
was of gold. spear in hand he spoke. "hear me," said he, "trojans,
dardanians, and allies. i deemed but now that i should destroy the
ships and all the achaea
 
 ___________________________
 
diomed the son of tydeus will drive me back from the
ships to the wall, or whether i shall myself slay him and carry off his
bloodstained spoils. to-morrow let him show his mettle, abide my spear
if he dare. i ween that at break of day, he shall be among the first to
fall and many another of his comrades round him. would that i were as
sure of being immortal and never growing old, and of being worshipped
like minerva and apollo, as i am that this day will bring evil to the
argives."

thus spoke hector and the trojans shouted applause. they took their
sweating steeds from under the yoke, and made them fast each by his own
chariot. they made haste to bring sheep and cattle from the city, they
brought wine also and corn from their houses and gathered much wood.
they then offered unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, and the wind
carried the sweet savour of sacrifice to heaven--but the blessed gods
partook not thereof, for they bitterly hated ilius with priam and
priam's people. thus high in h
 
 ___________________________
 
, neither
in the tent of agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat
and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. sir, we are in
the face of great disaster, and without your help know not whether we
shall save our fleet or lose it. the trojans and their allies have
camped hard by our ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires
throughout their host and deem that nothing can now prevent them from
falling on our fleet. jove, moreover, has sent his lightnings on their
right; hector, in all his glory, rages like a maniac; confident that
jove is with him he fears neither god nor man, but is gone raving mad,
and prays for the approach of day. he vows that he will hew the high
sterns of our ships in pieces, set fire to their hulls, and make havoc
of the achaeans while they are dazed and smothered in smoke; i much
fear that heaven will make good his boasting, and it will prove our lot
to perish at troy far from our home in argos. up, then, and late though
it be, save the sons 
 
 ___________________________
 
r
the sea, and on the borders of sandy pylos. the men that dwell there
are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though
were a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. all this
will he do if you will now forgo your anger. moreover, though you hate
both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the rest of the
achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they will honour you
as a god, and you will earn great glory at their hands. you might even
kill hector; he will come within your reach, for he is infatuated, and
declares that not a danaan whom the ships have brought can hold his own
against him."

achilles answered, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, i should give you
formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no
more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. him do i
hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides
another in his heart; therefore i will say what i mean. i will be
appeased neither
 
 ___________________________
 
s his own, as i this woman, with my whole
heart, though she was but a fruitling of my spear. agamemnon has taken
her from me; he has played me false; i know him; let him tempt me no
further, for he shall not move me. let him look to you, ulysses, and to
the other princes to save his ships from burning. he has done much
without me already. he has built a wall; he has dug a trench deep and
wide all round it, and he has planted it within with stakes; but even
so he stays not the murderous might of hector. so long as i fought the
achaeans hector suffered not the battle range far from the city walls;
he would come to the scaean gates and to the oak tree, but no further.
once he stayed to meet me and hardly did he escape my onset: now,
however, since i am in no mood to fight him, i will to-morrow offer
sacrifice to jove and to all the gods; i will draw my ships into the
water and then victual them duly; to-morrow morning, if you care to
look, you will see my ships on the hellespont, and my men row
 
 ___________________________
 
roof.
we are with you as messengers from the host of the danaans, and would
fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the achaeans."

"ajax," replied achilles, "noble son of telamon, you have spoken much
to my liking, but my blood boils when i think it all over, and remember
how the son of atreus treated me with contumely as though i were some
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the argives. go, then, and
deliver your message; say that i will have no concern with fighting
till hector, son of noble priam, reaches the tents of the myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. for all his
lust of battle, i take it he will be held in check when he is at my own
tent and ship."

on this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, ulysses leading the way. but patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for
phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of
fin
 
 ___________________________
 
ers, and right glad was he that his
brother had come.

menelaus spoke first. "why," said he, "my dear brother, are you thus
arming? are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit the
trojans? i greatly fear that no one will do you this service, and spy
upon the enemy alone in the dead of night. it will be a deed of great
daring."

and king agamemnon answered, "menelaus, we both of us need shrewd
counsel to save the argives and our ships, for jove has changed his
mind, and inclines towards hector's sacrifices rather than ours. i
never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one
day as hector has now wrought against the sons of the achaeans--and
that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor
goddess. the argives will rue it long and deeply. run, therefore, with
all speed by the line of the ships, and call ajax and idomeneus.
meanwhile i will go to nestor, and bid him rise and go about among the
companies of our sentinels to give them their instruc
 
 ___________________________
 
eans. i am in great
fear for the danaans. i am at sea, and without sure counsel; my heart
beats as though it would leap out of my body, and my limbs fail me. if
then you can do anything--for you too cannot sleep--let us go the round
of the watch, and see whether they are drowsy with toil and sleeping to
the neglect of their duty. the enemy is encamped hard and we know not
but he may attack us by night."

nestor replied, "most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon, jove
will not do all for hector that hector thinks he will; he will have
troubles yet in plenty if achilles will lay aside his anger. i will go
with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of tydeus, or
ulysses, or fleet ajax and the valiant son of phyleus. some one had
also better go and call ajax and king idomeneus, for their ships are
not near at hand but the farthest of all. i cannot however refrain from
blaming menelaus, much as i love him and respect him--and i will say so
plainly, even at the risk of offending yo
 
 ___________________________
 
m be of good cheer. "watch on, my children," said he, "and let not
sleep get hold upon you, lest our enemies triumph over us."

with this he passed the trench, and with him the other chiefs of the
achaeans who had been called to the council. meriones and the brave son
of nestor went also, for the princes bade them. when they were beyond
the trench that was dug round the wall they held their meeting on the
open ground where there was a space clear of corpses, for it was here
that when night fell hector had turned back from his onslaught on the
argives. they sat down, therefore, and held debate with one another.

nestor spoke first. "my friends," said he, "is there any man bold
enough to venture among the trojans, and cut off some straggler, or
bring us news of what the enemy mean to do whether they will stay here
by the ships away from the city, or whether, now that they have worsted
the achaeans, they will retire within their walls. if he could learn
all this and come back safely here, his f
 
 ___________________________
 
 helper. even so guide me and guard me now, and
in return i will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year
old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke. i will gild
her horns and will offer her up to you in sacrifice."

thus they prayed, and pallas minerva heard their prayer. when they had
done praying to the daughter of great jove, they went their way like
two lions prowling by night amid the armour and blood-stained bodies of
them that had fallen.

neither again did hector let the trojans sleep; for he too called the
princes and councillors of the trojans that he might set his counsel
before them. "is there one," said he, "who for a great reward will do
me the service of which i will tell you? he shall be well paid if he
will. i will give him a chariot and a couple of horses, the fleetest
that can be found at the ships of the achaeans, if he will dare this
thing; and he will win infinite honour to boot; he must go to the ships
and find out whether they are still 
 
 ___________________________
 
guarded as heretofore, or whether
now that we have beaten them the achaeans design to fly, and through
sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches."

they all held their peace; but there was among the trojans a certain
man named dolon, son of eumedes, the famous herald--a man rich in gold
and bronze. he was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son
among five sisters. he it was that now addressed the trojans. "i,
hector," said he, "will to the ships and will exploit them. but first
hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot,
bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of
peleus. i will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. i will go
through the host from one end to the other till i come to the ship of
agamemnon, where i take it the princes of the achaeans are now
consulting whether they shall fight or fly."

when he had done speaking hector held up his sceptre
 
 ___________________________
 
m his
oath saying, "may jove the thundering husband of juno bear witness that
no other trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that you
shall have your will with them for ever."

the oath he swore was bootless, but it made dolon more keen on going.
he hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he wore the skin
of a grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of ferret skin. then he
took a pointed javelin, and left the camp for the ships, but he was not
to return with any news for hector. when he had left the horses and the
troops behind him, he made all speed on his way, but ulysses perceived
his coming and said to diomed, "diomed, here is some one from the camp;
i am not sure whether he is a spy, or whether it is some thief who
would plunder the bodies of the dead; let him get a little past us, we
can then spring upon him and take him. if, however, he is too quick for
us, go after him with your spear and hem him in towards the ships away
from the trojan camp, to prevent his g
 
 ___________________________
 
etting back to the town."

with this they turned out of their way and lay down among the corpses.
dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when he had got about
as far as the distance by which a mule-plowed furrow exceeds one that
has been ploughed by oxen (for mules can plow fallow land quicker than
oxen) they ran after him, and when he heard their footsteps he stood
still, for he made sure they were friends from the trojan camp come by
hector's orders to bid him return; when, however, they were only a
spear's cast, or less, away from him, he saw that they were enemies and ran
as fast as his legs could take him. the others gave chase at once, and as
a couple of well-trained hounds press forward after a doe or hare that
runs screaming in front of them, even so did the son of tydeus and
ulysses pursue dolon and cut him off from his own people. but when he
had fled so far towards the ships that he would soon have fallen in
with the outp
 
 ___________________________
 
 me alive; i will ransom
myself; we have great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from
this my father will satisfy you with a very large ransom, should he
hear of my being alive at the ships of the achaeans."

"fear not," replied ulysses, "let no thought of death be in your mind;
but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone in
the dead of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while
other men are sleeping? is it to plunder the bodies of the slain, or
did hector send you to spy out what was going on at the ships? or did
you come here of your own mere notion?"

dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: "hector, with his vain
flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. he said he
would give me the horses of the noble son of peleus and his
bronze-bedizened chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the
flying night, get close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships
are still guarded as heretofore, or whether, now that we have b
 
 ___________________________
 
eaten
them, the achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are
neglecting to keep their watches."

ulysses smiled at him and answered, "you had indeed set your heart upon
a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of aeacus are hardly
to be kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than achilles
himself, whose mother was an immortal. but tell me, and tell me true,
where did you leave hector when you started? where lies his armour and
his horses? how, too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the
trojans ordered? what are their plans? will they stay here by the ships
and away from the city, or now that they have worsted the achaeans,
will they retire within their walls?"

and dolon answered, "i will tell you truly all. hector and the other
councillors are now holding conference by the monument of great ilus,
away from the general tumult; as for the guards about which you ask me,

 
 ___________________________
 
e
roused hippocoon, a counsellor of the thracians and a noble kinsman of
rhesus. he started up out of his sleep and saw that the horses were no
longer in their place, and that the men were gasping in their
death-agony; on this he groaned aloud, and called upon his friend by
name. then the whole trojan camp was in an uproar as the people kept
hurrying together, and they marvelled at the deeds of the heroes who
had now got away towards the ships.

when they reached the place where they had killed hector's scout,
ulysses stayed his horses, and the son of tydeus, leaping to the
ground, placed the blood-stained spoils in the hands of ulysses and
remounted: then he lashed the horses onwards, and they flew forward
nothing loth towards the ships as though of their own free will. nestor
was first to hear the tramp of their feet. "my friends," said he,
"princes and counsellors of the argives, shall i guess right or
wrong?--but i must say what i think: there is a sound in my ears as of
the tramp of hor
 
 ___________________________
 
od must have met you and given them to you, for you are both of you
dear to jove, and to jove's daughter minerva."

and ulysses answered, "nestor son of neleus, honour to the achaean
name, heaven, if it so will, can give us even better horses than these,
for the gods are far mightier than we are. these horses, however, about
which you ask me, are freshly come from thrace. diomed killed their
king with the twelve bravest of his companions. hard by the ships we
took a thirteenth man--a scout whom hector and the other trojans had
sent as a spy upon our ships."

he laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while the
other achaeans followed him gladly. when they reached the strongly
built quarters of the son of tydeus, they tied the horses with thongs
of leather to the manger, where the steeds of diomed stood eating their
sweet corn, but ulysses hung the blood-stained spoils of dolon at the
stern of his ship, that they might prepare a sacred offering to
minerva. as for themselves, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ir bodies, and from their necks and thighs. when the sea-water
had taken all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. after they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

and now as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, jo
 
 ___________________________
 
hold them
in readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in
full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning. the
chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but
these came up presently. the son of saturn sent a portent of evil sound
about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to
send many a brave man hurrying down to hades.

the trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great hector, noble polydamas, aeneas who was honoured
by the trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of antenor,
polybus, agenor, and young acamas beauteous as a god. hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in
the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of
aegis-bearing jove.

and now as a band of reap
 
 ___________________________
 
emnon followed after, ever slaying them and cheering on the
achaeans. as when some mighty forest is all ablaze--the eddying gusts
whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and are consumed
before the blast of the flame--even so fell the heads of the flying
trojans before agamemnon son of atreus, and many a noble pair of steeds
drew an empty chariot along the highways of war, for lack of drivers
who were lying on the plain, more useful now to vultures than to their
wives.

jove drew hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage and din
of battle; but the son of atreus sped onwards, calling out lustily to
the danaans. they flew on by the tomb of old ilus, son of dardanus, in
the middle of the plain, and past the place of the wild fig-tree making
always for the city--the son of atreus still shouting, and with hands
all bedrabbled in gore; but when they had reached the scaean gates and
the oak tree, there they halted and waited for the others to come up.
meanwhile the trojan
 
 ___________________________
 
ue the
foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell before him.
many a man was flung headlong from his chariot by the hand of the son
of atreus, for he wielded his spear with fury.

but when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the
father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat,
thunderbolt in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained ida. he then
told iris of the golden wings to carry a message for him. "go," said
he, "fleet iris, and speak thus to hector--say that so long as he sees
agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the trojan ranks, he is
to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when
agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his
chariot, then will i vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the
ships and night falls at the going down of the sun."

iris hearkened and obeyed. down she went to strong ilius from the
crests of ida, and found hector son of priam standing by his chariot
and h
 
 ___________________________
 
orses. then she said, "hector son of priam, peer of gods in
counsel, father jove has sent me to bear you this message--so long as
you see agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the trojan ranks,
you are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle,
but when agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to
his chariot, then will jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you
reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of the sun."

when she had thus spoken iris left him, and hecto
 
 ___________________________
 

bade his charioteer drive to the ships, for he was in great agony. with
a loud clear voice he shouted to the danaans, "my friends, princes and
counsellors of the argives, defend the ships yourselves, for jove has
not suffered me to fight the whole day through against the trojans."

with this the charioteer turned his horses towards the ships, and they
flew forward nothing loth. their chests were white with foam and their
bellies with dust, as they drew the wounded king out of the battle.

when hector saw agamemnon quit the field, he shouted to the trojans and
lycians saying, "trojans, lycians, and dardanian warriors, be men, my
friends, and acquit yourselves in battle bravely; their best man has
left them, and jove has vouchsafed me a great triumph; charge the foe
with your chariots that you may win still greater glory."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a huntsman
hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so did hector,
peer of mars, hound the proud t
 
 ___________________________
 
rojans on against the achaeans. full of
hope he plunged in among the foremost, and fell on the fight like some
fierce tempest that swoops down upon the sea, and lashes its deep blue
waters into fury.

what, then is the full tale of those whom hector son of priam killed in
the hour of triumph which jove then vouchsafed him? first asaeus,
autonous, and opites; dolops son of clytius, opheltius and agelaus;
aesymnus, orus and hipponous steadfast in battle; these chieftains of
the achaeans did hector slay, and then he fell upon the rank and file.
as when the west wind hustles the clouds of the white south and beats
them down with the fierceness of its fury--the waves of the sea roll
high, and the spray is flung aloft in the rage of the wandering
wind--even so thick were the heads of them that fell by the hand of
hector.

all had then been lost and no help for it, and the achaeans would have
fled pell-mell to their ships, had not ulysses cried out to diomed,
"son of tydeus, what has happened
 
 ___________________________
 
 to us that we thus forget our
prowess? come, my good fellow, stand by my side and help me, we shall
be shamed for ever if hector takes the ships."

and diomed answered, "come what may, i will stand firm; but we shall
have scant joy of it, for jove is minded to give victory to the trojans
rather than to us."

with these words he struck thymbraeus from his chariot to the ground,
smiting him in the left breast with his spear, while ulysses killed
molion who was his squire. these they let lie, now that they had
stopped their fighting; the two heroes then went on playing havoc with
the foe, like two wild boars that turn in fu
 
 ___________________________
 
ry and rend the hounds that
hunt them. thus did they turn upon the trojans and slay them, and the
achaeans were thankful to have breathing time in their flight from
hector.

they then took two princes with their chariot, the two sons of merops
of percote, who excelled all others in the arts of divination. he had
forbidden his sons to go to the war, but they would not obey him, for
fate lured them to their fall. diomed son of tydeus slew them both and
stripped them of their armour, while ulysses killed hippodamus and
hypeirochus.

and now the son of saturn as he looked down from ida ordained that
neither side should have the advantage, and they kept on killing one
 
 ___________________________
 

another. the son of tydeus speared agastrophus son of paeon in the
hip-joint with his spear. his chariot was not at hand for him to fly
with, so blindly confident had he been. his squire was in charge of it
at some distance and he was fighting on foot among the foremost until
he lost his life. hector soon marked the havoc diomed and ulysses were
making, and bore down upon them with a loud cry, followed by the trojan
ranks; brave diomed was dismayed when he saw them, and said to ulysses
who was beside him, "great hector is bearing down upon us and we shall
be undone; let us stand firm and wait his onset."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it, nor did he miss his
mark. he had aimed at hector's head near the top of his helmet, but
bronze was turned by bronze, and hector was untouched
 
 ___________________________
 
, for the spear
was stayed by the visored helm made with three plates of metal, which
phoebus apollo had given him. hector sprang back with a great bound
under cover of the ranks; he fell on his knees and propped himself with
his brawny hand leaning on the ground, for darkness had fallen on his
eyes. the son of tydeus having thrown his spear dashed in among the
foremost fighters, to the place where he had seen it strike the ground;
meanwhile hector recovered himself and springing back into his chariot
mingled with the crowd, by which means he saved his life. but diomed
made at him with his spear and said, "dog, you have again got away
though death was close on your heels. phoebus apollo, to whom i ween
you pray ere you go into battle, has again saved you, nevertheless i
will meet you and make an end of you hereafter, if there is any god who
will stand by me too and be my helper. for the present i must pursue
those i can lay hands on."

as
 
 ___________________________
 
 while his squire brought up his
chariot, but ajax rushed furiously on the trojans and killed doryclus,
a bastard son of priam; then he wounded pandocus, lysandrus, pyrasus,
and pylartes; as some swollen torrent comes rushing in full flood from
the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain of heaven--many a dry
oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much mud does it bring down and
cast into the sea--even so did brave ajax chase the foe furiously over
the plain, slaying both men and horses.

hector did not yet know what ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river scamander, where
the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round nestor and brave
idomeneus. among these hector was making great slaughter with his spear
and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to
him; still the achaeans would have given no ground, had not alexandrus
husband of lovely helen stayed the prowess of machaon, shepherd of his
people,
 
 ___________________________
 
ith you and drive your horses to the
ships as fast as you can. a physician is worth more than several other
men put together, for he can cut out arrows and spread healing herbs."

nestor knight of gerene did as idomeneus had counselled; he at once
mounted his chariot, and machaon son of the famed physician
aesculapius, went with him. he lashed his horses and they flew onward
nothing loth towards the ships, as though of their own free will.

then cebriones seeing the trojans in confusion said to hector from his
place beside him, "hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme wing
of the battle, while the other trojans are in pell-mell rout, they and
their horses. ajax son of telamon is driving them before him; i know
him by the breadth of his shield: let us turn our chariot and horses
thither, where horse and foot are fighting most desperately, and where
the cry of battle is loudest."

with this he lashed his goodly steeds, and when they felt the whip they
drew the chariot full speed among 
 
 ___________________________
 
the achaeans and trojans, over the
bodies and shields of those that had fallen: the axle was bespattered
with blood, and the rail round the car was covered with splashes both
from the horses' hoofs and from the tyres of the wheels. hector tore
his way through and flung himself into the thick of the fight, and his
presence threw the danaans into confusion, for his spear was not long
idle; nevertheless though he went among the ranks with sword and spear,
and throwing great stones, he avoided ajax son of telamon, for jove
would have been angry with him if he had fought a better man than
himself.

then father jove from his high throne struck fear into the heart of
ajax, so that he stood there dazed and threw his shield behind
him--l
 
 ___________________________
 
 met him, wounded in the thigh with an arrow,
and limping out of the fight. sweat rained from his head and shoulders,
and black blood welled from his cruel wound, but his mind did not
wander. the son of menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon him
and spoke piteously saying, "o unhappy princes and counsellors of the
danaans, are you then doomed to feed the hounds of troy with your fat,
far from your friends and your native land? say, noble eurypylus, will
the achaeans be able to hold great hector in check, or will they fall
now before his spear?"

wounded eurypylus made answer, "noble patroclus, there is no hope left
for the achaeans but they will perish at their ships. all they that
were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the hands of
the trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. but save me and take
me to your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash the black blood
from off it with warm water, and lay upon it those gracious herbs
which, so they say, have be
 
 ___________________________
 
into the tent,
and a servant, when he saw him, spread bullock-skins on the ground for
him to lie on. he laid him at full length and cut out the sharp arrow
from his thigh; he washed the black blood from the wound with warm
water; he then crushed a bitter herb, rubbing it between his hands, and
spread it upon the wound; this was a virtuous herb which killed all
pain; so the wound presently dried and the blood left off flowing.



book xii

  the trojans and their allies break the wall, led on by hector.

so the son of menoetius was attending to the hurt of eurypylus within
the tent, but the argives and trojans still fought desperately, nor
were the trench and the high wall above it, to keep the trojans in
check longer. they had built it to protect their ships, and had dug the
trench all round it that it might safeguard both the ships and the rich
spoils which they had taken, but they had not offered hecatombs to the
gods. it had been built without the consent of the immortals, and
therefore i
 
 ___________________________
 
t did not last. so long as hector lived and achilles nursed
his anger, and so long as the city of priam remained untaken, the great
wall of the achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of the trojans
were no more, and many also of the argives, though some were yet left
alive--when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth year, and the
argives had gone back with their ships to their own country--then
neptune and apollo took counsel to destroy the wall, and they turned on
to it the streams of all the rivers from mount ida int
 
 ___________________________
 
 toil; he made all
level by the mighty stream of the hellespont, and then when he had
swept the wall away he spread a great beach of sand over the place
where it had been. this done he turned the rivers back into their old
courses.

this was what neptune and apollo were to do in after time; but as yet
battle and turmoil were still raging round the wall till its timbers
rang under the blows that rained upon them. the argives, cowed by the
scourge of jove, were hemmed in at their ships in fear of hector the
mighty minister of rout, who as heretofore fought with the force and
fury of a whirlwind. as a lion or wild boar turns fiercely on the dogs
and men that attack him, while these form a solid wall and shower their
javelins as they face him--his courage is all undaunted, but his high
spirit will be the death of him; many a time does he charge at his
pursuers to scatter them, and they fall back as often as he does
so--even so did hector go about among the host exhorting his men, and
cheering th
 
 ___________________________
 
t the horses dared not do so, and stood neighing upon its brink, for
the width frightened them. they could neither jump it nor cross it, for
it had overhanging banks all round upon either side, above which there
were the sharp stakes that the sons of the achaeans had planted so
close and strong as a defence against all who would assail it; a horse,
therefore, could not get into it and draw his chariot after him, but
those who were on foot kept trying their very utmost. then polydamas
went up to hector and said, "hector, and you other captains of the
trojans and allies, it is madness for us to try and drive our horses
across the trench; it will be very hard to cross, for it is full of
sharp stakes, and beyond these there is the wall. our horses therefore
cannot get down into it, and would be of no use if they did; moreover
it is a narrow place and we should come to harm. if, indeed, great jove
is minded to help the trojans, and in his anger will utterly destroy
the achaeans, i would myself gl
 
 ___________________________
 
adly see them perish now and here far
from argos; but if they should rally and we are driven back from the
ships pell-mell into the trench there will be not so much as a man get
back to the city to tell the tale. now, therefore, let us all do as i
say; let our squires hold our horses by the trench, but let us follow
hector in a body on foot, clad in full armour, and if the day of their
doom is at hand the achaeans will not be able to withstand us."

thus spoke polydamas and his saying pleased hector, who sprang in full
armour to the ground, and all the other trojans, when they saw him do
so, also left their chariots. each man then gave his horses over to his
charioteer in charge to hold them ready for him at the trench. then
they formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in
five bodies followed their leaders. those that went with hector and
polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined
to break through the wall and fight at the ships. cebriones w
 
 ___________________________
 
as also
joined with them as third in command, for hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was cap
 
 ___________________________
 
her given to lying. i made sure the argive heroes
could not withstand us, whereas like slim-waisted wasps, or bees that
have their nests in the rocks by the wayside--they leave not the holes
wherein they have built undefended, but fight for their little ones
against all who would take them--even so these men, though they be but
two, will not be driven from the gates, but stand firm either to slay
or be slain."

he spoke, but moved not the mind of jove, whose counsel it then was to
give glory to hector. meanwhile the rest of the trojans were fighting
about the other gates; i, however, am no god to be able to tell about
all these things, for the battle raged everywhere about the stone wall
as it were a fiery furnace. the argives, discomfited though they were,
were forced to defend their ships, and all the gods who were defending
the achaeans were vexed in spirit; but the lapithae kept on fighting
with might and main.

thereon polypoetes, mighty son of pirithous, hit damasus with a spear
upon h
 
 ___________________________
 
ed about, and he died fighting. he then slew
pylon and ormenus. leonteus, of the race of mars, killed hippomachus
the son of antimachus by striking him with his spear upon the girdle.
he then drew his sword and sprang first upon antiphates whom he killed
in combat, and who fell face upwards on the earth. after him he killed
menon, iamenus, and orestes, and laid them low one after the other.

while they were busy stripping the armour from these heroes, the youths
who were led on by polydamas and hector (and these were the greater
part and the most valiant of those that were trying to break through
the wall and fire the ships) were still standing by the trench,
uncertain what they should do; for they had seen a sign from heaven
when they had essayed to cross it--a soaring eagle that flew skirting
the left wing of their host, with a monstrous blood-red snake in its
talons still alive and struggling to escape. the snake was still bent
on revenge, wriggling and twisting itself backwards till it s
 
 ___________________________
 
truck the
bird that held it, on the neck and breast; whereon the bird being in
pain, let it fall, dropping it into the middle of the host, and then
flew down the wind with a sharp cry. the trojans were struck with
terror when they saw the snake, portent of aegis-bearing jove, writhing
in the midst of them, and polydamas went up to hector and said,
"hector, at our councils of war you are ever given to rebuke me, even
when i speak wisely, as though it were not well, forsooth, that one of
the people should cross your will either in the field or at the council
board; you would have them support you always: nevertheless i will say
what i think will be best; let us not now go on to fight the danaans at
their ships, for i know what will happen if this soaring eagle which
skirted the left wing of our host with a monstrous blood-red snake in
its talons (
 
 ___________________________
 
ch. the eagle let go her
hold; she did not succeed in taking it home to her little ones, and so
will it be--with ourselves; even though by a mighty effort we break
through the gates and wall of the achaeans, and they give way before
us, still we shall not return in good order by the way we came, but
shall leave many a man behind us whom the achaeans will do to death in
defence of their ships. thus would any seer who was expert in these
matters, and was trusted by the people, read the portent."

hector looked fiercely at him and said, "polydamas, i like not of your
reading. you can find a better saying than this if you will. if,
however, you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed
you of your reason. you would have me pay no heed to the counsels of
jove, nor to the promises he made me--and he bowed his head in
confirmation; you bid me be ruled rather by the flight of wild-fowl.
what care i whether they fly towards dawn or dark, and whether they be
on my right hand or on my 
 
 ___________________________
 
hips of the
argives you are not likely to be killed yourself, for you are not
steadfast nor courageous. if you will not fight, or would talk others
over from doing so, you shall fall forthwith before my spear."

with these words he led the way, and the others followed after with a
cry that rent the air. then jove the lord of thunder sent the blast of
a mighty wind from the mountains of ida, that bore the dust down
towards the ships; he thus lulled the achaeans into security, and gave
victory to hector and to the trojans, who, trusting to their own might
and to the signs he had shown them, essayed to break through the great
wall of the achaeans. they tore down the breastworks from the walls,
and overthrew the battlements; they upheaved the buttresses, which the
achaeans had set in front of the wall in order to support it; when they
had pulled these down they made sure of breaking through the wall, but
the danaans still showed no sign of giving ground; they still fenced
the battlements with th
 
 ___________________________
 
s that jut into the sea, the grassy plains, and
the tilled fields of men; the snow lies deep upon the forelands, and
havens of the grey sea, but the waves as they come rolling in stay it
that it can come no further, though all else is wrapped as with a
mantle, so heavy are the heavens with snow--even thus thickly did the
stones fall on one side and on the other, some thrown at the trojans,
and some by the trojans at the achaeans; and the whole wall was in an
uproar.

still the trojans and brave hector would not yet have broken down the
gates and the great bar, had not jove turned his son sarpedon against
the argives as a lion against a herd of horned cattle. before him he
held his shield of hammered bronze, that the smith had beaten so fair
and round, and had lined with ox hides which he had made fast with
rivets of gold all round the shield; this he held in front of him, and
brandishing his two spears came on like some lion of the wilderness,
who has been long famished for want of meat and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the foe, and many were struck clean through their
shields; the wall and battlements were everywhere deluged with the
blood alike of trojans and of achaeans. but even so the trojans could
not rout the achaeans, who still held on; and as some honest
hard-working woman weighs wool in her balance and sees that the scales
be true, for she would gain some pitiful earnings for her little ones,
even so was the fight balanced evenly between them till the time came
when jove gave the greater glory to hector son of priam, who was first
to spring towards the wall of the achaeans. when he had done so, he
cried aloud to the trojans, "up, trojans, break the wall of the
argives, and fling fire upon their ships."

thus did he hound them on, and in one body they rushed straight at the
wall as he had bidden them, and scaled the battlements with sharp
spears in their hands. hector laid hold of a stone that lay just
outside the gates and was thick at one end but pointed at the other;
two of the best men in a
 
 ___________________________
 
 town, as men now are, could hardly raise it
from the ground and put it on to a waggon, but hector lifted it quite
easily by himself, for the son of scheming saturn made it light for
him. as a shepherd picks up a ram's fleece with one hand and finds it
no burden, so easily did hector lift the great stone and drive it right
at the doors that closed the gates so strong and so firmly set. these
doors were double and high, and were kept closed by two cross-bars to
which there was but one key. when he had got close up to them, hector
strode towards them that his blow might gain in force and struck them
in the middle, leaning his whole weight against them. he broke both
hinges, and the stone fell inside by reason of its great weight. the
portals re-echoed with the sound, the bars
 
 ___________________________
 
 held no longer, and the
doors flew open, one one way, and the other the other, through the
force of the blow. then brave hector leaped inside with a face as dark
as that of flying night. the gleaming bronze flashed fiercely about his
body and he had two spears in his hand. none but a god could have
withstood him as he flung himself into the gateway, and his eyes glared
like fire. then he turned round towards the trojans and called on them
to scale the wall, and they did as he bade them--some of them at once
climbing over the wall, while others passed through the gates. the
danaans then fled panic-stricken towards their 
 
 ___________________________
 
ships, and all was
uproar and confusion.



book xiii

  neptune helps the achaeans--the feats of idomeneus--hector at
  the ships.

now when jove had thus brought hector and the trojans to the ships, he
left them to their never-ending toil, and turned his keen eyes away,
looking elsewhither towards the horse-breeders of thrace, the mysians,
fighters at close quarters, the noble hippemolgi, who live on milk, and
the abians, justest of mankind. he no longer turned so much as a glance
towards troy, for he did not think that any of the immortals would go
and help either trojans or danaans.

but king neptune had kept no blind look-out; he had been looking
admiringly
 
 ___________________________
 
eds took him to the ships of the achaeans.

now there is a certain huge cavern in the depths of the sea midway
between tenedos and rocky imbrus; here neptune lord of the earthquake
stayed his horses, unyoked them, and set before them their ambrosial
forage. he hobbled their feet with hobbles of gold which none could
either unloose or break, so that they might stay there in that place
until their lord should return. this done he went his way to the host
of the achaeans.

now the trojans followed hector son of priam in close array like a
storm-cloud or flame of fire, fighting with might and main and raising
the cry battle; for they deemed that they should take the ships of the
achaeans and kill all their chiefest heroes then and there. meanwhile
earth-encircling neptune lord of the earthquake cheered on the argives,
for he had come up out of the sea and had assumed the form and voice of
calchas.

first he spoke to the two ajaxes, who were doing their best already,
and said, "ajaxes, you two ca
 
 ___________________________
 
n be the saving of the achaeans if you
will put out all your strength and not let yourselves be daunted. i am
not afraid that the trojans, who have got over the wall in force, will
be victorious in any other part, for the achaeans can hold all of them
in check, but i much fear that some evil will befall us here where
furious hector, who boasts himself the son of great jove himself, is
leading them on like a pillar of flame. may some god, then, put it into
your hearts to make a firm stand here, and to incite others to do the
like. in this case you will drive him from the ships even though he be
inspired by jove himself."

as he spoke the earth-encircling lord of the earthquake struck both of
them with his sceptre and filled their hearts with daring. he made
their legs light and active, as also their hands and their feet. t
 
 ___________________________
 
ess of the prophet is bidding us fight hard by our ships. it
was not calchas the seer and diviner of omens; i knew him at once by
his feet and knees as he turned away, for the gods are soon recognised.
moreover i feel the lust of battle burn more fiercely within me, while
my hands and my feet under me are more eager for the fray."

and ajax son of telamon answered, "i too feel my hands grasp my spear
more firmly; my strength is greater, and my feet more nimble; i long,
moreover, to meet furious hector son of priam, even in single combat."

thus did they converse, exulting in the hunger after battle with which
the god had filled them. meanwhile the earth-encircler roused the
achaeans, who were resting in the rear by the ships overcome at once by
hard fighting and by grief at seeing that the trojans had got over the
wall in force. tears began falling from their eyes as they beheld them,
for they made sure that they should not escape destruction; but the
lord of the earthquake passed lightly ab
 
 ___________________________
 
 peleus, still this is no reason why we should leave off
fighting. let us be quick to heal, for the hearts of the brave heal
quickly. you do ill to be thus remiss, you, who are the finest soldiers
in our whole army. i blame no man for keeping out of battle if he is a
weakling, but i am indignant with such men as you are. my good friends,
matters will soon become even worse through this slackness; think, each
one of you, of his own honour and credit, for the hazard of the fight
is extreme. great hector is now fighting at our ships; he has broken
through the gates and the strong bolt that held them."

thus did the earth-encircler address the achaeans and urge them on.
thereon round the two ajaxes there gathered strong bands of men, of
whom not even mars nor minerva, marshaller of hosts could make light if
they went among them, for they were the picked men of all those who
were now awaiting the onset of hector and the trojans. they made a
living fence, spear to spear, shield to shield, buckler 
 
 ___________________________
 
to buckler,
helmet to helmet, and man to man. the horse-hair crests on their
gleaming helmets touched one another as they nodded forward, so closely
serried were they; the spears they brandished in their strong hands
were interlaced, and their hearts were set on battle.

the trojans advanced in a dense body, with hector at their head
pressing right on as a rock that comes thundering down the side of some
mountain from whose brow the winter torrents have torn it; the
foundations of the dull thing have been loosened by floods of rain, and
as it bounds headlong on its way it sets the whole forest in an uproar;
it swerves neither to right nor left till it reaches level ground, but
then for all its fury it can go no further--even so easily did hector
for a while seem as though he would career through the tents and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ns, dwelling near
priam himself, who gave him like honour with his own sons. the son of
telamon now struck him under the ear with a spear which he then drew
back again, and imbrius fell headlong as an ash-tree when it is felled
on the crest of some high mountain beacon, and its delicate green
foliage comes toppling down to the ground. thus did he fall with his
bronze-dight armour ringing harshly round him, and teucer sprang
forward with intent to strip him of his armour; but as he was doing so,
hector took aim at him with a spear. teucer saw the spear coming and
swerved aside, whereon it hit amphimachus, son of cteatus son of actor,
in the chest as he was coming into battle, and his armour rang rattling
round him as he fell heavily to the ground. hector sprang forward to
take amphimachus's helmet from off his temples, and in a moment ajax
threw a spear at him, but did not wound him, for he was encased all
over in his terrible armour; nevertheless the spear struck the boss of
his shield with 
 
 ___________________________
 
st of the achaeans, while
the two brave and impetuous ajaxes did the like by imbrius. as two
lions snatch a goat from the hounds that have it in their fangs, and
bear it through thick brushwood high above the ground in their jaws,
thus did the ajaxes bear aloft the body of imbrius, and strip it of its
armour. then the son of oileus severed the head from the neck in
revenge for the death of amphimachus, and sent it whirling over the
crowd as though it had been a ball, till it fell in the dust at
hector's feet.

neptune was exceedingly angry that his grandson amphimachus should have
fallen; he therefore went to the tents and ships of the achaeans to
urge the danaans still further, and to devise evil for the trojans.
idomeneus met him, as he was taking leave of a comrade, who had just
come to him from the fight, wounded in the knee. his fellow-soldiers
bore him off the field, and idomeneus having given orders to the
physicians went on to his tent, for he was still thirsting for battle.
neptune 
 
 ___________________________
 
 so did meriones and idomeneus, captains of men, go out to
battle clad in their bronze armour. meriones was first to speak. "son
of deucalion," said he, "where would you have us begin fighting? on the
right wing of the host, in the centre, or on the left wing, where i
take it the achaeans will be weakest?"

idomeneus answered, "there are others to defend the centre--the two
ajaxes and teucer, who is the finest archer of all the achaeans, and is
good also in a hand-to-hand fight. these will give hector son of priam
enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish their
indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of saturn fling a
firebrand upon them with his own hand. great ajax son of telamon will
yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of ceres, if
bronze and great stones can overthrow him. he would not yield even to
achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is none
to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
and sword throughout the host.
the field bristled with the long and deadly spears which they bore.
dazzling was the sheen of their gleaming helmets, their fresh-burnished
breastplates, and glittering shields as they joined battle with one
another. iron indeed must be his courage who could take pleasure in the
sight of such a turmoil, and look on it without being dismayed.

thus did the two mighty sons of saturn devise evil for mortal heroes.
jove was minded to give victory to the trojans and to hector, so as to
do honour to fleet achilles, nevertheless he did not mean to utterly
overthrow the achaean host before ilius, and only wanted to glorify
thetis and her valiant son. neptune on the other hand went about among
the argives to incite them, having come up from the grey sea in secret,
for he was grieved at seeing them vanquished by the trojans, and was
furiously angry with jove. both were of the same race and country, but
jove was elder born and knew more, therefore neptune feared to defend
 
 ___________________________
 
polyidus had often told
him that he must either stay at home and die of a terrible disease, or
go with the achaeans and perish at the hands of the trojans; he chose,
therefore, to avoid incurring the heavy fine the achaeans would have
laid upon him, and at the same time to escape the pain and suffering of
disease. paris now smote him on the jaw under his ear, whereon the life
went out of him and he was enshrouded in the darkness of death.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. but hector had not
yet heard, and did not know that the argives were making havoc of his
men on the left wing of the battle, where the achaeans ere long would
have triumphed over them, so vigorously did neptune cheer them on and
help them. he therefore held on at the point where he had first forced
his way through the gates and the wall, after breaking through the
serried ranks of danaan warriors. it was here that the ships of ajax
and protesilaus were drawn up by the sea-shore; here the wall was at
its l
 
 ___________________________
 
owest, and the fight both of man and horse raged most fiercely.
the boeotians and the ionians with their long tunics, the locrians, the
men of phthia, and the famous force of the epeans could hardly stay
hector as he rushed on towards the ships, nor could they drive him from
them, for he was as a wall of fire. the chosen men of the athenians
were in the van, led by menestheus son of peteos, with whom were also
pheidas, stichius, and stalwart bias; meges son of phyleus, amphion,
and dracius commanded the epeans, while medon and staunch podarces led
the men of phthia. of these, medon was bastard son to oileus and
brother of ajax, but he lived in phylace away from his own country, for
he had killed the b
 
 ___________________________
 
rcome with sweat and toil, but the locrians did
not follow so close after the son of oileus, for they could not hold
their own in a hand-to-hand fight. they had no bronze helmets with
plumes of horse-hair, neither had they shields nor ashen spears, but
they had come to troy armed with bows, and with slings of twisted wool
from which they showered their missiles to break the ranks of the
trojans. the others, therefore, with their heavy armour bore the brunt
of the fight with the trojans and with hector, while the locrians shot
from behind, under their cover; and thus the trojans began to lose
heart, for the arrows threw them into confusion.

the trojans would now have been driven in sorry plight from the ships
and tents back to windy ilius, had not polydamas presently said to
hector, "hector, there is no persuading you to take advice. because
heaven has so richly endowed you with the arts of war, you think that
you must therefore excel others in counsel; but you cannot thus claim
preeminence 
 
 ___________________________
 
scattered and outnumbered near the
ships. draw back, therefore, and call your chieftains round you, that
we may advise together whether to fall now upon the ships in the hope
that heaven may vouchsafe us victory, or to beat a retreat while we can
yet safely do so. i greatly fear that the achaeans will pay us their
debt of yesterday in full, for there is one abiding at their ships who
is never weary of battle, and who will not hold aloof much longer."

thus spoke polydamas, and his words pleased hector well. he sprang in
full armour from his chariot and said, "polydamas, gather the
chieftains here; i will go yonder into the fight, but will return at
once when i have given them their orders."

he then sped onward, towering like a snowy mountain, and with a loud
cry flew through the ranks of the trojans and their allies. when they
heard his voice they all hastened to gather round polydamas, the
excellent son of panthous, but hector kept on among the foremost,
looking everywhere to find deiphobu
 
 ___________________________
 
the others had been also
stricken and wounded by them; but upon the left wing of the dread
battle he found alexandrus, husband of lovely helen, cheering his men
and urging them on to fight. he went up to him and upbraided him.
"paris," said he, "evil-hearted paris, fair to see but woman-mad and
false of tongue, where are deiphobus and king helenus? where are adamas
son of asius, and asius son of hyrtacus? where too is othryoneus? ilius
is undone and will now surely fall!"

alexandrus answered, "hector, why find fault when there is no one to
find fault with? i should hold aloof from battle on any day rather than
this, for my mother bore me with nothing of the coward about me. from
the moment when you set our men fighting about the ships we have been
staying here and doing battle with the danaans. our comrades about whom
you ask me are dead; deiphobus and king helenus alone have left the
field, wounded both of them in the hand, but the son of saturn saved
them alive. now, therefore, lead on wh
 
 ___________________________
 
e from fertile ascania on the
preceding day to relieve other troops. then jove urged them on to
fight. they flew forth like the blasts of some fierce wind that strike
earth in the van of a thunderstorm--they buffet the salt sea into an
uproar; many and mighty are the great waves that come crashing in one
after the other upon the shore with their arching heads all crested
with foam--even so did rank behind rank of trojans arrayed in gleaming
armour follow their leaders onward. the way was led by hector son of
priam, peer of murderous mars, with his round shield before him--his
shield of ox-hides covered with plates of bronze--and his gleaming
helmet upon his temples. he kept stepping forward under cover of his
shield in every direction, making trial of the ranks to see if they
would give way before him, but he could not daunt the courage of the
achaeans. ajax was the first to stride out and challenge him. "sir," he
cried, "draw near; why do you think thus vainly to dismay the argives?
we acha
 
 ___________________________
 
 us. your heart, forsooth, is set on destroying our ships,
but we too have hands that can keep you at bay, and your own fair town
shall be sooner taken and sacked by ourselves. the time is near when
you shall pray jove and all the gods in your flight, that your steeds
may be swifter than hawks as they raise the dust on the plain and bear
you back to your city."

as he was thus speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand, and the
host of the achaeans shouted, for they took heart at the omen. but
hector answered, "ajax, braggart and false of tongue, would that i were
as sure of being son for evermore to aegis-bearing jove, with queen
juno for my mother, and of being held in like honour with minerva and
apollo, as i am that this day is big with the destruction of the
achaeans; and you shall fall among them if you dare abide my spear; it
shall rend your fair body and bid you glut our hounds and birds of prey
with your fat and your flesh, as you fall by the ships of the achaeans."

with these wor
 
 ___________________________
 
ds he led the way and the others followed after with a
cry that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them. the argives
on their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their
prowess, but stood firm against the onslaught of the trojan chieftains,
and the cry from both the hosts rose up to heaven and to the brightness
of jove's presence.



book xiv

  agamemnon proposes that the achaeans should sail home, and
  is rebuked by ulysses--juno beguiles jupiter--hector is
  wounded.

nestor was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not escape
him, and he said to the son of aesculapius, "what, noble machaon, is
the meaning of all this? the shouts of men fighting by our ships grow
stronger and stronger; stay here, therefore, and sit over your wine,
while fair hecamede heats you a bath and washes the clotted blood from
off you. i will go at once to the look-out station and see what it is
all about."

as he spoke he took up the shield of his son thrasy
 
 ___________________________
 
ships, and the host was cramped for space, therefore they had placed
the ships in rows one behind the other, and had filled the whole
opening of the bay between the two points that formed it. the kings,
leaning on their spears, were coming out to survey the fight, being in
great anxiety, and when old nestor met them they were filled with
dismay. then king agamemnon said to him, "nestor son of neleus, honour
to the achaean name, why have you left the battle to come hither? i
fear that what dread hector said will come true, when he vaunted among
the trojans saying that he would not return to ilius till he had fired
our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it is all coming
true. alas! others of the achaeans, like achilles, are in such anger with
me that they refuse to fight by the sterns of our ships."

then nestor knight of gerene, answered, "it is indeed as you say; it is
all coming true at this moment, and even jove who thunders from on high
cannot prevent it. fallen is the wal
 
 ___________________________
 
ptune, lord of the earthquake. when he had
found him he said, "now, neptune, you can help the danaans with a will,
and give them victory though it be only for a short time while jove is
still sleeping. i have sent him into a sweet slumber, and juno has
beguiled him into going to bed with her."

sleep now departed and went his ways to and fro among mankind, leaving
neptune more eager than ever to help the danaans. he darted forward
among the first ranks and shouted saying, "argives, shall we let hector
son of priam have the triumph of taking our ships and covering himself
with glory? this is what he says that he shall now do, seeing that
achilles is still in dudgeon at his ship; we shall get on very well
without him if we keep each other in heart and stand by one another.
now, therefore, let us all do as i say. let us each take the best and
largest shield we can lay hold of, put on our helmets, and sally forth
with our longest spears in our hands; i will lead you on, and hector
son of priam, 
 
 ___________________________
 
of tydeus,
ulysses, and agamemnon, wounded though they were, set the others in
array, and went about everywhere effecting the exchanges of armour; the
most valiant took the best armour, and gave the worse to the worse man.
when they had donned their bronze armour they marched on with neptune
at their head. in his strong hand he grasped his terrible sword, keen
of edge and flashing like lightning; woe to him who comes across it in
the day of battle; all men quake for fear and keep away from it.

hector on the other side set the trojans in array. thereon neptune and
hector waged fierce war on one another--hector on the trojan and
neptune on the argive side. mighty was the uproar as the two forces
met; the sea came rolling in towards the ships and tents of the
achaeans, but waves do not thunder on the shore more loudly when driven
before the blast of boreas, nor do the flames of a forest fire roar
more fiercely when it is well alight upon the mountains, nor does the
wind bellow with ruder music
 
 ___________________________
 
 as it tears on through the tops of when it
is blowing its hardest, than the terrible shout which the trojans and
achaeans raised as they sprang upon one another.

hector first aimed his spear at ajax, who was turned full towards him,
nor did he miss his aim. the spear struck him where two bands passed
over his chest--the band of his shield and that of his silver-studded
sword--and these protected his body. hector was angry that his spear
should have been hurled in vain, and withdrew under cover of his men.
as he was thus retreating, ajax son of telamon, struck him with a
stone, of which there were many lying about under the men's feet as
they fought--brought there to give support to the ships' sides as they
lay on the shore. ajax caught up one of them and struck hector above
the rim of his shield close to his neck; the blow made him spin round
like a top and reel in all directions. as an oak falls headl
 
 ___________________________
 
ong when
uprooted by the lightning flash of father jove, and there is a terrible
smell of brimstone--no man can help being dismayed if he is standing
near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing--even so did hector
fall to earth and bite the dust. his spear fell from his hand, but his
shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze armour
rang about him.

the sons of the achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him,
hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the trojans,
but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered
by the princes polydamas, aeneas, agenor, sarpedon captain of the
lycians, and noble glaucus. of the others, too, there was not one 
 
 ___________________________
 
e chariot; these
then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. when they
reached the ford of the fair stream of xanthus, begotten of immortal
jove, they took him from off his chariot and laid him down on the
ground; they poured water over him, and as they did so he breathed
again and opened his eyes. then kneeling on his knees he vomited blood,
but soon fell back on to the ground, and his eyes were again closed in
darkness for he was still stunned by the blow.

when the argives saw hector leaving the field, they took heart and set
upon the trojans yet more furiously. ajax fleet son of oileus began by
springing on satnius son of enops, and wounding him with his spear: a
fair naiad nymph had borne him to enops as he was herding cattle by the
banks of the river satnioeis. the son of oileus came up to him and
struck him in the flank so that he fell, and a fierce fight between
trojans and danaans raged round his body. polydamas son of panthous
drew near to avenge him, and wounded pro
 
 ___________________________
 
so killed prothoon and periphetes. the son of
atreus then wounded hyperenor shepherd of his people, in the flank, and
the bronze point made his entrails gush out as it tore in among them;
on this his life came hurrying out of him at the place where he had
been wounded, and his eyes were closed in darkness. ajax son of oileus
killed more than any other, for there was no man so fleet as he to
pursue flying foes when jove had spread panic among them.



book xv

  jove awakes, tells apollo to heal hector, and the trojans
  again become victorious.

but when their flight had taken them past the trench and the set
stakes, and many had fallen by the hands of the danaans, the trojans
made a halt on reaching their chariots, routed and pale with fear. jove
now woke on the crests of ida, where he was lying with golden-throned
juno by his side, and starting to his feet he saw the trojans and
achaeans, the one thrown into confusion, and the others driving them
pell-mell before them with king neptune in 
 
 ___________________________
 
their midst. he saw hector
lying on the ground with his comrades gathered round him, gasping for
breath, wandering in mind and vomiting blood, for it was not the
feeblest of the achaeans who struck him.

the sire of gods and men had pity on him, and looked fiercely on juno.
"i see, juno," said he, "you mischief-making trickster, that your
cunning has stayed hector from fighting and has caused the rout of his
host. i am in half a mind to thrash you, in which case you will be the
first to reap the fruits of your scurvy knavery. do you not remember
how once upon a time i had you hanged? i fastened two anvils on to your
feet, and bound your hands in a chain of gold which none might break,
and you hung in mid-air among the clouds. all the gods in olympus were
in a fury, but they could not reach you to set you free; when i caught
any one of them i gripped him 
 
 ___________________________
 
 that you may learn to leave off being
so deceitful, and discover how much you are likely to gain by the
embraces out of which you have come here to trick me."

juno trembled as he spoke, and said, "may heaven above and earth below
be my witnesses, with the waters of the river styx--and this is the
most solemn oath that a blessed god can take--nay, i swear also by your
own almighty head and by our bridal bed--things over which i could
never possibly perjure myself--that neptune is not punishing hector and
the trojans and helping the achaeans through any doing of mine; it is
all of his own mere motion because he was sorry to see the achaeans
hard pressed at their ships: if i were advising him, i should tell him
to do as you bid him."

the sire of gods and men smiled and answered, "if you, juno, were
always to support me when we sit in council of the gods, neptune, like
it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of thinking. if,
then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, g
 
 ___________________________
 
o among the
rank and file of the gods, and tell iris and apollo lord of the bow,
that i want them--iris, that she may go to the achaean host and tell
neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and apollo, that he may send
hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of achilles son of peleus. achilles will
then send his comrade patroclus into battle, and hector will kill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my
own noble son sarpedon. achilles will kill hector to avenge patroclus,
and from that time i will bring it about that the achaeans shall
persistently drive the trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of
minerva and take ilius. but i will not stay my anger, nor permit any
god to help the danaans till i have accomplished the desire of the son
of peleus, according to the promise i made by bowing my head on the da
 
 ___________________________
 
wever, i
will give way in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let me tell you,
and i mean what i say--if contrary to the desire of myself, minerva
driver of the spoil, juno, mercury, and king vulcan, jove spares steep
ilius, and will not let the achaeans have the great triumph of sacking
it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable resentment."

neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely did the
achaeans miss him. then jove said to apollo, "go, dear phoebus, to
hector, for neptune who holds the earth in his embrace has now gone
down under the sea to avoid the severity of my displeasure. had he not
done so those gods who are below with saturn would have come to hear of
the fight between us. it is better for both of us that he should have
curbed his anger and kept out of my reach, for i should have had much
trouble with him. take, then, your tasselled aegis, and shake it
furiously, so as to set the achaean heroes in a panic; take, moreover,
brave hector, o far
 
 ___________________________
 
-darter, into your own care, and rouse him to deeds
of daring, till the achaeans are sent flying back to their ships and to
the hellespont. from that point i will think it well over, how the
achaeans may have a respite from their troubles."

apollo obeyed his father's saying, and left the crests of ida, flying
like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. he found hector
no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had just come
to himself again. he knew those who were about him, and the sweat and
hard breathing had left him from the moment when the will of
aegis-bearing jove had revived him. apollo stood beside him and said,
"hector son of priam, why are you so faint, and why are you here away
from the others? has any mishap befallen you?"

hector in a weak voice answered, "and which, kind sir, of the gods are
you, who now ask me thus? do you not kn
 
 ___________________________
 
 multitudes. i will go
before your horses to smooth the way for them, and will turn the
achaeans in flight."

as he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his people.
and as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to take his
bath in the river--he tosses his head, and his mane streams over his
shoulders as in all the pride of his strength he flies full speed to
the pastures where the mares are feeding--even so hector, when he heard
what the god said, urged his horsemen on, and sped forward as fast as
his limbs could take him. as country peasants set their hounds on to a
homed stag or wild goat--he has taken shelter under rock or thicket,
and they cannot find him, but, lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts
have roused stands in their path, and they are in no further humour for
the chase--even so the achaeans were still charging on in a body, using
their swords and spears pointed at both ends, but when they sa
 
 ___________________________
 
w hector
going about among his men they were afraid, and their hearts fell down
into their feet.

then spoke thoas son of andraemon, leader of the aetolians, a man who
could throw a good throw, and who was staunch also in close fight,
while few could surpass him in debate when opinions were divided. he
then with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: "what, in
heaven's name, do i now see? is it not hector come to life again? every
one made sure he had been killed by ajax son of telamon, but it seems
that one of the gods has again rescued him. he has killed many of us
danaans already, and i take it will yet do so, for the hand of jove
must be with him or he would never dare show himself so masterful in
the forefront of the battle. now, therefore, let us all do as i say;
let us order the main body of our forces to fall back upon the ships,
but let those of us who profess to be the flower of the ar
 
 ___________________________
 
my stand
firm, and see whether we cannot hold hector back at the point of our
spears as soon as he comes near us; i conceive that he will then think
better of it before he tries to charge into the press of the danaans."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. those who were
about ajax and king idomeneus, the followers moreover of teucer,
meriones, and meges peer of mars called all their best men about them
and sustained the fight against hector and the trojans, but the main
body fell back upon the ships of the achaeans.

the trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with hector striding on at
their head. before him went phoebus apollo shrouded in cloud about his
shoulders. he bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy fringe,
which vulcan the smith had given jove to strike terror into the hearts
of men. with this in his hand he led on the trojans.

the argives held together and stood their ground. the cry of battle
rose high from ei
 
 ___________________________
 
pollo held his aegis quietly and without shaking it, the
weapons on either side took effect and the people fell, but when he
shook it straight in the face of the danaans and raised his mighty
battle-cry their hearts fainted within them and they forgot their
former prowess. as when two wild beasts spring in the dead of night on
a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep when the herdsman is not
there--even so were the danaans struck helpless, for apollo filled them
with panic and gave victory to hector and the trojans.

the fight then became more scattered and they killed one another where
they best could. hector killed stichius and arcesilaus, the one, leader
of the boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of menestheus.
aeneas killed medon and iasus. the first was bastard son to oileus, and
brother to ajax, but he lived in phylace away from his own country, for
he had killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother eriopis whom oileus
had married. iasus had become a leader of the athenians, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd was son of
sphelus the son of boucolos. polydamas killed mecisteus, and polites
echius, in the front of the battle, while agenor slew clonius. paris
struck deiochus from behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as he
was flying among the foremost, and the point of the spear went clean
through him.

while they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the achaeans
were flying pell-mell to the trench and the set stakes, and were forced
back within their wall. hector then cried out to the trojans, "forward
to the ships, and let the spoils be. if i see any man keeping back on
the other side the wall away from the ships i will have him killed: his
kinsmen and kinswomen shall not give him his dues of fire, but dogs
shall tear him in pieces in front of our city."

as he spoke he laid his whip about his horses' shoulders and called to
the trojans throughout their ranks; the trojans shouted with a cry that
rent the air, and kept their horses neck and neck with hi
 
 ___________________________
 
sisted the attack of the trojans, yet though these were fewer in
number, they could not drive them back from the ships, neither could
the trojans break the achaean ranks and make their way in among the
tents and ships. as a carpenter's line gives a true edge to a piece of
ship's timber, in the hand of some skilled workman whom minerva has
instructed in all kinds of useful arts--even so level was the issue of
the fight between the two sides, as they fought some round one and some
round another.

hector made straight for ajax, and the two fought fiercely about the
same ship. hector could not force ajax back and fire the ship, nor yet
could ajax drive hector from the spot to which heaven had brought him.

then ajax struck caletor son of clytius in the chest with a spear as he
was bringing fire towards the ship. he fell heavily to the ground and
the torch dropped from his hand. when hector saw his cousin fallen in
front of the ship he shouted to the trojans and lycians saying,
"trojans, lycians,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and dardanians good in close fight, bate not a jot,
but rescue the son of clytius lest the achaeans strip him of his armour
now that he has fallen."

he then aimed a spear at ajax, and missed him, but he hit lycophron a
follower of ajax, who came from cythera, but was living with ajax
inasmuch as he had killed a man among the cythereans. hector's spear
struck him on the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the
ship's prow on to the ground with no life left in him. ajax shook with
rage and said to his brother, "teucer, my good fellow, our trusty
comrade the son of mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from
cythera and whom we honoured as much as our own parents. hector has
just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which
phoebus apollo gave you."

teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd quiver in
his hands. forthwith he showered his arrows on the trojans, and hit
cleitus the son of pisenor, comrade of polydamas the noble son of
panthous, with the reins in his hands as he was attending to his
horses; he was in the middle of the very thickest part of the fight,
doing good service to hector and the trojans, but evil had now come
upon him, and not one of those who were fain to do so could avert it,
for the arrow struck him on the back of the neck. he fell from his
chariot and his horses shook the empty car as they swerved aside. king
polydamas saw what had happened, and was the first to come up to the
horses; he gave them in charge to astynous son of protiaon, and ordered
him to look on, and to keep the horses near at hand. he then went back
and took his place in the front ranks.


 
 ___________________________
 
teucer then aimed another arrow at hector, and there would have been no
more fighting at the ships if he had hit him and killed him then and
there: jove, however, who kept watch over hector, had his eyes on
teucer, and deprived him of his triumph, by breaking his bowstring for
him just as he was drawing it and about to take his aim; on this the
arrow went astray and the bow fell from his hands. teucer shook with
anger and said to his brother, "alas, see how heaven thwarts us in all
we do; it has broken my bowstring and snatched the bow from my hand,
though i strung it this selfsame morning that it might serve me for
many an arrow."

ajax son of telamon answered, "my good fellow, l
 
 ___________________________
 
er, and both
fight the trojans yourself and urge others to do so. they may be
successful for the moment but if we fight as we ought they will find it
a hard matter to take the ships."

teucer then took his bow and put it by in his tent. he hung a shield
four hides thick about his shoulders, and on his comely head he set his
helmet well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and forthwith
he was by the side of ajax.

when hector saw that teucer's bow was of no more use to him, he shouted
out to the trojans and lycians, "trojans, lycians, and dardanians good
in close fight, be men, my friends, and show your mettle here at the
ships, for i see the weapon of one of their chieftains made useless by
the hand of jove. it is easy to see when jove is helping people and
means to help them still further, or again when he is bringing them
down and will do nothing for them; he is now on our side, and is going
against the argives. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 his life, let him die; he
dies with honour who dies fighting for his country; and he will leave
his wife and children safe behind him, with his house and allotment
unplundered if only the achaeans can be driven back to their own land,
they and their ships."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. ajax on the other
side exhorted his comrades saying, "shame on you argives, we are now
utterly undone, unless we can save ourselves by driving the enemy from
our ships. do you think, if hector takes them, that you will be able to
get home by land? can you not hear him cheering on his whole host to
fire our fleet, and bidding them remember that they are not at a dance
but in battle? our only course is to fight them with might and main; we
had better chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and
without issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves."

with these words he put life and soul into them all. hector then killed
schedius son of perimedes, leader of th
 
 ___________________________
 
most crest of dolops's bronze helmet with his spear and tore away
its plume of horse-hair, so that all newly dyed with scarlet as it was
it tumbled down into the dust. while he was still fighting and
confident of victory, menelaus came up to help meges, and got by the
side of dolops unperceived; he then speared him in the shoulder, from
behind, and the point, driven so furiously, went through into his
chest, whereon he fell headlong. the two then made towards him to strip
him of his armour, but hector called on all his brothers for help, and
he especially upbraided brave melanippus son of hiketaon, who erewhile
used to pasture his herds of cattle in percote before the war broke
out; but when the ships of the danaans came, he went back to ilius,
where he was eminent among the trojans, and lived near priam who
treated him as one of his own sons. hector now rebuked him and said,
"why, melanippus, are we thus remiss? do you take no note of the death
of your kinsman, and do you not see how they a
 
 ___________________________
 
rojans fell back as he threw, and the dart did not
speed from his hand without effect, for it struck melanippus the proud
son of hiketaon in the breast by the nipple as he was coming forward,
and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the
ground. antilochus sprang upon him as a dog springs on a fawn which a
hunter has hit as it was breaking away from its covert, and killed it.
even so, o melanippus, did stalwart antilochus spring upon you to strip
you of your armour; but noble hector marked him, and came running up to
him through the thick of the battle. antilochus, brave soldier though
he was, would not stay to face him, but fled like some savage creature
which knows it has done wrong, and flies, when it has killed a dog or a
man who is herding his cattle, before a body of men can be gathered to
attack it. even so did the son of nestor fly, and the trojans and
hector with a cry that rent the air showered their weapons after him;
nor did he turn round and stay his flight ti
 
 ___________________________
 
ll he had reached his
comrades.

the trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships
in fulfilment of the behests of jove who kept spurring them on to new
deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the argives and
defeated them by encouraging the trojans. for he meant giving glory to
hector son of priam, and letting him throw fire upon the ships, till he
had fulfilled the unrighteous prayer that thetis had made him; jove,
therefore, bided his time till he should see the glare of a blazing
ship. from that hour he was about so to order that the trojans should
be driven back from the ships and to vouchsafe glory to the achaeans.
with this purpose he inspired hector son of priam, who was eager enough
already, to assail the ships. his fury was as that of mars, or as when
a fire is ragi
 
 ___________________________
 
le from
destruction--even so were the hearts of the achaeans fainting within
them. or as a savage lion attacking a herd of cows while they are
feeding by thousands in the low-lying meadows by some wide-watered
shore--the herdsman is at his wit's end how to protect his herd and
keeps going about now in the van and now in the rear of his cattle,
while the lion springs into the thick of them and fastens on a cow so
that they all tremble for fear--even so were the achaeans utterly
panic-stricken by hector and father jove. nevertheless hector only
killed periphetes of mycenae; he was son of copreus who was wont to
take the orders of king eurystheus to mighty hercules, but the son was
a far better man than the father in every way; he was fleet of foot, a
valiant warrior, and in understanding ranked among the foremost men of
mycenae. he it was who then afforded hector a triumph, for as he was
turning back he stumbled against the rim of his shield which reached
his feet, and served to keep the javel
 
 ___________________________
 
ins off him. he tripped against
this and fell face upward, his helmet ringing loudly about his head as
he did so. hector saw him fall and ran up to him; he then thrust a
spear into his chest, and killed him close to his own comrades. these,
for all their sorrow, could not help him for they were themselves
terribly afraid of hector.

they had now reached the ships and the prows of those that had been
drawn up first were on every side of them, but the trojans came pouring
after them. the argives were driven back from the first row of ships,
but they made a stand by their tents without being broken up and
scattered; shame and fear restrained them. they kept shouting
incessantly to one another, and nestor of gerene, tower of strength to
the achaeans, was loudest in imploring every man by his parents, and
beseeching him to st
 
 ___________________________
 
nds," he cried, "and respect one another's good
opinion. think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your
property, and your parents whether these be alive or dead. on their
behalf though they are not here, i implore you to stand firm, and not
to turn in flight."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. minerva lifted
the thick veil of darkness from their eyes, and much light fell upon
them, alike on the side of the ships and on that where the fight was
raging. they could see hector and all his men, both those in the rear
who were taking no part in the battle, and those who were fighting by
the ships.

ajax could not bring himself to retreat along with the rest, but strode
from deck to deck with a great sea-pike in his hands twelve cubits long
and jointed with rings. as a man skilled in feats of horsemanship
couples four horses together and comes tearing full speed along the
public way from the country into some large town--many both men and
women marvel as they see him fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r he keeps all the time changing his
horse, springing from one to another without ever missing his feet
while the horses are at a gallop--even so did ajax go striding from one
ship's deck to another, and his voice went up into the heavens. he kept
on shouting his orders to the danaans and exhorting them to defend
their ships and tents; neither did hector remain within the main body
of the trojan warriors, but as a dun eagle swoops down upon a flock of
wild-fowl feeding near a river--geese, it may be, or cranes, or
long-necked swans--even so did hector make straight for a dark-prowed
ship, rushing right towards it; for jove with his mighty hand impelled
him forward, and roused his people to follow him.

and now the battle again raged furiously at the ships. you would have
thought the men were coming on fresh and unwearied, so fiercely did
they f
 
 ___________________________
 
ight; and this was the mind in which they were--the achaeans did
not believe they should escape destruction but thought themselves
doomed, while there was not a trojan but his heart beat high with the
hope of firing the ships and putting the achaean heroes to the sword.

thus were the two sides minded. then hector seized the stern of the
good ship that had brought protesilaus to troy, but never bore him back
to his native land. round this ship there raged a close hand-to-hand
fight between danaans and trojans. they did not fight at a distance
with bows and javelins, but with one mind hacked at one another in
close combat with their mighty swords and spears pointed at both ends;
they fought moreover with keen battle-axes and with hatchets. many a
good stout blade hilted and scabbarded with iron, fell from
 
 ___________________________
 
 hand or
shoulder as they fought, and the earth ran red with blood. hector, when
he had seized the ship, would not loose his hold but held on to its
curved stern and shouted to the trojans, "bring fire, and raise the
battle-cry all of you with a single voice. now has jove vouchsafed us a
day that will pay us for all the rest; this day we shall take the ships
which came hither against heaven's will, and which have caused us such
infinite suffering through the cowardice of our councillors, who when i
would have done battle at the ships held me back and forbade the host

 
 ___________________________
 
 with main. can we
hope to find helpers hereafter, or a wall to shield us more surely than
the one we have? there is no strong city within reach, whence we may
draw fresh forces to turn the scales in our favour. we are on the plain
of the armed trojans with the sea behind us, and far from our own
country. our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our hands and in
hard fighting."

as he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and when any
trojan made towards the ships with fire at hector's bidding, he would
be on the look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear.
twelve men did he thus kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships.



book xvi

  fire being now thrown on the ship of protesilaus, patroclus
  fights in the armour of achilles--he drives the trojans back,
  but is in the end killed by euphorbus and hector.

thus did they fight about the ship of protesilaus. then patroclus drew
near to achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from some spring
whose cryst
 
 ___________________________
 
against them, because they see not
the visor of my helmet gleaming near them. had they seen this, there
would not have been a creek nor grip that had not been filled with
their dead as they fled back again. and so it would have been, if only
king agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. as it is the trojans have beset
our host. diomed son of tydeus no longer wields his spear to defend the
danaans, neither have i heard the voice of the son of atreus coming
from his hated head, whereas that of murderous hector rings in my cars
as he gives orders to the trojans, who triumph over the achaeans and
fill the whole plain with their cry of battle. but even so, patroclus,
fall upon them and save the fleet, lest the trojans fire it and prevent
us from being able to return. do, however, as i now bid you, that you
may win me great honour from all the danaans, and that they may restore
the girl to me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. when you
have driven the trojans from the ships, come back again. 
 
 ___________________________
 
g on to it and on to the cheek-pieces that protected his
face. moreover his left shoulder was tired with having held his shield
so long, yet for all this, let fly at him as they would, they could not
make him give ground. he could hardly draw his breath, the sweat rained
from every pore of his body, he had not a moment's respite, and on all
sides he was beset by danger upon danger.

and now, tell me, o muses that hold your mansions on olympus, how fire
was thrown upon the ships of the achaeans. hector came close up and let
drive with his great sword at the ashen spear of ajax. he cut it clean
in two just behind where the point was fastened on to the shaft of the
spear. ajax, therefore, had now nothing but a headless spear, while the
bronze point flew some way off and came ringing down on to the ground.
ajax knew the hand of heaven in this, and was dismayed at seeing that
jove had now left him utterly defenceless and was willing victory for
the trojans. therefore he drew back, and the trojans
 
 ___________________________
 
n your sway, where your
prophets the selli dwell around you with their feet unwashed and their
couches made upon the ground--if you heard me when i prayed to you
aforetime, and did me honour while you sent disaster on the achaeans,
vouchsafe me now the fulfilment of yet this further prayer. i shall
stay here where my ships are lying, but i shall send my comrade into
battle at the head of many myrmidons. grant, o all-seeing jove, that
victory may go with him; put your courage into his heart that hector
may learn whether my squire is man enough to fight alone, or whether
his might is only then so indomitable when i myself enter the turmoil
of war. afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of battle
from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armour and
his comrades, fighters in close combat."

thus did he pray, and all-counselling jove heard his prayer. part of it
he did indeed vouchsafe him--but not the whole. he granted that
patroclus should thrust back war and batt
 
 ___________________________
 
danaans each of them kill his man. as
ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them when they are
alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the main flock through the
carelessness of the shepherd--and when the wolves see this they pounce
upon them at once because they cannot defend themselves--even so did
the danaans now fall on the trojans, who fled with ill-omened cries in
their panic and had no more fight left in them.

meanwhile great ajax kept on trying to drive a spear into hector, but
hector was so skilful that he held his broad shoulders well under cover
of his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the whizzing of the
arrows and the heavy thud of the spears. he well knew that the fortunes
of the day had changed, but still stood his ground and tried to protect
his comrades.

as when a cloud goes up into heaven from olympus, rising out of a clear
sky when jove is brewing a gale--even with such panic stricken rout did
the trojans now fly, and there was no order in thei
 
 ___________________________
 
r going. hector's
fleet horses bore him and his armour out of the fight, and he left the
trojan host penned in by the deep trench against their will. many a
yoke of horses snapped the pole of their chariots in the trench and
left their master's car behind them. patroclus gave chase, calling
impetuously on the danaans and full of fury against the trojans, who,
being now no longer in a body, filled all the ways with their cries of
panic and rout; the air was darkened with the clouds of dust they
raised, and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
horses strained every nerve in their flight from the
tents and ships towards the city.

patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men flying in
confusion, cheering on his men the while. chariots were being smashed
in all directions, and many a man came tumbling down from his own car
to fall beneath the wheels of that of patroclus, whose immortal steeds,
given by the gods to peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound as they
sped onward. he was intent on trying to get near hector, for he had set
his heart on spearing him, but hector's horses were now hurrying him
away. as the whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day
when jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving crooked judgement
in their courts, and driving justice therefrom without heed to the
decrees of heaven--all the rivers run full and the torrents tear many a
new channel as they roar headlong from the mountains to the dark sea,
and it fares ill with the works of men--even such was the stre
 
 ___________________________
 
 them round the body of him who has fallen."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the lycian
captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. sarpedon leader of the lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of lycia; mars has laid
him low by the spear of patroclus. stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body
with contumely in revenge for all the danaans whom we have spea
 
 ___________________________
 
red at
the ships."

as he spoke the trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief;
for sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of
their city, both as having much people with him, and himself the
foremost among them all. led by hector, who was infuriated by the fall
of sarpedon, they made instantly for the danaans with all their might,
while the undaunted spirit of patroclus son of menoetius cheered on the
achaeans. first he spoke to the two ajaxes, men who needed no bidding.
"ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show yourselves the men
you have always been, or even better--sarpedon is fallen--he who was
first to overleap the wall of the achaeans; let us take the body and
outrage it; let us strip the armour from his s
 
 ___________________________
 
ther, and jove shed
a thick darkness over the fight, to increase the toil of the battle
over the body of his son.

at first the trojans made some headway against the achaeans, for one of
the best men among the myrmidons was killed, epeigeus, son of noble
agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with peleus and thetis, who sent him to ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the trojans under achilles. hector now struck him on the head
with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains
inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost
upon the body of sarpedon, and there died. patroclus was enraged by the
death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. even so swiftly,
o noble knight patroclus, did you make straight for the lycians and
trojans to avenge your comrade. forthwith he struck
 
 ___________________________
 
 sthenelaus the son
of ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join
it to the head and spine. on this hector and the front rank of his men
gave ground. as far as a man can throw a javelin when competing for
some prize, or even in battle--so far did the trojans now retreat
before the achaeans. glaucus, captain of the lycians, was the first to
rally them, by killing bathycles son of chalcon who lived in hellas and
was the richest man among the myrmidons. glaucus turned round suddenly,
just as bathycles who was pursuing him was about to lay hold of him,
and drove his spear right into the middle of his ch
 
 ___________________________
 
eir swords and spears pointed at both ends. a man had
need of good eyesight now to know sarpedon, so covered was he from head
to foot with spears and blood and dust. men swarmed about the body, as
flies that buzz round the full milk-pails in spring when they are
brimming with milk--even so did they gather round sarpedon; nor did
jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept
looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill
patroclus, and considering whether hector should be allowed to end him
now in the fight round the body of sarpedon, and strip him of his
armour, or whether he should let him give yet further trouble to the
trojans. in the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire of
achilles son of peleus should drive hector and the trojans back towards
the city and take the lives of many. first, therefore, he made hector
turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and fled, bidding the
other trojans fly also, for he saw that the scales of jov
 
 ___________________________
 
harge at an angle of the high wall, and
thrice did apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his own
immortal hands. when patroclus was coming on like a god for yet a
fourth time, apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "draw
back, noble patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of the
trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of achilles who is a far
better man than you are." on hearing this, patroclus withdrew to some
distance and avoided the anger of apollo.

meanwhile hector was waiting with his horses inside the scaean gates,
in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call the
army inside the gates. as he was thus doubting phoebus apollo drew near
him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior asius, who was
hector's uncle, being own brother to hecuba, and son of dymas who lived
in phrygia by the waters of the river sangarius; in his likeness jove's
son apollo now spoke to hector saying, "hector, why have you left off
fighting? it is ill done 
 
 ___________________________
 
of you. if i were as much better a man than
you, as i am worse, you should soon rue your slackness. drive straight
towards patroclus, if so be that apollo may grant you a triumph over
him, and you may rule him."

with this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and hector bade
cebriones drive again into the fight. apollo passed in among them, and
struck panic into the argives, while he gave triumph to hector and the
trojans. hector let the other danaans alone and killed no man, but
drove straight at patroclus. patroclus then sprang from his chariot to
the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right a jagged
stone as large as his hand could hold. he stood still and threw it, nor
did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for
the stone struck cebriones, hector's charioteer, a bastard son of
priam, as he held the reins in his hands. the stone hit him on the
forehead and drove his brows into
 
 ___________________________
 
ow would have dived from the ship's side and brought up as
many oysters as the whole crew could stomach, even in rough water, for
he has dived beautifully off his chariot on to the ground. it seems,
then, that there are divers also among the trojans."

as he spoke he flung himself on cebriones with the spring, as it were,
of a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself struck in the
chest, and his courage is his own bane--even so furiously, o patroclus,
did you then spring upon cebriones. hector sprang also from his chariot
to the ground. the pair then fought over the body of cebriones. as two
lions fight fiercely on some high mountain over the body of a stag that
they have killed, even so did these two mighty warriors, patroclus son
of menoetius and brave hector, hack and hew at one another over the
corpse of cebriones. hector would not let him go when he had once got
him by the head, while patroclus kept fast hold of his feet, and a
fierce fight raged between the other danaans and tr
 
 ___________________________
 
n thick darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his
back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his
eyes turned dizzy. phoebus apollo beat the helmet from off his head,
and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where its horse-hair
plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. never indeed had that
helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect the head and
comely forehead of the godlike hero achilles. now, however, zeus
delivered it over to be worn by hector. nevertheless the end of hector
also was near. the bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was
broken in the hand of patroclus, while his shield that covered him from
head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and
apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.

on this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as
one dazed; whereon euphorbus son of panthous a dardanian, the best
spearman of his time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner,
came
 
 ___________________________
 
iot
had dismounted twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of
war--he it was, o knight patroclus, that first drove a weapon into you,
but he did not quite overpower you. euphorbus then ran back into the
crowd, after drawing his ashen spear out of the wound; he would not
stand firm and wait for patroclus, unarmed though he now was, to attack
him; but patroclus unnerved, alike by the blow the god had given him
and by the spear-wound, drew back under cover of his men in fear for
his life. hector on this, seeing him to be wounded and giving ground,
forced his way through the ranks, and when close up with him struck him
in the lower part of the belly with a spear, driving the bronze point
right through it, so that he fell heavily to the ground to the great
grief of the achaeans. as when a lion has fought some fierce wild-boar
and worsted him--the two fight furiously upon the mountains over some
little fountain at which they would both drink, and the lion has beaten
the boar till he can h
 
 ___________________________
 
ardly breathe--even so did hector son of priam
take the life of the brave son of menoetius who had killed so many,
striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him the while.
"patroclus," said he, "you deemed that you should sack our city, rob
our trojan women of their freedom, and carry them off in your ships to
your own country. fool; hector and his fleet horses were ever straining
their utmost to defend them. i am foremost of all the trojan warriors
to stave the day of bondage from off them; as for you, vultures shall
devour you here. poor wretch, achilles with all his bravery availed you
nothing; and yet i ween when you left him he charged you straitly
saying, 'come not back to the ships, knight patroclus, till you have
rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous hector about his body.' thus i
ween did he charge you, and your fool's
 
 ___________________________
 
 heart answered him 'yea' within
you."

then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, o knight patroclus:
"hector, vaunt as you will, for jove the son of saturn and apollo have
vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have vanquished me so easily,
and they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had twenty
such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my
spear. fate and the son of leto have overpowered me, and among mortal
men euphorbus; you are yourself third only in the killing of me. i say
further, and lay my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a
little season; dea
 
 ___________________________
 
th and the day of your doom are close upon you, and
they will lay you low by the hand of achilles son of aeacus."

when he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left
his body and flitted down to the house of hades, mourning its sad fate
and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. dead though
he was, hector still spoke to him saying, "patroclus, why should you
thus foretell my doom? who knows but achilles, son of lovely thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?"

as he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. he then
went spear in hand after automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of
aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the
gods had given as a rich gift to peleus bore hi
 
 ___________________________
 
st heifer in a herd as it is feeding--first he
breaks her neck with his strong jaws, and then gorges on her blood and
entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue and cry against him, but they
stand aloof and will not come close to him, for they are pale with
fear--even so no one had the courage to face valiant menelaus. the son
of atreus would have then carried off the armour of the son of panthous
with ease, had not phoebus apollo been angry, and in the guise of
mentes chief of the cicons incited hector to attack him. "hector," said
he, "you are now going after the horses of the noble son of aeacus, but
you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven by
mortal man, save only by achilles, who is son to an immortal mother.
meanwhile menelaus son of atreus has bestridden the body of patroclus
and killed the noblest of the trojans, euphorbus son of panthous, so
that he can fight no more."

the god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of
hector was darkened with a c
 
 ___________________________
 
ng on the ground with the blood still flowing from
his wound, and menelaus stripping him of his armour. on this he made
his way to the front like a flame of fire, clad in his gleaming armour,
and crying with a loud voice. when the son of atreus heard him, he said
to himself in his dismay, "alas! what shall i do? i may not let the
trojans take the armour of patroclus who has fallen fighting on my
behalf, lest some danaan who sees me should cry shame upon me. still if
for my honour's sake i fight hector and the trojans single-handed, they
will prove too many for me, for hector is bringing them up in force.
why, however, should i thus hesitate? when a man fights in despite of
heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue it. let no
danaan think ill of me if i give place to hector, for the hand of
heaven is with him. yet, if i could find ajax, the two of us would
fight hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of
patroclus for achilles son of peleus. this, of many evils woul
 
 ___________________________
 
d be the
least."

while he was thus in two minds, the trojans came up to him with hector
at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off--even so did menelaus son of atreus turn and leave the body
of patroclus. when among the body of his men, he looked around for
mighty ajax son of telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme left
of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep on
fighting, for pho
 
 ___________________________
 
ebus apollo had spread a great panic among them. he
ran up to him and said, "ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to
dead patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to achilles--as for
his armour, hector already has it."

these words stirred the heart of ajax, and he made his way among the
front ranks, menelaus going with him. hector had stripped patroclus of
his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the
body to fling before the dogs of troy. but ajax came up with his shield
like wall before him, on which hector withdrew under shelter of his
men, and sprang on to his chariot, giving the armour over to the
trojans to take to the city, as a great trophy for himself; ajax,
therefore, covered the body of patroclus with his broad shield and
bestrode him; as a lion stands over his whelps if hunters have c
 
 ___________________________
 
ome
upon him in a forest when he is with his little ones--in the pride and
fierceness of his strength he draws his knit brows down till they cover
his eyes--even so did ajax bestride the body of patroclus, and by his
side stood menelaus son of atreus, nursing great sorrow in his heart.

then glaucus son of hippolochus looked fiercely at hector and rebuked
him sternly. "hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight
you are sadly wanting. a runaway like yourself has no claim to so great
a reputation. think how you may now save your town and citadel by the
hands of your own people born in ilius; for you will get no lycians to
fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incessant
hardships. are you likely, sir, to do anything to help a man of less
note, after leaving sarpedon, who was at once your guest and comrade in
arms, to be the spoil and pre
 
 ___________________________
 
would attack it, we should soon
bear off patroclus into ilius. could we get this dead man away and
bring him into the city of priam, the argives would readily give up the
armour of sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. for he whose
squire has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the
achaeans--he and his close-fighting followers. nevertheless you dared
not make a stand against ajax, nor face him, eye to eye, with battle
all round you, for he is a braver man than you are."

hector scowled at him and answered, "glaucus, you should know better. i
have held you so far as a man of more understanding than any in all
lycia, but now i despise you for saying that i am afraid of ajax. i
fear neither battle nor the din of chariots, but jove's will is
stronger than ours; jove at one time makes even a strong man draw back
and snatches victory from his grasp, while at another he will set him
on to fight. come hither then, my friend, stand by me and see indeed
whether i shall play the
 
 ___________________________
 
 coward the whole day through as you say, or
whether i shall not stay some even of the boldest danaans from fighting
round the body of patroclus."

as he spoke he called loudly on the trojans saying, "trojans, lycians,
and dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and fight
might and main, while i put on the goodly armour of achilles, which i
took when i killed patroclus."

with this hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men who
were taking the armour of achilles to troy, but had not yet got far.
standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed his
armour. his own he sent to the strong city of ilius and to the trojans,
while he put on the immortal armour of the son of peleus, which the
gods had given to peleus, who in his age gave it to his son; but the
son did not grow old in his father's armour.

when jove, lord of the storm-cloud, saw hector standing a
 
 ___________________________
 
elf saying, "a! poor wretch, you arm in the armour
of a hero, before whom many another trembles, and you reck nothing of
the doom that is already close upon you. you have killed his comrade so
brave and strong, but it was not well that you should strip the armour
from his head and shoulders. i do indeed endow you with great might
now, but as against this you shall not return from battle to lay the
armour of the son of peleus before andromache."

the son of saturn bowed his portentous brows, and hector fitted the
armour to his body, while terrible mars entered into him, and filled
his whole body with might and valour. with a shout he strode in among
the allies, and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to all
of them like the great son of peleus himself. he went about among them
and cheered them on--mesthles, glaucus, medon, thersilochus,
asteropaeus, deisenor and hippothous, phorcys, chromius and ennomus the
augur. all these did he exhort saying, "hear me, allies from other
cities w
 
 ___________________________
 
harged full weight upon the danaans with
their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran high that
he should force ajax son of telamon to yield up the body--fools that
they were, for he was about to take the lives of many. then ajax said
to menelaus, "my good friend menelaus, you and i shall hardly come out
of this fight alive. i am less concerned for the body of patroclus, who
will shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures of troy, than for
the safety of my own head and yours. hector has wrapped us round in a
storm of battle from every quarter, and our destruction seems now
certain. call then upon the princes of the danaans if there is any who
can hear us."

menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the danaans for help at the top
of his voice. "my friends," he cried, "princes and counsellors of the
argives, all you who with agamemnon and menelaus drink at the public
cost, and give orders each to his own people as jove vouchsafes him
power and glory, the fight is so thick abo
 
 ___________________________
 
ut me that i cannot
distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and
think it shame that patroclus should become meat and morsel for trojan
hounds."

fleet ajax son of oileus heard him and was first to force his way
through the fight and run to help him. next came idomeneus and meriones
his esquire, peer of murderous mars. as for the others that came into
the fight after these, who of his own self could name them?

the trojans with hector at their head charged in a body. as a great
wave that comes thundering in at the mouth of some heaven-born river,
and the rocks that jut into the sea ring with the roar of the breakers
that beat and buffet them--even with such a roar did the trojans come
on; but the achaeans in singleness of heart stood firm about the son of
menoetius, and fenced him with their bronze shields. jove, moreover,
hid the brightness of their helmets in a thick cloud, for he had borne
no grudge against the son of men
 
 ___________________________
 
us
alike in stature and prowess, quickly rallied them and made towards the
front like a wild boar upon the mountains when he stands at bay in the
forest glades and routs the hounds and lusty youths that have attacked
him--even so did ajax son of telamon passing easily in among the
phalanxes of the trojans, disperse those who had bestridden patroclus
and were most bent on winning glory by dragging him off to their city.
at this moment hippothous brave son of the pelasgian lethus, in his
zeal for hector and the trojans, was dragging the body off by the foot
through the press of the fight, having bound a strap round the sinews
near the ancle; but a mischief soon befell him from which none of those
could save him who would have gladly done so, for the son of telamon
sprang forward and smote him on his bronze-cheeked helmet. the plumed
headpiece broke about the point of the weapon, struck at once by the
spear and by the strong hand of ajax, so that the bloody brain came
oozing out through the cre
 
 ___________________________
 
st-socket. his strength then failed him and
he let patroclus' foot drop from his hand, as he fell full length dead
upon the body; thus he died far from the fertile land of larissa, and
never repaid his parents the cost of bringing him up, for his life was
cut short early by the spear of mighty ajax. hector then took aim at
ajax with a spear, but he saw it coming and just managed to avoid it;
the spear passed on and struck schedius son of noble iphitus, captain
of the phoceans, who dwelt in famed panopeus and reigned over much
people; it struck him under the middle of the collar-bone the bronze
point went right through him, coming out at the bottom of his
shoulder-blade, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground. ajax in his turn struck noble phorcys son of
phaenops i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the middle of the belly as he was bestriding hippothous,
and broke the plate of his cuirass; whereon the spear tore out his
entrails and he clutched the ground in his palm as he fell to earth.
hector and those who were in the front rank then gave ground, while the
argives raised a loud cry of triumph, and drew off the bodies of
phorcys and hippothous which they stripped presently of their armour.

the trojans would now have been worsted by the brave achaeans and
driven back to ilius through their own cowardice, while the argives, so
great was their courage and endurance, would have achieved a triumph
even against the will of jove, if apollo had not roused aeneas, in the
likeness of periphas
 
 ___________________________
 
ervice of aeneas' aged father, and was at all times devoted to
him. in his likeness, then, apollo said, "aeneas, can you not manage,
even though heaven be against us, to save high ilius? i have known men,
whose numbers, courage, and self-reliance have saved their people in
spite of jove, whereas in this case he would much rather give victory
to us than to the danaans, if you would only fight instead of being so
terribly afraid."

aeneas knew apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to
hector saying, "hector and all other trojans and allies, shame on us if
we are beaten by the achaeans and driven back to ilius through our own
cowardice. a god has just come up to me and told me that jove the
supreme disposer will be with us. therefore let us make for the
danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they bear away dead
patroclus to the ships."

as he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied
and again faced the achaeans. aeneas speared leiocritus son of arisbas,
a
 
 ___________________________
 
ojans have the triumph of bearing off
patroclus to their city."

the trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying, "friends,
though we fall to a man beside this body, let none shrink from
fighting." with such words did they exhort each other. they fought and
fought, and an iron clank rose through the void air to the brazen vault
of heaven. the horses of the descendant of aeacus stood out of the
fight and wept when they heard that their driver had been laid low by
the hand of murderous hector. automedon, valiant son of diores, lashed
them again and again; many a time did he speak kindly to them, and many
a time did he upbraid them, but they would neither go back to the ships
by the waters of the broad hellespont, nor yet into battle among the
achaeans; they stood with their chariot stock still, as a pillar set
over the tomb of some dead man or woman, and bowed their heads to the
ground. hot tears fell from their eyes as they mourned the loss of
their charioteer, and their noble mane
 
 ___________________________
 
s drooped all wet from under the
yokestraps on either side the yoke.

the son of saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. he wagged
his head, and muttered to himself, saying, "poor things, why did we
give you to king peleus who is a mortal, while you are yourselves
ageless and immortal? was it that you might share the sorrows that
befall mankind? for of all creatures that live and move upon the earth
there is none so pitiable as he is--still, hector son of priam shall
drive neither you nor your chariot. i will not have it. it is enough
that he should have the armour over which he vaunts so vainly.
furthermore i will give you strength of heart and limb to bear
automedon safely to the ships from battle, for i shall let the trojans
triumph still further, and go on killing till they reach the ships;
whereon night shall fall and darkness overshadow the land."

as he spoke he breathed heart and strength into the horses so that they
shook the dus
 
 ___________________________
 
shed
amid the throng of the trojans, but for all the fury of his pursuit he
killed no man, for he could not wield his spear and keep his horses in
hand when alone in the chariot; at last, however, a comrade, alcimedon,
son of laerces son of haemon caught sight of him and came up behind his
chariot. "automedon," said he, "what god has put this folly into your
heart and robbed you of your right mind, that you fight the trojans in
the front rank single-handed? he who was your comrade is slain, and
hector plumes himself on being armed in the armour of the descendant of
aeacus."

automedon son of diores answered, "alcimedon, there is no one else who
can control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you can, save only
patroclus--while he was alive--peer of gods in counsel. take then the
whip and reins, while i go down from the car and fight."

alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and reins,
while automedon leaped from off the car. when hector saw him he said to
aeneas who 
 
 ___________________________
 
with much bronze. chromius and aretus went also with
them, and their hearts beat high with hope that they might kill the men
and capture the horses--fools that they were, for they were not to
return scatheless from their meeting with automedon, who prayed to
father jove and was forthwith filled with courage and strength
abounding. he turned to his trusty comrade alcimedon and said,
"alcimedon, keep your horses so close up that i may feel their breath
upon my back; i doubt that we shall not stay hector son of priam till
he has killed us and mounted behind the horses; he will then either
spread panic among the ranks of the achaeans, or himself be killed
among the foremost."

on this he cried out to the two ajaxes and menelaus, "ajaxes captains
of the argives, and menelaus, give the dead body over to them that are
best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for hector
and aeneas who are the two best men among the trojans, are pressing us
hard in the full tide of war. neverthele
 
 ___________________________
 
ed and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the round
shield of aretus, and went right through it for the shield stayed it
not, so that it was driven through his belt into the lower part of his
belly. as when some sturdy youth, axe in hand, deals his blow behind
the horns of an ox and severs the tendons at the back of its neck so
that it springs forward and then drops, even so did aretus give one
bound and then fall on his back the spear quivering in his body till it
made an end of him. hector then aimed a spear at automedon but he saw
it coming and stooped forward to avoid it, so that it flew past him and
the point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering
till mars robbed it of its force. they would then have fought hand to
hand with swords had not the two ajaxes forced their way through the
crowd when they heard their comrade calling, and parted them for all
their fury--for hector, aeneas, and chromius were afraid and drew back,
leaving aretus to lie there struck t
 
 ___________________________
 
h. first
she took the form and voice of phoenix and spoke to menelaus son of
atreus, who was standing near her. "menelaus," said she, "it will be
shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of achilles
under the walls of troy. therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be
so also."

menelaus answered, "phoenix, my good old friend, may minerva vouchsafe
me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall i stand by
patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but hector is
as a raging fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for jove is now
granting him a time of triumph."

minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the other
gods. therefore she put strength into his knees and shoulders, and made
him as bold as a fly, which, though driven off will yet come again and
bite if it can, so dearly does it love man's blood--even so bold as
this did she make him as he stood over patroclus and threw his spear.
now there was among the trojans a man n
 
 ___________________________
 
amed podes, son of eetion, who
was both rich and valiant. hector held him in the highest honour for he
was his comrade and boon companion; the spear of menelaus struck this
man in the girdle just as he had turned in flight, and went right
through him. whereon he fell heavily forward, and menelaus son of
atreus drew off his body from the trojans into the ranks of his own
people.

apollo then went up to hector and spurred him on to fight, in the
likeness of phaenops son of asius who lived in abydos and was the most
favoured of all hector's guests. in his likeness apollo said, "hector,
who of the achaeans will fear you henceforward now that you have
quailed before menelaus who has ever been rated poorly as a soldier?
yet he has now got a corpse away from the trojans single-handed, and
has slain your own true comrade, a man brave among the foremost, podes
son of eetion."

a dark cloud of grief fell upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n hector as he heard, and he made his way
to the front clad in full armour. thereon the son of saturn seized his
bright tasselled aegis, and veiled ida in cloud: he sent forth his
lightnings and his thunders, and as he shook his aegis he gave victory
to the trojans and routed the achaeans.

the panic was begun by peneleos the boeotian, for while keeping his
face turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear on the
upper part of the shoulder; a spear thrown by polydamas had grazed the
top of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he bone, for polydamas had come up to him and struck him from
close at hand. then hector in close combat struck leitus son of noble
alectryon in the hand by the wrist, and disabled him from fighting
further. he looked about him in dismay, knowing that never again should
he wield spear in battle with the trojans. while hector was in pursuit
of leitus, idomeneus struck him on the breastplate over his chest near
the nipple; but the spear broke in the shaft, and the trojans cheered
aloud. hector then aimed at idomeneus son of deucalion as he was
standing on his chariot, and very narrowly missed him, but the spear
hit coiranus, a follower and charioteer of meriones who had come with
him from lyctus. idomeneus had left the ships on foot and would have
afforded a great triumph to the trojans if coiranus had not driven
quickly up to him, he therefore brought life and rescue to idomeneus,
but himself fell by the hand of murderous hector. for hector hit him on
the jaw under the ear; the end 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and ajax was first to speak. "alas," said he, "even a fool may
see that father jove is helping the trojans. all their weapons strike
home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that hurls them,
jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without
effect. what, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and
our return to the joy of our friends who will be grieving as they look
hitherwards; for they will make sure that nothing can now check the
terrible hands of hector, and that he will fling himself upon our
ships. i wish that some one would go and tell the son of peleus at
once, for i do not think he can have yet heard the sad news that the
dearest of his friends has fallen. but i can see not a man among the
achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in
darkness. o father jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the
achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we
perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight."

father 
 
 ___________________________
 
his men and exhorting them to fight boldly.
menelaus went up to him and said, "antilochus, come here and listen to
sad news, which i would indeed were untrue. you must see with your own
eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the danaans, and giving
victory to the trojans. patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of
the achaeans, and sorely will the danaans miss him. run instantly to
the ships and tell achilles, that he may come to rescue the body and
bear it to the ships. as for the armour, hector already has it."

antilochus was struck with horror. for a long time he was speechless;
his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did
as menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his
armour to a comrade, laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round, close
beside him.

thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to
achilles son of peleus. nor were you, o menelaus, minded to succour his
harassed comrades, when antilochus had lef
 
 ___________________________
 
t the pylians--and greatly
did they miss him--but he sent them noble thrasymedes, and himself went
back to patroclus. he came running up to the two ajaxes and said, "i
have sent antilochus to the ships to tell achilles, but rage against
hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour.
what then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and
our own escape from death amid the battle-cries of the trojans?"

ajax answered, "menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and
meriones stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while
we two behind you keep off hector and the trojans, one in heart as in
name, and long used to fighting side by side with one another."

on this menelaus and merione
 
 ___________________________
 
t as they go--even so did menelaus and pant and sweat
as they bore the body of patroclus. behind them the two ajaxes held
stoutly out. as some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain
will turn water and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there
any stream strong enough to break through it--even so did the two
ajaxes face the trojans and stem the tide of their fighting though they
kept pouring on towards them and foremost among them all was aeneas son
of anchises with valiant hector. as a flock of daws or starlings fall
to screaming and chattering when they see a falcon, foe to all small
birds, come soaring near them, even so did the achaean youth raise a
babel of cries as they fled before aeneas and hector, unmindful of
their former prowess. in the rout of the danaans much goodly armour
fell round about the trench, and of fighting there was no end.



book xviii

  the grief of achilles over patroclus--the visit of thetis
  to vulcan and the armour that he made for achill
 
 ___________________________
 
haeans again scouring the plain and flocking
towards the ships? heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that
sorrow upon me of which my mother thetis spoke, saying that while i was
yet alive the bravest of the myrmidons should fall before the trojans,
and see the light of the sun no longer. i fear the brave son of
menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet i bade him return
to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing
fire against them, and not join battle with hector."

as he was thus pondering, the son of nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "alas," he cried, "son of noble
peleus, i bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue.
patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked body--for
hector holds his armour."

a dark cloud of grief fell upon achilles as he listened. he filled both
hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head,
disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refus
 
 ___________________________
 
jove has granted
you the prayer you made him, when you lifted up your hands and besought
him that the achaeans might all of them be pent up at their ships, and
rue it bitterly in that you were no longer with them."

achilles groaned and answered, "mother, olympian jove has indeed
vouchsafed me the fulfilment of my prayer, but what boots it to me,
seeing that my dear comrade patroclus has fallen--he whom i valued more
than all others, and loved as dearly as my own life? i have lost him;
aye, and hector when he had killed him stripped the wondrous armour, so
glorious to behold, which the gods gave to peleus when they laid you in
the couch of a mortal man. would that you were still dwelling among the
immortal sea-nymphs, and that peleus had taken to himself some mortal
bride. for now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of
that son whom you can never welcome home--nay, i will not live nor go
about among mankind unless hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for
having slain pat
 
 ___________________________
 
roclus son of menoetius."

thetis wept and answered, "then, my son, is your end near at hand--for
your own death awaits you full soon after that of hector."

then said achilles in his great grief, "i would die here and now, in
that i could not save my comrade. he has fallen far from home, and in
his hour of need my hand was not there to help him. what is there for
me? return to my own land i shall not, and i have brought no saving
neither to patroclus nor to my other comrades of whom so many have been
slain by mighty hector; i stay here by my ships a bootless burden upon
the earth, i, who in fight have no peer among the achaeans, though in
counci
 
 ___________________________
 
l there are better than i. therefore, perish strife both from
among gods and men, and anger, wherein even a righteous man will harden
his heart--which rises up in the soul of a man like smoke, and the
taste thereof is sweeter than drops of honey. even so has agamemnon
angered me. and yet--so be it, for it is over; i will force my soul
into subjection as i needs must; i will go; i will pursue hector who
has slain him whom i loved so dearly, and will then abide my doom when
it may please jove and the other gods to send it. even hercules, the
best beloved of jove--even he could not escape the hand of death, but
fate and juno's fierce anger laid him low, as i too shall lie when i am
dead if a like doom awaits me. till then i will win fame, and will bid
trojan and dardanian women wring tears from their tender cheeks with
both their hands in the grievousness of their great sorrow; thus shall
th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey know that he who has held aloof so long will hold aloof no longer.
hold me not back, therefore, in the love you bear me, for you shall not
move me."

then silver-footed thetis answered, "my son, what you have said is
true. it is well to save your comrades from destruction, but your
armour is in the hands of the trojans; hector bears it in triumph upon
his own shoulders. full well i know that his vaunt shall not be
lasting, for his end is close at hand; go not, however, into the press
of battle till you see me return hither; to-morrow at break of day i
shall be here, and will bring you goodly armour from king vulcan."

on this she left her brave son, and as she turned away she said to the
sea-nymphs her sisters, "dive into the bosom of the sea and go to the
house of the old sea-god my father. tell him everything; as f
 
 ___________________________
 
or me, i
will go to the cunning workman vulcan on high olympus, and ask him to
provide my son with a suit of splendid armour."

when she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves, while
silver-footed thetis went her way that she might bring the armour for
her son.

thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to olympus, and meanwhile the
achaeans were flying with loud cries before murderous hector till they
reached the ships and the hellespont, and they could not draw the body
of mars's servant patroclus out of reach of the weapons that were
showered upon him, for hector son of priam with his host and horsemen
had again caught up to him like the flame of a fiery furnace; thrice
did brave hector seize him by the feet, striving with might and main to
draw him away and calling loudly on the trojans, and thrice did the two
ajaxes, clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him from off the
bo
 
 ___________________________
 
dy; but all undaunted he would now charge into the thick of the
fight, and now again he would stand still and cry aloud, but he would
give no ground. as upland shepherds that cannot chase some famished
lion from a carcase, even so could not the two ajaxes scare hector son
of priam from the body of patroclus.

and now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable
glory, had not iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger from
olympus to the son of peleus and bidden him arm. she came secretly
without the knowledge of jove and of the other gods, for juno sent her,
and when she had got close to him she said, "up, son of peleus,
mightiest of all mankind; rescue patroclus about whom this fearful
fight is now raging by the ships. men are killi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng one another, the
danaans in defence of the dead body, while the trojans are trying to
hale it away, and take it to windy ilius: hector is the most furious of
them all; he is for cutting the head from the body and fixing it on the
stakes of the wall. up, then, and bide here no longer; shrink from the
thought that patroclus may become meat for the dogs of troy. shame on
you, should his body suffer any kind of outrage."

and achilles said, "iris, which of the gods was it that sent you to me?"

iris answered, "it was juno the royal spouse of jove, but the son of
saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of the
immo
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and the achaeans had rest from the tug and turmoil
of war.

now the trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoked their
horses and gathered in assembly before preparing their supper. they
kept their feet, nor would any dare to sit down, for fear had fallen
upon them all because achilles had shown himself after having held
aloof so long from battle. polydamas son of panthous was first to
speak, a man of judgement, who alone among them could look both before
and after. he was comrade to hector, and they had been born upon the
same night; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed
them thus:--

"look to it well, my friends; i would urge you to go back now to your
city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from
our walls. so long as this man was at enmity with agamemnon the
achaeans were easier to deal with, and i would have gladly camped by
the ships in the hope of taking them; but now i go in great fear of the
fleet son of peleus; he is so daring t
 
 ___________________________
 
tle though
we may like it, we shall have strength in counsel during the night, and
the great gates with the doors that close them will protect the city.
at dawn we can arm and take our stand on the walls; he will then rue it
if he sallies from the ships to fight us. he will go back when he has
given his horses their fill of being driven all whithers under our
walls, and will be in no mind to try and force his way into the city.
neither will he ever sack it, dogs shall devour him ere he do so."

hector looked fiercely at him and answered, "polydamas, your words are
not to my liking in that you bid us go back and be pent within the
city. have you not had enough of being cooped up behind walls? in the
old-days the city of priam was famous the whole world over for its
wealth of gold and bronze, but our treasures are wasted out of our
houses, and much goods have been sold away to phrygia and fair meonia,
for the hand of jove has been laid heavily upon us. now, therefore,
that the son of scheming 
 
 ___________________________
 
eful every man of
you. if any trojan is uneasy about his possessions, let him gather them
and give them out among the people. better let these, rather than the
achaeans, have them. at daybreak we will arm and fight about the ships;
granted that achilles has again come forward to defend them, let it be
as he will, but it shall go hard with him. i shall not shun him, but
will fight him, to fall or conquer. the god of war deals out like
measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain."

thus spoke hector; and the trojans, fools that they were, shouted in
applause, for pallas minerva had robbed them of their understanding.
they gave ear to hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words of
polydamas no man would heed. they took their supper throughout the
host, and meanwhile through the whole night the achaeans mourned
patroclus, and the son of peleus led them in their lament. he laid his
murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again and
again as a bearded lion when a man who w
 
 ___________________________
 
bring his brave son back again to opoeis after he had sacked
ilius and taken his share of the spoils--but jove does not give all men
their heart's desire. the same soil shall be reddened here at troy by
the blood of us both, for i too shall never be welcomed home by the old
knight peleus, nor by my mother thetis, but even in this place shall
the earth cover me. nevertheless, o patroclus, now that i am left
behind you, i will not bury you, till i have brought hither the head
and armour of mighty hector who has slain you. twelve noble sons of
trojans will i behead before your bier to avenge you; till i have done
so you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women of troy and
dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we
sacked men's goodly cities, shall weep over you both night and day."

then achilles told his men to set a large tripod upon the fire that
they might wash the clotted gore from off patroclus. thereon they set a
tripod full of bath water on to a clear f
 
 ___________________________
 
nd he wastes with sorrow for her sake. then the trojans hemmed
the achaeans in at their ships' sterns and would not let them come
forth; the elders, therefore, of the argives besought achilles and
offered him great treasure, whereon he refused to bring deliverance to
them himself, but put his own armour on patroclus and sent him into the
fight with much people after him. all day long they fought by the
scaean gates and would have taken the city there and then, had not
apollo vouchsafed glory to hector and slain the valiant son of
menoetius after he had done the trojans much evil. therefore i am
suppliant at your knees if haply you may be pleased to provide my son,
whose end is near at hand, with helmet and shield, with goodly greaves
fitted with ancle-clasps, and with a breastplate, for he lost his own
when his true comrade fell at the hands of the trojans, and he now lies
stretched on earth in the bitterness of his soul."

and vulcan answered, "take heart, and be no more disquieted about th
 
 ___________________________
 
or coon son of
antenor had struck him with a spear in battle.

when the achaeans were got together achilles rose and said, "son of
atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you and me,
when we two were in such high anger about briseis, surely it would have
been better, had diana's arrow slain her at the ships on the day when i
took her after having sacked lyrnessus. for so, many an achaean the
less would have bitten dust before the foe in the days of my anger. it
has been well for hector and the trojans, but the achaeans will long
indeed remember our quarrel. now, however, let it be, for it is over.
if we have been angry, necessity has schooled our anger. i put it from
me: i dare not nurse it for ever; therefore, bid the achaeans arm
forthwith that i may go out against the trojans, and learn whether they
will be in a mind to sleep by the ships or no. glad, i ween, will he be
to rest his knees who may fly my spear when i wield it."

thus did he speak, and the achaeans rejoiced i
 
 ___________________________
 
er the argives.'

"on this jove was stung to the very quick, and in his rage he caught
folly by the hair, and swore a great oath that never should she again
invade starry heaven and olympus, for she was the bane of all. then he
whirled her round with a twist of his hand, and flung her down from
heaven so that she fell on to the fields of mortal men; and he was ever
angry with her when he saw his son groaning under the cruel labours
that eurystheus laid upon him. even so did i grieve when mighty hector
was killing the argives at their ships, and all the time i kept
thinking of folly who had so baned me. i was blind, and jove robbed me
of my reason; i will now make atonement, and will add much treasure by
way of amends. go, therefore, into battle, you and your people with
you. i will give you all that ulysses offered you yesterday in your
tents: or if it so please you, wait, though you would fain fight at
once, and my squires shall bring the gifts from my ship, that you may
see whether what i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 do i charge you:
take some noble young achaeans with you, and bring from my tents the
gifts that i promised yesterday to achilles, and bring the women also;
furthermore let talthybius find me a boar from those that are with the
host, and make it ready for sacrifice to jove and to the sun."

then said achilles, "son of atreus, king of men agamemnon, see to these
matters at some other season, when there is breathing time and when i
am calmer. would you have men eat while the bodies of those whom hector
son of priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain? let the sons
of the achaeans, say i, fight fasting and without food, till we have
avenged them; afterwards at the going down of the sun let them eat
their fill. as for me, patroclus is lying dead in my tent, all hacked
and hewn, with his feet to the door, and his comrades are mourning
round him. therefore i can take thought of nothing save only slaughter
and blood and the rattle in the throat of the dying."

ulysses answered, "achilles, 
 
 ___________________________
 
wed his head till his mane
touched the ground as it hung down from under the yoke-band. "dread
achilles," said he, "we will indeed save you now, but the day of your
death is near, and the blame will not be ours, for it will be heaven
and stern fate that will destroy you. neither was it through any sloth
or slackness on our part that the trojans stripped patroclus of his
armour; it was the mighty god whom lovely leto bore that slew him as he
fought among the foremost, and vouchsafed a triumph to hector. we two
can fly as swiftly as zephyrus who they say is fleetest of all winds;
nevertheless it is your doom to fall by the hand of a man and of a god."

when he had thus said the erinyes stayed his speech, and achilles
answered him in great sadness, saying, "why, o xanthus, do you thus
foretell my death? you need not do so, for i well know that i am to
fall here, far from my dear father and mother; none the more, however,
shall i stay my hand till i have given the trojans their fill of
fighting.
 
 ___________________________
 
as the gods came together in battle.
apollo with his arrows took his stand to face king neptune, while
minerva took hers against the god of war; the archer-goddess diana with
her golden arrows, sister of far-darting apollo, stood to face juno;
mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced leto, while the mighty
eddying river whom men can scamander, but gods xanthus, matched himself
against vulcan.

the gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. but the heart of
achilles was set on meeting hector son of priam, for it was with his
blood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of
battle. meanwhile apollo set aeneas on to attack the son of peleus, and
put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of lycaon son of
priam. in his likeness therefore, he said to aeneas, "aeneas,
counsellor of the trojans, where are now the brave words with which you
vaunted over your wine before the trojan princes, saying that you would
fight achilles son of peleus in single combat?
 
 ___________________________
 
they could gallop on the crest of a breaker. erichthonius
begat tros, king of the trojans, and tros had three noble sons, ilus,
assaracus, and ganymede who was comeliest of mortal men; wherefore the
gods carried him off to be jove's cupbearer, for his beauty's sake,
that he might dwell among the immortals. ilus begat laomedon, and
laomedon begat tithonus, priam, lampus, clytius, and hiketaon of the
stock of mars. but assaracus was father to capys, and capys to
anchises, who was my father, while hector is son to priam.

"such do i declare my blood and lineage, but as for valour, jove gives
it or takes it as he will, for he is lord of all. and now let there be
no more of this prating in mid-battle as though we were children. we
could fling taunts without end at one another; a hundred-oared galley
would not hold them. the tongue can run all whithers and talk all wise;
it can go here and there, and as a man says, so shall he be gainsaid.
what is the use of our bandying hard like women who when t
 
 ___________________________
 
em and fight them man for man. however valiant i may be, i
cannot give chase to so many and fight all of them. even mars, who is
an immortal, or minerva, would shrink from flinging himself into the
jaws of such a fight and laying about him; nevertheless, so far as in
me lies i will show no slackness of hand or foot nor want of endurance,
not even for a moment; i will utterly break their ranks, and woe to the
trojan who shall venture within reach of my spear."

thus did he exhort them. meanwhile hector called upon the trojans and
declared that he would fight achilles. "be not afraid, proud trojans,"
said he, "to face the son of peleus; i could fight gods myself if the
battle were one of words only, but they would be more than a match for
me, if we had to use our spears. even so the deed of achilles will fall
somewhat short of his word; he will do in part, and the other part he
will clip short. i will go up against him though his hands be as
fire--though his hands be fire and his strength iron
 
 ___________________________
 
."

thus urged the trojans lifted up their spears against the achaeans, and
raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves into the midst of
their ranks. but phoebus apollo came up to hector and said, "hector, on
no account must you challenge achilles to single combat; keep a lookout
for him while you are under cover of the others and away from the thick
of the fight, otherwise he will either hit you with a spear or cut you
down at close quarters."

thus he spoke, and hector drew back within the crowd, for he was afraid
when he heard what the god had said to him. achilles then sprang upon
the trojans with a terrible cry, clothed in valour as with a garment.
first he killed iphition son of otrynteus, a leader of much people whom
a naiad nymph had borne to otrynteus waster of cities, in the land of
hyde under the snowy heights of mt. tmolus. achilles struck him full on
the head as he was coming on towards him, and split it clean in two;
whereon he fell heavily to the
 
 ___________________________
 
showing
off the fleetness of his feet, was rushing about among front ranks
until he lost his life, for achilles struck him in the middle of the
back as he was darting past him: he struck him just at the golden
fastenings of his belt and where the two pieces of the double
breastplate overlapped. the point of the spear pierced him through and
came out by the navel, whereon he fell groaning on to his knees and a
cloud of darkness overshadowed him as he sank holding his entrails in
his hands.

when hector saw his brother polydorus with his entrails in his hands
and sinking down upon the ground, a mist came over his eyes, and he
could not bear to keep longer at a distance; he therefore poised his
spear and darted towards achilles like a flame of fire. when achilles
saw him he bounded forward and vaunted saying, "this is he that has
wounded my heart most deeply and has slain my beloved comrade. not for
long shall we two quail before one another on the highways of war."

he looked fiercely on hecto
 
 ___________________________
 
r and said, "draw near, that you may meet
your doom the sooner." hector feared him not and answered, "son of
peleus, think not that your words can scare me as though i were a
child; i too if i will can brag and talk unseemly; i know that you are
a mighty warrior, mightier by far than i, nevertheless the issue lies
in the lap of heaven whether i, worse man though i be, may not slay you
with my spear, for this too has been found keen ere now."

he hurled his spear as he spoke, but minerva breathed upon it, and
though she breathed but very lightly she turned it back f
 
 ___________________________
 
rom going
towards achilles, so that it returned to hector and lay at his feet in
front of him. achilles then sprang furiously on him with a loud cry,
bent on killing him, but apollo caught him up easily as a god can, and
hid him in a thick darkness. thrice did achilles spring towards him
spear in hand, and thrice did he waste his blow upon the air. when he
rushed forward for the fourth time as though he were a god, he shouted
aloud saying, "hound, this time too you have escaped death--but of a
truth it came exceedingly near you. phoebus apollo, to who
 
 ___________________________
 
on to win
still further glory, and his hands were bedrabbled with gore.



book xxi

  the fight between achilles and the river scamander--the gods
  fight among themselves--achilles drives the trojans within
  their gates.

now when they came to the ford of the full-flowing river xanthus,
begotten of immortal jove, achilles cut their forces in two: one half
he chased over the plain towards the city by the same way that the
achaeans had taken when flying panic-stricken on the preceding day with
hector in full triumph; this way did they fly pell-mell, and juno sent
down a thick mist in front of them to stay them. the other half were
hemmed in by the deep silver-eddying stream, and fell into it with a
great uproar. the waters resounded, and the banks rang again, as they
swam hither and thither with loud cries amid the whirling eddies. as
locusts flying to a river before the blast of a grass fire--the flame
comes on and on till at last it overtakes them and they huddle into the
water--even so w
 
 ___________________________
 
tes--of altes who reigns over the warlike lelegae
and holds steep pedasus on the river satnioeis. priam married his
daughter along with many other women and two sons were born of her,
both of whom you will have slain. your spear slew noble polydorus as he
was fighting in the front ranks, and now evil will here befall me, for
i fear that i shall not escape you since heaven has delivered me over
to you. furthermore i say, and lay my saying to your heart, spare me,
for i am not of the same womb as hector who slew your brave and noble
comrade."

with such words did the princely son of priam beseech achilles; but
achilles answered him sternly. "idiot," said he, "talk not to me of
ransom. until patroclus fell i preferred to give the trojans quarter,
and sold beyond the sea many of those whom i had taken alive; but now
not a man shall live of those whom heaven delivers into my hands before
the city of ilius--and of all trojans it shall fare hardest with the
sons of priam. therefore, my friend, you 
 
 ___________________________
 
t any rate drive them out of my stream, and do your grim work on land.
my fair waters are now filled with corpses, nor can i find any channel
by which i may pour myself into the sea for i am choked with dead, and
yet you go on mercilessly slaying. i am in despair, therefore, o
captain of your host, trouble me no further."

achilles answered, "so be it, scamander, jove-descended; but i will
never cease dealing out death among the trojans, till i have pent them
up in their city, and made trial of hector face to face, that i may
learn whether he is to vanquish me, or i him."

as he spoke he set upon the trojans with a fury like that of the gods.
but the river said to apollo, "surely, son of jove, lord of the silver
bow, you are not obeying the commands of jove who charged you straitly
that you should stand by the trojans and defend them, till twilight
fades, and darkness is over the earth."

meanwhile achilles sprang from the bank into mid-stream, whereon the
river raised a high wave and attack
 
 ___________________________
 
lood was tiring him out as it flowed past him and ate
the ground from under his feet.

then the son of peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying, "father
jove, is there none of the gods who will take pity upon me, and save me
from the river? i do not care what may happen to me afterwards. i blame
none of the other dwellers on olympus so severely as i do my dear
mother, who has beguiled and tricked me. she told me i was to fall
under the walls of troy by the flying arrows of apollo; would that
hector, the best man among the trojans, might there slay me; then
should i fall a hero by the hand of a hero; whereas now it seems that i
shall come to a most pitiable end, trapped in this river as though i
were some swineherd's boy, who gets carried down a torrent while trying
to cross it during a storm."

as soon as he had spoken thus, neptune and minerva came up to him in
the likeness of two men, and took him by the hand to reassure him.
neptune spoke first. "son of peleus," said he, "be not so exc
 
 ___________________________
 
eeding
fearful; we are two gods, come with jove's sanction to assist you, i,
and pallas minerva. it is not your fate to perish in this river; he
will abate presently as you will see; moreover we strongly advise you,
if you will be guided by us, not to stay your hand from fighting till
you have pent the trojan host within the famed walls of ilius--as many
of them as may escape. then kill hector and go back to the ships, for
we will vouchsafe you a triumph over him."

when they had so said they went back to the other immortals, but
achilles strove onward over the plain, encouraged by the charge the
gods had laid upon him. all was now covered with the flood of waters,
and much goodly armour of the youths that had been slain was rifting
about, as also many corpses, but he forced his way against the stream,
speeding right onwards, nor could the broad waters stay him, for
minerva had endow
 
 ___________________________
 
iver scamander. apollo ran
but a little way before him and beguiled achilles by making him think
all the time that he was on the point of overtaking him. meanwhile the
rabble of routed trojans was thankful to crowd within the city till
their numbers thronged it; no longer did they dare wait for one another
outside the city walls, to learn who had escaped and who were fallen in
fight, but all whose feet and knees could still carry them poured
pell-mell into the town.



book xxii

  the death of hector.

thus the trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat from
off them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against the goodly
battlements, while the achaeans with their shields laid upon their
shoulders drew close up to the walls. but stern fate bade hector stay
where he was before ilius and the scaean gates. then phoebus apollo
spoke to the son of peleus saying, "why, son of peleus, do you, who are
but man, give chase to me who am immortal? have you not yet found out
that it is
 
 ___________________________
 
 he scoured the plain, all
radiant as the star which men call orion's hound, and whose beams blaze
forth in time of harvest more brilliantly than those of any other that
shines by night; brightest of them all though he be, he yet bodes ill
for mortals, for he brings fire and fever in his train--even so did
achilles' armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. priam raised a
cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted
out to his dear son, imploring him to return; but hector still stayed
before the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle with
achilles. the old man reached out his arms towards him and bade him for
pity's sake come within the walls. "hector," he cried, "my son, stay
not to face this man alone and unsupported, or you will meet death at
the hands of the son of peleus, for he is mightier than you. monster
that he is; would indeed that the gods loved him no better than i do,
for so, dogs and vultures would soon devour him as he lay stretched on
ea
 
 ___________________________
 
d fed at my own table to
guard my gates, but who will yet lap my blood and then lie all
distraught at my doors. when a young man falls by the sword in battle,
he may lie where he is and there is nothing unseemly; let what will be
seen, all is honourable in death, but when an old man is slain there is
nothing in this world more pitiable than that dogs should defile his
grey hair and beard and all that men hide for shame."

the old man tore his grey hair as he spoke, but he moved not the heart
of hector. his mother hard by wept and moaned aloud as she bared her
bosom and pointed to the breast which had suckled him. "hector," she
cried, weeping bitterly the while, "hector, my son, spurn not this
breast, but have pity upon me too: if i have ever given you comfort
from my own bosom, think on it now, dear son, and come within the wall
to protect us from this man; stand not without to meet him. should the
wretch kill you, neither i nor your richly dowered wife shall ever
weep, dear offshoot of myse
 
 ___________________________
 
lf, over the bed on which you lie, for dogs
will devour you at the ships of the achaeans."

thus did the two with many tears implore their son, but they moved not
the heart of hector, and he stood his ground awaiting huge achilles as
he drew nearer towards him. as a serpent in its den upon the mountains,
full fed with deadly poisons, waits for the approach of man--he is
filled with fury and his eyes glare terribly as he goes writhing round
his den--even so hector leaned his shield against a tower that jutted
out from the wall and stood where he was, undaunted.

"alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, "if i go
within the gates, polydamas will be the first to heap reproach upon me,
for it was he that urged me to lead the trojans back to the city on
that awful night when achilles again came forth against us. i would not
listen, but it would have been indeed better if i had done so. now that
my folly has destroyed the host, i dare not look
 
 ___________________________
 
 trojan men and trojan
women in the face, lest a worse man should say, 'hector has ruined us
by his self-confidence.' surely it would be better for me to return
after having fought achilles and slain him, or to die gloriously here
before the city. what, again, if i were to lay down my shield and
helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight up to noble
achilles? what if i were to promise to give up helen, who was the
fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure that alexandrus
brought with him in his ships to troy, aye, and to let the achaeans
divide the ha
 
 ___________________________
 
oman, when i had off my
armour. there is no parleying with him from some rock or oak tree as
young men and maidens prattle with one another. better fight him at
once, and learn to which of us jove will vouchsafe victory."

thus did he stand and ponder, but achilles came up to him as it were
mars himself, plumed lord of battle. from his right shoulder he
brandished his terrible spear of pelian ash, and the bronze gleamed
around him like flashing fire or the rays of the rising sun. fear fell
upon hector as he beheld him, and he dared not stay longer where he was
but fled in dismay from before the gates, while achilles darted after
him at his utmost speed. as a mountain falcon, swiftest of all birds,
swoops down upon some cowering dove--the dove flies before him but the
falcon with a shrill scream follows close after, resolved to have
her--even so did achilles make straight for hector with all his might,
while hector fled under the trojan wall as fast as his limbs could take
him.

on they flew 
 
 ___________________________
 
prings, are the
goodly washing-troughs of stone, where in the time of peace before the
coming of the achaeans the wives and fair daughters of the trojans used
to wash their clothes. past these did they fly, the one in front and
the other giving chase behind him: good was the man that fled, but
better far was he that followed after, and swiftly indeed did they run,
for the prize was no mere beast for sacrifice or bullock's hide, as it
might be for a common foot-race, but they ran for the life of hector.
as horses in a chariot race speed round the turning-posts when they are
running for some great prize--a tripod or woman--at the games in honour
of some dead hero, so did these two run full speed three times round
the city of priam. all the gods watched them, and the sire of gods and
men was the first to speak.

"alas," said he, "my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued
round the walls of troy; my heart is full of pity for hector, who has
burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in m
 
 ___________________________
 
f cloud and
storm, what mean you? would you pluck this mortal whose doom has long
been decreed out of the jaws of death? do as you will, but we others
shall not be of a mind with you."

and jove answered, "my child, trito-born, take heart. i did not speak
in full earnest, and i will let you have your way. do without let or
hindrance as you are minded."

thus did he urge minerva who was already eager, and down she darted
from the topmost summits of olympus.

achilles was still in full pursuit of hector, as a hound chasing a fawn
which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and hunts
through glade and thicket. the fawn may try to elude him by crouching
under cover of a bush, but he will scent her out and follow her up
until he gets her--even so there was no escape for hector from the
fleet son of peleus. whenever he made a set to get near the dardanian
gates and under the walls, that his people might help him by showering
down weapons from above, achilles would gain on him and head h
 
 ___________________________
 
im back
towards the plain, keeping himself always on the city side. as a man in
a dream who fails to lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing--the
one cannot escape nor the other overtake--even so neither could
achilles come up with hector, nor hector break away from achilles;
nevertheless he might even yet have escaped death had not the time come
when apollo, who thus far had sustained his strength and nerved his
running, was now no longer to stay by him. achilles made signs to the
achaean host, and shook his head to show that no man was to aim a dart
at hector, lest another might win the glory of having hit him and he
might himself come in second. then, at last, as they were nearing the
fountains for the fourth time, the father of all bala
 
 ___________________________
 
nced his golden
scales and placed a doom in each of them, one for achilles and the
other for hector. as he held the scales by the middle, the doom of
hector fell down deep into the house of hades--and then phoebus apollo
left him. thereon minerva went close up to the son of peleus and said,
"noble achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely take back to
the ships a triumph for the achaeans by slaying hector, for all his
lust of battle. do what apollo may as he lies grovelling before his
father, aegis-bearing jove, hector cannot escape us longer. stay here
and take breath, while i go up to him and persuade him to make a stand
and fight you."

thus spoke minerva. achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while minerva left him and
went after hector in the form and with the voice of deiphobus. she came
close up to him and said, "dear brother, i see you ar
 
 ___________________________
 
e hard pressed by
achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of priam, let
us await his onset and stand on our defence."

and hector answered, "deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of
all my brothers, children of hecuba and priam, but henceforth i shall
rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the
wall for my sake when all the others remain inside."

then minerva said, "dear brother, my father and mother went down on
their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but i was in an agony of
grief when i beheld you; now, therefore, 
 
 ___________________________
 
let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we may
learn whether achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to the
ships, or whether he shall fall before you."

thus did minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were now
close to one another great hector was first to speak. "i will no longer
fly you, son of peleus," said he, "as i have been doing hitherto. three
times have i fled round the mighty city of priam, without daring to
withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for i am in the
mind to face you. let us, then, give pledges to one another by our
gods, who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let
it be agreed between us that if jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and
i take your life, i am not to treat you
 
 ___________________________
 
standing between you and me,
nor may there be any covenants between us, till one or other shall fall
and glut grim mars with his life's blood. put forth all your strength;
you have need now to prove yourself indeed a bold soldier and man of
war. you have no more chance, and pallas minerva will forthwith
vanquish you by my spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief
you have caused me on account of my comrades whom you have killed in
battle."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. hector saw it coming and
avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it flew over his
head and stuck in the ground beyond; minerva then snatched it up and
gave it back to achilles without hector's seeing her; hector thereon
said to the son of peleus, "you have missed your aim, achilles, peer of
the gods, and jove has not yet revealed to you the hour of my doom,
though you made sure that he had done so. you were a false-tongued liar
when you deemed that i should forget my valour and quail befor
 
 ___________________________
 
k of a runaway--drive it,
should heaven so grant you power, drive it into me as i make straight
towards you; and now for your own part avoid my spear if you can--would
that you might receive the whole of it into your body; if you were once
dead the trojans would find the war an easier matter, for it is you who
have harmed them most."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. his aim was true for he
hit the middle of achilles' shield, but the spear rebounded from it,
and did not pierce it. hector was angry when he saw that the weapon had
sped from his hand in vain, and stood there in dismay for he had no
second spear. with a loud cry he called deiphobus and asked him for
one, but there was no man; then he saw the truth and said to himself,
"alas! the gods have lured me on to my destruction. i deemed that the
hero deiphobus was by my side, but he is within the wall, and minerva
has inveigled me; death is now indeed exceedingly near at hand and
there is no way out of it--for so jove and h
 
 ___________________________
 
is son apollo the
far-darter have willed it, though heretofore they have been ever ready
to protect me. my doom has come upon me; let me not then die
ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me first do some great
thing that shall be told among men hereafter."

as he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong by his
side, and gathering himself together be sprang on achilles like a
soaring eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some lamb or
timid hare--even so did hector brandish his sword and spring upon
achilles. achilles mad with rage darted towards him, with his wondrous
shield before his breast, and his gleaming helmet, made with four
layers of metal, nodding fiercely forward. the thick tresses of gold
with which vulcan had crested the helmet floated round it, and as the
evening star that shines brighter than all others through the stillness
of night, even such was the gleam of the spear which achilles poised in
his right hand, fraught with the death of no
 
 ___________________________
 
ble hector. he eyed his
fair flesh over and over to see where he could best wound it, but all
was protected by the goodly armour of which hector had spoiled
patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat where the
collar-bones divide the neck from the shoulders, and this is a most
deadly place: here then did achilles strike him as he was coming on
towards him, and the point of his spear went right through the fleshy
part of the neck, but it did not sever his windpipe so that he could
still speak. hector fell headlong, and achilles vaunted over him
saying, "hector, you deemed that you should come off scatheless when
you were spoi
 
 ___________________________
 
ling patroclus, and recked not of myself who was not with
him. fool that you were: for i, his comrade, mightier far than he, was
still left behind him at the ships, and now i have laid you low. the
achaeans shall give him all due funeral rites, while dogs and vultures
shall work their will upon yourself."

then hector said, as the life ebbed out of him, "i pray you by your
life and knees, and by your parents, let not dogs devour me at the
ships of the achaeans, but accept the rich treasure of gold and bronze
which my father and mother will offer you, and send my body home, that
the trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when i am dead."

achilles glared at him and answered, "dog, talk not to me neither of
knees nor parents; would that i could be as sure of being able to cut
your flesh into piece
 
 ___________________________
 
s and eat it raw, for the ill you have done me, as
i am that nothing shall save you from the dogs--it shall not be, though
they bring ten or twenty-fold ransom and weigh it out for me on the
spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. though priam son of dardanus
should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall
never lay you out and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and
vultures shall eat you utterly up."

hector with his dying breath then said, "i know you what you are, and
was sure that i should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron;
look to it that i bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day when
paris and phoebus apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the
scaean gates."

when he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his
soul went out of him and flew down to the house of hades, lamenting its
sad fate that it should enjoy youth and strength no longer. but
achille
 
 ___________________________
 
s said, speaking to the dead body, "die; for my part i will
accept my fate whensoever jove and the other gods see fit to send it."

as he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side;
then he stripped the blood-stained armour from hector's shoulders while
the other achaeans came running up to view his wondrous strength and
beauty; and no one came near him without giving him a fresh wound. then
would one turn to his neighbour and say, "it is easier to handle hector
now than when he was flinging fire on to our ships"--and as he spoke he
would thrust his spear into him anew.

when achilles had done spoiling hector of his armour, he stood among
the argives and said, "my friends, princes and counsellors of the
argives, now that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome this man, who
has done us more hurt than all the others together, consider whether we
should not attack the city in force, and discover in what mind the
trojans may be. we should thus learn whether 
 
 ___________________________
 
they will desert their
city now that hector has fallen, or will still hold out even though he
is no longer living. but why argue with myself in this way, while
patroclus is still lying at the ships unburied, and unmourned--he whom
i can never forget so long as i am alive and my strength fails not?
though men forget their dead when once they are within the house of
hades, yet not even there will i forget the comrade whom i have lost.
now, therefore, achaean youths, let us raise the song of victory and go
back to the ships taking this man 
 
 ___________________________
 
along with us; for we have achieved a
mighty triumph and have slain noble hector to whom the trojans prayed
throughout their city as though he were a god."

on this he treated the body of hector with contumely: he pierced the
sinews at the back of both his feet from heel to ancle and passed
thongs of ox-hide through the slits he had made: thus he made the body
fast to his chariot, letting the head trail upon the ground. then when
he had put the goodly armour on the chariot and had himself mounted, he
lashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loth. the dust rose
from hector as he was being dragged along, his dark hair flew all
abroad, and his head once so comely was laid low on
 
 ___________________________
 
 earth, for jove had
now delivered him into the hands of his foes to do him outrage in his
own land.

thus was the head of hector being dishonoured in the dust. his mother
tore her hair, and flung her veil from her with a loud cry as she
looked upon her son. his father made piteous moan, and throughout the
city the people fell to weeping and wailing. it was as though the whole
of frowning ilius was being smirched with fire. hardly could the people
hold priam back in his hot haste to rush without the gates of the city.
he grovelled in the mire and besought them, calling each one of them by
his name. "let be, my friends," h
 
 ___________________________
 
e cried, "and for all your sorrow,
suffer me to go single-handed to the ships of the achaeans. let me
beseech this cruel and terrible man, if maybe he will respect the
feeling of his fellow-men, and have compassion on my old age. his own
father is even such another as myself--peleus, who bred him and reared
him to be the bane of us trojans, and of myself more than of all
others. many a son of mine has he slain in the flower of his youth, and
yet, grieve for these as i may, i do so for one--hector--more than for
them all, and the bitterness of my sorrow will bring me down to the
house of hades. would that he had died in my arms, for so both his
ill-starred mother who bore him, and myself, should have had the
comfort of weeping and mourning over him."

thus did he speak with many tears, and all the people of the city
joined in his lament. hecuba then raised the cry of wailing among the
trojans. "alas, my son," she cried, "what have i left to live for now
that you are no more? night and da
 
 ___________________________
 
y did i glory in you throughout the
city, for you were a tower of strength to all in troy, and both men and
women alike hailed you as a god. so long as you lived you were their
pride, but now death and destruction have fallen upon you."

hector's wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to tell her
that her husband had remained without the gates. she was at her loom in
an inner part of the house, weaving a double purple web, and
embroidering it with many flowers. she told her maids to set a large
tripod on the fire, so as to have a warm bath ready for hector when he
came out of battle; poor woman, she knew not that he was now beyond the
reach of baths, and that minerva had laid him low by the hands of
achilles. she heard the
 
 ___________________________
 
 from the wall, and trembled in
every limb; the shuttle fell from her hands, and again she spoke to her
waiting-women. "two of you," she said, "come with me that i may learn
what it is that has befallen; i heard the voice of my husband's
honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it would come into my
mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great misfortune for
priam's children must be at hand. may i never live to hear it, but i
greatly fear that achilles has cut off the retreat of brave hector and
has chased him on to the plain where he was singlehanded; i fear he may
have put an end to the reckless daring which possessed my husband, who
would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in
front, foremost of them all in valour."

her heart beat fast, and as she spoke she flew from the house like a
maniac, with her waiting-women following after. when she reached the
battlements and the crowd of people, she stood looking out upon the
wall, and saw hector being borne aw
 
 ___________________________
 
ay in front of the city--the horses
dragging him without heed or care over the ground towards the ships of
the achaeans. her eyes were then shrouded as with the darkness of night
and she fell fainting backwards. she tore the attiring from her head
and flung it from her, the frontlet and net with its plaited band, and
the veil which golden venus had given her on the day when hector took
her with him from the house of eetion, after having given countless
gifts of wooing for her sake. her husband's sisters and the wives of
his brothers crowded round her and supported her, for she was fain to
die in her distraction; when she again presently breathed and came to
herself, she sobbed and made lament among the trojans saying, "woe is
me, o hector; woe, indeed, that to share a common lot we were born, you
at troy in the house of priam, and i at thebes under the wooded
mountain of
 
 ___________________________
 
 placus in the house of eetion who brought me up when i was
a child--ill-starred sire of an ill-starred daughter--would that he had
never begotten me. you are now going into the house of hades under the
secret places of the earth, and you leave me a sorrowing widow in your
house. the child, of whom you and i are the unhappy parents, is as yet
a mere infant. now that you are gone, o hector, you can do nothing for
him nor he for you. even though he escape the horrors of this woeful
war with the achaeans, yet shall his life henceforth be one of labour
and sorrow, for others will seize his lands. the day that robs a child
of his parents severs him from his own kind; his head is bowed, his
cheeks are wet with tears, and he will go about destitute among the
friends of his father, plucking one by the cloak and another by the
shirt. some one or other of these may so far pity him as to h
 
 ___________________________
 
l say, 'you have no father here,' and the child
will go crying back to his widowed mother--he, astyanax, who erewhile
would sit upon his father's knees, and have none but the daintiest and
choicest morsels set before him. when he had played till he was tired
and went to sleep, he would lie in a bed, in the arms of his nurse, on
a soft couch, knowing neither want nor care, whereas now that he has
lost his father his lot will be full of hardship--he, whom the trojans
name astyanax, because you, o hector, were the only defence of their
gates and battlements. the wriggling writhing worms will now eat you at
the ships, far from your parents, when the dogs have glutted themselves
upon you. you will lie naked, although in your house you have fine and
goodly raiment made by hands of women. this will i now burn; it is of
no use to you, for you can never again wear it, and thus you will have
respect shown you by the trojans both men and women."

in such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the w
 
 ___________________________
 
heir lament. thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round
the body, and thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning. the
sands of the seashore and the men's armour were wet with their weeping,
so great a minister of fear was he whom they had lost. chief in all
their mourning was the son of peleus: he laid his bloodstained hand on
the breast of his friend. "fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in
the house of hades. i will now do all that i erewhile promised you; i
will drag hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons
of trojans will i also slay before your pyre to avenge you."

as he spoke he treated the body of noble hector with contumely, laying
it at full length in the dust beside the bier of patroclus. the others
then put off every man his armour, took the horses from their chariots,
and seated themselves in great multitude by the ship of the fleet
descendant of aeacus, who thereon feasted them with an abundant funeral
banquet. many a goodly ox, with
 
 ___________________________
 
s he had said. they made haste to
prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full share so that
all were satisfied. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
the others went to their rest each in his own tent, but the son of
peleus lay grieving among his myrmidons by the shore of the sounding
sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in one after
another. here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and eased the
burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing hector
round windy ilius. presently the sad spirit of patroclus drew near him,
like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of his beaming
eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. the spirit hovered over
his head and said--

"you sleep, achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living, but
now that i am dead you think for me no further. bury me with all speed
that i may pass the gates of hades; the ghosts, vain shadows of men
that can labour no more, drive me away from them; they wi
 
 ___________________________
 
pyre; he also put twelve brave sons of noble trojans
to the sword and laid them with the rest, for he was full of bitterness
and fury. then he committed all to the resistless and devouring might
of the fire; he groaned aloud and called on his dead comrade by name.
"fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in the house of hades; i am now
doing all that i have promised you. twelve brave sons of noble trojans
shall the flames consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall
devour the flesh of hector son of priam."

thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of hector, for
jove's daughter venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him
with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when
achilles was dragging him about. phoebus apollo moreover sent a dark
cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

now the pyre about dead patroclus would not kindle. achilles therefore

 
 ___________________________
 
en agamemnon, and meriones, stalwart squire of
idomeneus. but achilles spoke saying, "son of atreus, we know how far
you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take
the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let
us give the spear to meriones; this at least is what i should myself
wish."

king agamemnon assented. so he gave the bronze spear to meriones, and
handed the goodly cauldron to talthybius his esquire.



book xxiv

  priam ransoms the body of hector--hector's funeral.

the assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to his
own ship. there they made ready their supper, and then bethought them
of the blessed boon of sleep; but achilles still wept for thinking of
his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could take no
hold upon him. this way and that did he turn as he yearned after the
might and manfulness of patroclus; he thought of all they had done
together, and all they had gone through both on the field of ba
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle and
on the waves of the weary sea. as he dwelt on these things he wept
bitterly and lay now on his side, now on his back, and now face
downwards, till at last he rose and went out as one distraught to
wander upon the seashore. then, when he saw dawn breaking over beach
and sea, he yoked his horses to his chariot, and bound the body of
hector behind it that he might drag it about. thrice did he drag it
round the tomb of the son of menoetius, and then went back into his
tent, leaving the body on the ground full length and with its face
downwards. but apollo would not suffer it to be disfigured, for he
pitied the man, dead though he now was; therefore he shielded him with
his golden aegis continually, that he might take no hurt while achilles
was dragging him.

thus shamefully did achilles in his fury dishonour hector; but the
blessed
 
 ___________________________
 
rey-eyed daughter, who persisted in the hate which
they had ever borne towards ilius with priam and his people; for they
forgave not the wrong done them by alexandrus in disdaining the
goddesses who came to him when he was in his sheepyards, and preferring
her who had offered him a wanton to his ruin.

when, therefore, the morning of the twelfth day had now come, phoebus
apollo spoke among the immortals saying, "you gods ought to be ashamed
of yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. did not hector burn you
thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished goats? and now dare you not
rescue even his dead body, for his wife to look upon, with his mother
and child, his father priam, and his people, who would forthwith commit
him to the flames, and give him his due funeral rites? so, then, you
would all be on the side of mad achilles, who knows neither right nor
ruth? he is like some savage lion that in the pride of his great
strength and daring springs upon men's flocks and gorges on them. even
so 
 
 ___________________________
 
has achilles flung aside all pity, and all that conscience which at
once so greatly banes yet greatly boons him that will heed it. a man
may lose one far dearer than achilles has lost--a son, it may be, or a
brother born from his own mother's womb; yet when he has mourned him
and wept over him he will let him bide, for it takes much sorrow to
kill a man; whereas achilles, now that he has slain noble hector, drags
him behind his chariot round the tomb of his comrade. it were better of
him, and for him, that he should not do so, for brave though he be we
gods may take it ill that he should vent his fury upon dead clay."

juno spoke up in a rage. "this were well," she cried, "o lord of the
silver bow, if you would give like honour to hector and to achilles;
but hector was mortal and suckled at a woman's breast, whereas achilles
is the offspring of a goddess whom i myself reared and brought up. i
mar
 
 ___________________________
 
ried her to peleus, who is above measure dear to the immortals; you
gods came all of you to her wedding; you feasted along with them
yourself and brought your lyre--false, and fond of low company, that
you have ever been."

then said jove, "juno, be not so bitter. their honour shall not be
equal, but of all that dwell in ilius, hector was dearest to the gods,
as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. never was my
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we claim of right. i shall therefore permit the body of
mighty hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without achilles
coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside him. let
some one of you, therefore, send thetis to me, and i will impart my
counsel to her, namely that achilles is to accept a ranso
 
 ___________________________
 
 the side of father
jove. juno then placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and spoke to her
in words of comfort, whereon thetis drank and gave her back the cup;
and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.

"so, goddess," said he, "for all your sorrow, and the grief that i well
know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to olympus, and i
will tell you why i have sent for you. this nine days past the
immortals have been quarrelling about achilles waster of cities and the
body of hector. the gods would have mercury slayer of argus steal the
body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, i will
concede such honour to your son as i will now tell you. go, then, to
the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry
with him, and that i am myself more angry than them all, in that he
keeps hector at the ships and will not give him up. he may thus fear me
and let the body go. at the same time i will send iris to great priam
to bid him go to the ships
 
 ___________________________
 
side him and
caressed him with her hand saying, "my son, how long will you keep on
thus grieving and making moan? you are gnawing at your own heart, and
think neither of food nor of woman's embraces; and yet these too were
well, for you have no long time to live, and death with the strong hand
of fate are already close beside you. now, therefore, heed what i say,
for i come as a messenger from jove; he says that the gods are angry
with you, and himself more angry than them all, in that you keep hector
at the ships and will not give him up. therefore let him go, and accept
a ransom for his body."

and achilles answered, "so be it. if olympian jove of his own motion
thus commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the body away."

thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long discourse
with one another. meanwhile the son of saturn sent iris to the strong
city of ilius. "go," said he, "fleet iris, from the mansions of
olympus, and tell king priam in ilius, that he is to go to 
 
 ___________________________
 
s' wives went wailing about the
house, as they thought of the many and brave men who lay dead, slain by
the argives. the messenger of jove stood by priam and spoke softly to
him, but fear fell upon him as she did so. "take heart," she said,
"priam offspring of dardanus, take heart and fear not. i bring no evil
tidings, but am minded well towards you. i come as a messenger from
jove, who though he be not near, takes thought for you and pities you.
the lord of olympus bids you go and ransom noble hector, and take with
you such gifts as shall give satisfaction to achilles. you are to go
alone, with no trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive
your mules and waggon, and bring back to the city the body of him whom
noble achilles has slain. you are to have no thought, nor fear of
death, for jove will send the slayer of argus to escort you. when he
has brought you within achilles' tent, achilles will not kill you nor
let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and

 
 ___________________________
 
 pass through the camps of the achaeans and
go to their ships."

his wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, "alas, what has become
of that judgement for which you have been ever famous both among
strangers and your own people? how can you venture alone to the ships
of the achaeans, and look into the face of him who has slain so many of
your brave sons? you must have iron courage, for if the cruel savage
sees you and lays hold on you, he will know neither respect nor pity.
let us then weep hector from afar here in our own house, for when i
gave him birth the threads of overruling fate were spun for him that
dogs should eat his flesh far from his parents, in the house of that
terrible man on whose liver i would fain fasten and devour it. thus
would i avenge my son, who showed no cowardice when achilles slew him,
and thought neither of flight nor of avoiding battle as he stood in
defence of trojan men and trojan women."

then priam said, "i would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as a b
 
 ___________________________
 
o down within the house of
hades, ere mine eyes behold the sacking and wasting of the city."

he drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the old
man sped them. then he called to his sons, upbraiding helenus, paris,
noble agathon, pammon, antiphonus, polites of the loud battle-cry,
deiphobus, hippothous, and dius. these nine did the old man call near
him. "come to me at once," he cried, "worthless sons who do me shame;
would that you had all been killed at the ships rather than hector.
miserable man that i am, i have had the bravest sons in all troy--noble
nestor, troilus the dauntless charioteer, and hector who was a god
among men, so that one would have thought he was son to an
immortal--yet there is not one of them left. mars has slain them and
those of whom i am ashamed are alone left me. liars, and light of foot,
heroes of the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own people,
why do you not get a waggon ready for me at once, and put all these
things upon it that i 
 
 ___________________________
 
ule-yoke from the peg on which
it hung, a yoke of boxwood with a knob on the top of it and rings for
the reins to go through. then they brought a yoke-band eleven cubits
long, to bind the yoke to the pole; they bound it on at the far end of
the pole, and put the ring over the upright pin making it fast with
three turns of the band on either side the knob, and bending the thong
of the yoke beneath it. this done, they brought from the store-chamber
the rich ransom that was to purchase the body of hector, and they set
it all orderly on the waggon; then they yoked the strong harness-mules
which the mysians had on a time given as a goodly present to priam; but
for priam himself they yoked horses which the old king had bred, and
kept for his own use.

thus heedfully did priam and his servant see to the yolking of their
cars at the palace. then hecuba came to them all sorrowful, with a
golden goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might make a
drink-offering before they set out. she stood in f
 
 ___________________________
 
 me true, are you taking this
rich treasure to send it to a foreign people where it may be safe, or
are you all leaving strong ilius in dismay now that your son has fallen
who was the bravest man among you and was never lacking in battle with
the achaeans?"

and priam said, "who are you, my friend, and who are your parents, that
you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy son?"

the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, answered him, "sir, you would
prove me, that you question me about noble hector. many a time have i
set eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the argives to their
ships and putting them to the sword. we stood still and marvelled, for
achilles in his anger with the son of atreus suffered us not to fight.
i am his squire, and came with him in the same ship. i am a myrmidon,
and my father's name is polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as
you are; he has six sons besides myself, and i am the seventh. we cast
lots, and it fell upon me to sail hither with achilles. 
 
 ___________________________
 
ere is none to keep war and ruin from him. yet when
he hears of you being still alive, he is glad, and his days are full of
hope that he shall see his dear son come home to him from troy; but i,
wretched man that i am, had the bravest in all troy for my sons, and
there is not one of them left. i had fifty sons when the achaeans came
here; nineteen of them were from a single womb, and the others were
borne to me by the women of my household. the greater part of them has
fierce mars laid low, and hector, him who was alone left, him who was
the guardian of the city and ourselves, him have you lately slain;
therefore i am now come to the ships of the achaeans to ransom his body
from you with a great ransom. fear, o achilles, the wrath of heaven;
think on your own father and have compassion upon me, who am the more
pitiable, for i have steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled
himself before me, and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew
my son."

thus spoke priam, and the heart of a
 
 ___________________________
 
chilles yearned as he bethought him
of his father. he took the old man's hand and moved him gently away.
the two wept bitterly--priam, as he lay at achilles' feet, weeping for
hector, and achilles now for his father and now for patroclus, till the
house was filled with their lamentation. but when achilles was now
sated with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he
left his seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white
hair and beard; then he said, "unhappy man, you have indeed been
greatly daring; how could you venture to come alone to the ships of the
achaeans, and enter the presence of him who has slain so many of your
brave sons? you mu
 
 ___________________________
 

the northward, phrygia that is more inland, and those that dwell upon
the great hellespont; but from the day when the dwellers in heaven sent
this evil upon you, war and slaughter have been about your city
continually. bear up against it, and let there be some intervals in
your sorrow. mourn as you may for your brave son, you will take nothing
by it. you cannot raise him from the dead, ere you do so yet another
sorrow shall befall you."

and priam answered, "o king, bid me not be seated, while hector is
still lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great ransom
which i have brought you, and give him to me at once that i may look
upon him. may you prosper with the ransom and reach your own land in
safety, seeing that you have suffered me to live and to look upon the
light of the sun."

achilles looked at him sternly and said, "vex me, sir, no longer; i am
of myself minded to give up the body of hector. my mother, daughter of
the old man of the sea, came to me from jove to bid me deli
 
 ___________________________
 
rther, lest i sin against the word
of jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within my tents."

the old man feared him and obeyed. then the son of peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his
two squires automedon and alcimus who were closer to him than any
others of his comrades now that patroclus was no more. these unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. they lifted the ransom for hector's body from the
waggon, but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. then he
called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint it,
but he first took it to a place where priam should not see it, lest if
he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of his grief, and
enrage achilles, who might then kill him and sin against the word of
jove. when the servants had washed the body and anointed it, and h
 
 ___________________________
 
ad
wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle, achilles himself lifted it on to
a bier, and he and his men then laid it on the waggon. he cried aloud
as he did so and called on the name of his dear comrade, "be not angry
with me, patroclus," he said, "if you hear even in the house of hades
that i have given hector to his father for a ransom. it has been no
unworthy one, and i will share it equitably with you."

achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right
angles to the one against which priam was sitting. "sir," he said,
"your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to
desire; you shall look upon him when you take him away at daybreak; for
the present let us prepare our supper. even lovely niobe h
 
 ___________________________
 
aks for priam
and idaeus to wear. so the maids went out carrying a torch and got the
two beds ready in all haste. then achilles said laughingly to priam,
"dear sir, you shall lie outside, lest some counsellor of those who in
due course keep coming to advise with me should see you here in the
darkness of the flying night, and tell it to agamemnon. this might
cause delay in the delivery of the body. and now tell me and tell me
true, for how many days would you celebrate the funeral rites of noble
hector? tell me, that i may hold aloof from war and restrain the host."

and priam answered, "since, then, you suffer me to bury my noble son
with all due rites, do thus, achilles, and i shall be grateful. you
know how we are pent up within our city; it is far for us to fetch wood
from the mountain, and the people live in fear. nine days, therefore,
will we mourn hector in my house; on the tenth day we will bury him and
there shall be a public feast in his honour; on the eleventh we will
build a mound
 
 ___________________________
 
achaeans were to know of your being here."

when he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant.
mercury then yoked their horses and mules, and drove them quickly
through the host so that no man perceived them. when they came to the
ford of eddying xanthus, begotten of immortal jove, mercury went back
to high olympus, and dawn in robe of saffron began to break over all
the land. priam and idaeus then drove on toward the city lamenting and
making moan, and the mules drew the body of hector. no one neither man
nor woman saw them, till cassandra, fair as golden venus standing on
pergamus, caught sight of her dear father in his chariot, and his
servant that was the city's herald with him. then she saw him that was
lying upon the bier, drawn by the mules, and with a loud cry she went
about the city saying, "come hither trojans, men and women, and look on
hector; if ever you rejoiced to see him coming from battle when he was
alive, look now on him that was the glory of our city and al
 
 ___________________________
 
l our
people."

at this there was not man nor woman left in the city, so great a sorrow
had possessed them. hard by the gates they met priam as he was bringing
in the body. hector's wife and his mother were the first to mourn him:
they flew towards the waggon and laid their hands upon his head, while
the crowd stood weeping round them. they would have stayed before the
gates, weeping and lamenting the livelong day to the going down of the
sun, had not priam spoken to them from the chariot and said, "make way
for the mules to pass you. afterwards when i have taken the body home
you shall have your fill of weeping."

on this the people stood asunder, and made a way for the
 
 ___________________________
 
 waggon. when
they had borne the body within the house they laid it upon a bed and
seated minstrels round it to lead the dirge, whereon the women joined
in the sad music of their lament. foremost among them all andromache
led their wailing as she clasped the head of mighty hector in her
embrace. "husband," she cried, "you have died young, and leave me in
your house a widow; he of whom we are the ill-starred parents is still
a mere child, and i fear he may not reach manhood. ere he can do so our
city will be razed and overthrown, for you who watched over it are no
more--you who were its saviour, the guardian of our wives and children.
our women will be carried away captives to the ships, and i among them;
while you, my child, who will be with me will be put to some unsee
 
 ___________________________
 
mly
tasks, working for a cruel master. or, may be, some achaean will hurl
you (o miserable death) from our walls, to avenge some brother, son, or
father whom hector slew; many of them have indeed bitten the dust at
his hands, for your father's hand in battle was no light one. therefore
do the people mourn him. you have left, o hector, sorrow unutterable to
your parents, and my own grief is greatest of all, for you did not
stretch forth your arms and embrace me as you lay dying, nor say to me
any words that might have lived with me in my tears night and day for
evermore."

bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her lament.
hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. "hector," she cried,
"dearest to me of all my children. so long as you were alive the gods
loved you well, and even in death they have not b
 
 ___________________________
 

of you; for when achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him
beyond the seas, to samos imbrus or rugged lemnos; and when he had
slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the
sepulchre of his comrade--though this could not give him life--yet here
you lie all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom apollo has slain with
his painless shafts."

thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then
helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "hector,"
said she, "dearest of all my brothers-in-law--for i am wife to
alexandrus who brought me hither to troy--would that i had died ere he
did so--twenty years are come and gone since i left my home and came
from over the sea, but i have never heard one word of insult or
unkindness from you. when another would chide with me, as it might be
one of your brothers or sisters or of your brothers' wives, or my
mother-in-law--for priam was as kind to me as though he were my own
father--you would rebuke a
 
 ___________________________
 
 gathered round her
joined in her lament. then king priam spoke to them saying, "bring
wood, o trojans, to the city, and fear no cunning ambush of the
argives, for achilles when he dismissed me from the ships gave me his
word that they should not attack us until the morning of the twelfth
day."

forthwith they yoked their oxen and mules and gathered together before
the city. nine days long did they bring in great heaps of wood, and on
the morning of the tenth day with many tears they took brave hector
forth, laid his dead body upon the summit of the pile, and set the fire
thereto. then when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared
on the eleventh day, the people again assembled, round the pyre of
mighty hector. when they were got together, they first quenched the
fire with wine wherever it was burning, and then his brothers and
comrades with many a bitter tear gathered his white bones, wrapped them
in soft robes of purple, and laid them in a golden urn, which they
placed in a grave
 
 ___________________________
 
 and covered over with large stones set close
together. then they built a barrow hurriedly over it keeping guard on
every side lest the achaeans should attack them before they had
finished. when they had heaped up the barrow they went back again into
the city, and being well assembled they held high feast in the house of
priam their king.

thus, then, did they celebrate the funeral of hector tamer of horses.
