rreach and you shall not persuade me.
are you to keep your own prize, while i sit tamely under my loss and
give up the girl at your bidding? let the achaeans find me a prize in
fair exchange to my liking, or i will come and take your own, or that
of ajax or of ulysses; and he to whomsoever i may come shall rue my
coming. but of this we will take thought hereafter; for the present,
let us draw a ship into the sea, and find a crew for her expressly; let
us put a hecatomb on board, and let us send chryseis also; further, let
some chief man among us be in command, either ajax, or idomeneus, or
yourself, son of peleus, mighty warrior that you are, that we may offer
sacrifice and appease the anger of the god."

achilles scowled at him and answered, "you are steeped in insolence and
lust of gain. with what heart can any of the achaeans do your bidding,
either on foray or in open fighting? i came not warring here for any
ill the trojans had done me. i have no quarrel with them. they have not
raided my
 
 ___________________________
 
u."

and agamemnon answered, "fly if you will, i shall make you no prayers
to stay you. i have others here who will do me honour, and above all
jove, the lord of counsel. there is no king here so hateful to me as
you are, for you are ever quarrelsome and ill-affected. what though you
be brave? was it not heaven that made you so? go home, then, with your
ships and comrades to lord it over the myrmidons. i care neither for
you nor for your anger; and thus will i do: since phoebus apollo is
taking chryseis from me, i shall send her with my ship and my
followers, but i shall come to your tent and take your own prize
briseis, that you may learn how much stronger i am than you are, and
that another may fear to set himself up as equal or comparable with me."

the son of peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast
was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill
the son of atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger. while he
was thus in two minds, and was d
 
 ___________________________
 
l, for
those that take were those also that gave. but of all else that is at
my ship you shall carry away nothing by force. try, that others may
see; if you do, my spear shall be reddened with your blood."

when they had quarrelled thus angrily, they rose, and broke up the
assembly at the ships of the achaeans. the son of peleus went back to
his tents and ships with the son of menoetius and his company, while
agamemnon drew a vessel into the water and chose a crew of twenty
oarsmen. he escorted chryseis on board and sent moreover a hecatomb for
the god. and ulysses went as captain.

these, then, went on board and sailed their ways over the sea. but the
son of atreus bade the people purify themselves; so they purified
themselves and cast their filth into the sea. then they offered
hecatombs of bulls and goats without blemish on the sea-shore, and the
smoke with the savour of their sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven.

thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. but agamemnon did
not
 
 ___________________________
 
ose as it were a grey mist out of the waves, sat down
before him as he stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said,
"my son, why are you weeping? what is it that grieves you? keep it not
from me, but tell me, that we may know it together."

achilles drew a deep sigh and said, "you know it; why tell you what you
know well already? we went to thebe the strong city of eetion, sacked
it, and brought hither the spoil. the sons of the achaeans shared it
duly among themselves, and chose lovely chryseis as the meed of
agamemnon; but chryses, priest of apollo, came to the ships of the
achaeans to free his daughter, and brought with him a great ransom:
moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of apollo, wreathed with a
suppliant's wreath, and he besought the achaeans, but most of all the
two sons of atreus who were their chiefs.

"on this the rest of the achaeans with one voice were for respecting
the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so agamemnon,
who spoke fiercely to him a
 
 ___________________________
 


on this she left him, still furious at the loss of her that had been
taken from him. meanwhile ulysses reached chryse with the hecatomb.
when they had come inside the harbour they furled the sails and laid
them in the ship's hold; they slackened the forestays, lowered the mast
into its place, and rowed the ship to the place where they would have
her lie; there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast the
hawsers. they then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb
for apollo; chryseis also left the ship, and ulysses led her to the
altar to deliver her into the hands of her father. "chryses," said he,
"king agamemnon has sent me to bring you back your child, and to offer
sacrifice to apollo on behalf of the danaans, that we may propitiate
the god, who has now brought sorrow upon the argives."

so saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly,
and they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the
god. they washed their hands and took up the