the iliad of homer


book i

  the quarrel between agamemnon and achilles--achilles withdraws
  from the war, and sends his mother thetis to ask jove to help
  the trojans--scene between jove and juno on olympus.

sing, o goddess, the anger of achilles son of peleus, that brought
countless ills upon the achaeans. many a brave soul did it send
hurrying down to hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and
vultures, for so were the counsels of jove fulfilled from the day on
which the son of atreus, king of men, and great achilles, first fell
out with one another.

and which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? it was the
son of jove and leto; for he was angry with the king and sent a
pestilence upon the host to plague the pe
 
 ___________________________
 
 his bow and his quiver upon his
shoulder, and the arrows rattled on his back with the rage that
trembled within him. he sat himself down away from the ships with a
face as dark as night, and his silver bow rang death as he shot his
arrow in the midst of them. first he smote their mules and their
hounds, but presently he aimed his shafts at the people themselves, and
all day long the pyres of the dead were burning.

for nine whole days he shot his arrows among the people, but upon the
tenth day achilles called them in assembly--moved thereto by juno, who
saw the achaeans in their death-throes and had compassion upon them.
then, when they were got together, he rose and spoke among them.

"son of atreus," said he, "i deem that we should now turn roving home
if we would escape destruction, for we are being cut down by war and
pestilence at once. let us ask some priest or prophet, or some reader
of dreams (for dreams, too, are of jove) who can tell us why phoebus
apollo is so angry, and say whethe
 
 ___________________________
 
hat we have
broken, or hecatomb that we have not offered, and whether he will
accept the savour of lambs and goats without blemish, so as to take
away the plague from us."

with these words he sat down, and calchas son of thestor, wisest of
augurs, who knew things past present and to come, rose to speak. he it
was who had guided the achaeans with their fleet to ilius, through the
prophesyings with which phoebus apollo had inspired him. with all
sincerity and goodwill he addressed them thus:--

"achilles, loved of heaven, you bid me tell you about the anger of king
apollo, i will therefore do so; but consider first and swear that you
will stand by me heartily in word and deed, for i know that i shall
offend one who rules the argives with might, to whom all the achaeans
are in subjection. a plain man cannot stand against the anger of a
king, who if he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge
till he has wreaked it. consider, therefore, whether or no you will
protect me."

and achilles
 
 ___________________________
 
e a ransom for this girl, the daughter of chryses. i have
set my heart on keeping her in my own house, for i love her better even
than my own wife clytemnestra, whose peer she is alike in form and
feature, in understanding and accomplishments. still i will give her up
if i must, for i would have the people live, not die; but you must find
me a prize instead, or i alone among the argives shall be without one.
this is not well; for you behold, all of you, that my prize is to go
elsewhither."

and achilles answered, "most noble son of atreus, covetous beyond all
mankind, how shall the achaeans find you another prize? we have no
common store from which to take one. those we took from the cities have
been awarded; we cannot disallow the awards that have been made
already. give this girl, therefore, to the god, and if ever jove grants
us to sack the city of troy we will requite you three and fourfold."

then agamemnon said, "achilles, valiant though you be, you shall not
thus outwit me. you shall no
 
 ___________________________
 
come and take your own, or that
of ajax or of ulysses; and he to whomsoever i may come shall rue my
coming. but of this we will take thought hereafter; for the present,
let us draw a ship into the sea, and find a crew for her expressly; let
us put a hecatomb on board, and let us send chryseis also; further, let
some chief man among us be in command, either ajax, or idomeneus, or
yourself, son of peleus, mighty warrior that you are, that we may offer
sacrifice and appease the anger of the god."

achilles scowled at him and answered, "you are steeped in insolence and
lust of gain. with what heart can any of the achaeans do your bidding,
either on foray or in open fighting? i came not warring here for any
ill the trojans had done me. i have no quarrel with them. they have not
raided my cattle nor my horses, nor cut down my harvests on the rich
plains of phthia; for between me and them there is a great space, both
mountain and sounding sea. we have followed you, sir insolence! for
your pleasure, n
 
 ___________________________
 
 with me."

the son of peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast
was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill
the son of atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger. while he
was thus in two minds, and was drawing his mighty sword from its
scabbard, minerva came down from heaven (for juno had sent her in the
love she bore to them both), and seized the son of peleus by his yellow
hair, visible to him alone, for of the others no man could see her.
achilles turned in amaze, and by the fire that flashed from her eyes at
once knew that she was minerva. "why are you here," said he, "daughter
of aegis-bearing jove? to see the pride of agamemnon, son of atreus?
let me tell you--and it shall surely be--he shall pay for this
insolence with his life."

and minerva said, "i come from heaven, if you will hear me, to bid you
stay your anger. juno has sent me, who cares for both of you alike.
cease, then, this brawling, and do not draw your sword; rail at him
 
 ___________________________
 
 if
you will, and your railing will not be vain, for i tell you--and it
shall surely be--that you shall hereafter receive gifts three times as
splendid by reason of this present insult. hold, therefore, and obey."

"goddess," answered achilles, "however angry a man may be, he must do
as you two command him. this will be best, for the gods ever hear the
prayers of him who has obeyed them."

he stayed his hand on the silver hilt of his sword, and thrust it back
into the scabbard as minerva bade him. then she went back to olympus
among the other gods, and to the house of aegis-bearing jove.

but the son of peleus again began railing at the son of atreus, for he
was still in a rage. "wine-bibber," he cried, "with the face of a dog
and th
 
 ___________________________
 
ou are king over
a feeble folk; otherwise, son of atreus, henceforward you would insult
no man. therefore i say, and swear it with a great oath--nay, by this
my sceptre which shalt sprout neither leaf nor shoot, nor bud anew from
the day on which it left its parent stem upon the mountains--for the
axe stripped it of leaf and bark, and now the sons of the achaeans bear
it as judges and guardians of the decrees of heaven--so surely and
solemnly do i swear that hereafter they shall look fondly for achilles
and shall not find him. in the day of your distress, when your men fall
dying by the murderous hand of hector, you shall not know how to help
them, and shall rend your heart with rage for the hour when you offered
insult to the bravest of the achaeans."

with this the son of peleus dashed his gold-bestudded sceptre on the
ground and took his seat, while the son of atreus was beginning
fiercely from his place upon the other side. then uprose smooth-tongued
nestor, the facile speaker of the pylia
 
 ___________________________
 
ey, and when they fought the
fiercest tribes of mountain savages they utterly overthrew them. i came
from distant pylos, and went about among them, for they would have me
come, and i fought as it was in me to do. not a man now living could
withstand them, but they heard my words, and were persuaded by them. so
be it also with yourselves, for this is the more excellent way.
therefore, agamemnon, though you be strong, take not this girl away,
for the sons of the achaeans have already given her to achilles; and
you, achilles, strive not further with the king, for no man who by the
grace of jove wields a sceptre has like honour with agamemnon. you are
strong, and have a goddess for your mother; but agamemnon is stronger
than you, for he has more people under him. son of atreus, check your
anger, i implore you; end this quarrel with achilles, who in the day of
battle is a tower of strength to the achaeans."

and agamemnon answered, "sir, all that you have said is true, but this
fellow must needs be
 
 ___________________________
 
come our lord and master: he must be lord of all,
king of all, and captain of all, and this shall hardly be. granted that
the gods have made him a great warrior, have they also given him the
right to speak with railing?"

achilles interrupted him. "i should be a mean coward," he cried, "were
i to give in to you in all things. order other people about, not me,
for i shall obey no longer. furthermore i say--and lay my saying to
your heart--i shall fight neither you nor any man about this girl, for
those that take were those also that gave. but of all else that is at
my ship you shall carry away nothing by force. try, that others may
see; if you do, my spear shall be reddened with your blood."

when they had quarrelled thus
 
 ___________________________
 
mb for
the god. and ulysses went as captain.

these, then, went on board and sailed their ways over the sea. but the
son of atreus bade the people purify themselves; so they purified
themselves and cast their filth into the sea. then they offered
hecatombs of bulls and goats without blemish on the sea-shore, and the
smoke with the savour of their sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven.

thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. but agamemnon did
not forget the threat that he had made achilles, and called his trusty
messengers and squires talthybius and eurybates. "go," said he, "to the
tent of achilles, son of peleus; take briseis by the hand and bring her
hither; if he will not give her i shall come with others and take
her--which will press him harder."

he charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the myrmidons. they found achilles sitting by his tent and
his ships, and ill-
 
 ___________________________
 
by mortal
men, and by the fierceness of agamemnon's anger, that if ever again
there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they shall seek and
they shall not find. agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to
look before and after that the achaeans may fight by their ships in
safety."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. he brought briseis
from the tent and gave her over to the heralds, who took her with them
to the ships of the achaeans--and the woman was loth to go. then
achilles went all alone by the side of the hoar sea, weeping and
looking out upon the boundless waste of waters. he raised his hands in
prayer to his immortal mother, "mother," he cried, "you bore me doomed
to live but for a little season; surely jove, who thunders from
olympus, might have made that little glorious. it is not so. agamemnon,
son of atreus, has done me dishonour, and has robbed me of my prize by
force."

as he spoke he wept aloud, and his mother heard him where she was
sitting in the dept
 
 ___________________________
 
hs of the sea hard by the old man her father.
forthwith she rose as it were a grey mist out of the waves, sat down
before him as he stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said,
"my son, why are you weeping? what is it that grieves you? keep it not
from me, but tell me, that we may know it together."

achilles drew a deep sigh and said, "you know it; why tell you what you
know well already? we went to thebe the strong city of eetion, sacked
it, and brought hither the spoil. the sons of the achaeans shared it
duly among themselves, and chose lovely chryseis as the meed of
agamemnon; but chryses, priest of apollo, came to the ships of the
achaeans to free his daughter, and brought with him a great ransom:
moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of apollo, wreathed with a
suppliant's wreath, and he bes
 
 ___________________________
 
 dawn, appeared they again set sail for
the host of the achaeans. apollo sent them a fair wind, so they raised
their mast and hoisted their white sails aloft. as the sail bellied
with the wind the ship flew through the deep blue water, and the foam
hissed against her bows as she sped onward. when they reached the
wide-stretching host of the achaeans, they drew the vessel ashore, high
and dry upon the sands, set her strong props beneath her, and went
their ways to their own tents and ships.

but achilles abode at his ships and nursed his anger. he went not to
the honourable assembly, and sallied not forth to fight, but gnawed at
his own heart, pining for battle and the war-cry.

now after twelve days the immortal gods came back in a body to olympus,
and jove led the way. thetis was not unmindful of the charge her son
had laid upon her, so she rose from under the sea and went through
great heaven with early morning to olympus, where she found the mighty
son of saturn sitting all alone upon its t
 
 ___________________________
 
or man, who will be told sooner, but when i mean to keep a
matter to myself, you must not pry nor ask questions."

"dread son of saturn," answered juno, "what are you talking about? i?
pry and ask questions? never. i let you have your own way in
everything. still, i have a strong misgiving that the old merman's
daughter thetis has been talking you over, for she was with you and had
hold of your knees this self-same morning. i believe, therefore, that
you have been promising her to give glory to achilles, and to kill much
people at the ships of the achaeans."

"wife," said jove, "i can do nothing but you suspect me and find it
out. you will take nothing by it, for i shall only dislike you the
more, and it will go harder with you. granted that it is as you say; i
mean to have it so; sit down and hold your tongue as i bid you for if i
once begin to lay my hands about you, though all heaven were on your
side it would profit you nothing."

on this juno was frightened, so she curbed her stubborn wil
 
 ___________________________
 
thunder, hied him to the bed in which he always slept;
and when he had got on to it he went to sleep, with juno of the golden
throne by his side.



book ii

  jove sends a lying dream to agamemnon, who thereon calls the
  chiefs in assembly, and proposes to sound the mind of his
  army--in the end they march to fight--catalogue of the
  achaean and trojan forces.

now the other gods and the armed warriors on the plain slept soundly,
but jove was wakeful, for he was thinking how to do honour to achilles,
and destroyed much people at the ships of the achaeans. in the end he
deemed it would be best to send a lying dream to king agamemnon; so he
called one to him and said to it, "lying dream, go to the ships of the
achaeans, into the tent of agamemnon, and say to him word for word as i
now bid you. tell him to get the achaeans instantly under arms, for he
shall take troy. there are no longer divided counsels among the gods;
juno has brought them to her own mind, and woe betides the trojans."

the
 
 ___________________________
 
 and kept to their own several places, but
thersites still went on wagging his unbridled tongue--a man of many
words, and those unseemly; a monger of sedition, a railer against all
who were in authority, who cared not what he said, so that he might set
the achaeans in a laugh. he was the ugliest man of all those that came
before troy--bandy-legged, lame of one foot, with his two shoulders
rounded and hunched over his chest. his head ran up to a point, but
there was little hair on the top of it. achilles and ulysses hated him
worst of all, for it was with them that he was most wont to wrangle;
now, however, with a shrill squeaky voice he began heaping his abuse on
agamemnon. the achaeans were angry and disgusted, yet none the less he
kept on brawling and bawling at the son of atreus.

"agamemnon," he cried, "what ails you now, and what more do you want?
your tents are filled with bronze and with fair women, for whenever we
take a town we give you the pick of them. would you have yet more gold,

 
 ___________________________
 
which some trojan is to give you as a ransom for his son, when i or
another achaean has taken him prisoner? or is it some young girl to
hide and lie with? it is not well that you, the ruler of the achaeans,
should bring them into such misery. weakling cowards, women rather than
men, let us sail home, and leave this fellow here at troy to stew in
his own meeds of honour, and discover whether we were of any service to
him or no. achilles is a much better man than he is, and see how he has
treated him--robbing him of his prize and keeping it himself. achilles
takes it meekly and shows no fight; if he did, son of atreus, you would
never again insult him."

thus railed thersites, but ulysses at once went up to him and rebuked
him sternly. "check your glib tongue, thersites," said be, "and babble
not a word further. chide not with princes when you have none to back
you. there is no viler creature come before troy with the sons of
a
 
 ___________________________
 
against the
other. thus you shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of
heaven or the cowardice of man that you shall fail to take the town."

and agamemnon answered, "nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the
achaeans in counsel. would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that i
had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of king priam
would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. but the
son of saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife. achilles
and i are quarrelling about this girl, in which matter i was the first
to offend; if we can be of one mind again, the trojans will not stave
off destruction for a day. now, therefore, get your morning meal, that
our hosts join in fight. whet well your spears; see well to the
ordering of your shields; give good feeds to your horses, and look your
chariots carefully over, that we may do battle the livelong day; for we
shall have no rest, not for a moment, till night falls to part us. the
bands th
 
 ___________________________
 
of no substance, and had but a small
following.

and those that held nisyrus, crapathus, and casus, with cos, the city
of eurypylus, and the calydnian islands, these were commanded by
pheidippus and antiphus, two sons of king thessalus the son of
hercules. and with them there came thirty ships.

those again who held pelasgic argos, alos, alope, and trachis; and
those of phthia and hellas the land of fair women, who were called
myrmidons, hellenes, and achaeans; these had fifty ships, over which
achilles was in command. but they now took no part in the war, inasmuch
as there was no one to marshal them; for achilles stayed by his ships,
furious about the loss of the girl briseis, whom he had taken from
lyrnessus at his own great peril, when he had sacked lyrnessus and
thebe, and had overthrown mynes and epistrophus, sons of king evenor,
son of selepus. for her sake achilles was still grieving, but ere long
he was again to join them.

and those that held phylace and the flowery meadows of pyrasus
 
 ___________________________
 
princes of the danaans. who, then, o muse, was
the foremost, whether man or horse, among those that followed after the
sons of atreus?

of the horses, those of the son of pheres were by far the finest. they
were driven by eumelus, and were as fleet as birds. they were of the
same age and colour, and perfectly matched in height. apollo, of the
silver bow, had bred them in perea--both of them mares, and terrible as
mars in battle. of the men, ajax, son of telamon, was much the foremost
so long as achilles' anger lasted, for achilles excelled him greatly
and he had also better horses; but achilles was now holding aloof at
his ships by reason of his quarrel with agamemnon, and his people
passed their time upon the sea shore, throwing discs or aiming with
spears at a mark, and in archery. their horses stood each by his own
chariot, champing lotus and wild celery. the chariots were housed under
cover, but their owners, for lack of leadership, wandered hither and
thither about the host and went not f
 
 ___________________________
 
lake. these led the meonians, who dwelt under mt.
tmolus.

nastes led the carians, men of a strange speech. these held miletus and
the wooded mountain of phthires, with the water of the river maeander
and the lofty crests of mt. mycale. these were commanded by nastes and
amphimachus, the brave sons of nomion. he came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to
save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant
of aeacus, and achilles bore away his gold.

sarpedon and glaucus led the lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the xanthus.



book iii

  alexandria, also called paris, challenges menelaus--helen and
  priam view the achaeans from the wall--the covenant--paris
  and menelaus fight, and paris is worsted--venus carries him
  off to save him--scene between him and helen.

when the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that sc
 
 ___________________________
 
s, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. hector, and they that were in
front, then gave round while the argives raised a shout and drew off
the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. but apollo looked
down from pergamus and called aloud to the trojans, for he was
displeased. "trojans," he cried, "rush on the foe, and do not let
yourselves be thus beaten by the argives. their skins are not stone nor
iron that when hit them you do them no harm. moreover, achilles, the
son of lovely thetis, is not fighting, but is nursing his anger at the
ships."

thus spoke the mighty god, crying to them from the city, while jove's
redoubtable daughter, the trito-born, went about among the host of the
achaeans, and urged them forward whenever she beheld them slackening.

then fate fell upon diores, son of amarynceus, for he was struck by a
jagged stone near the ancle of his right leg. he that hurled it was
peirous, son of imbrasus, captain of the thracians, who had come
 
 ___________________________
 
p for
them to eat; the two goddesses then went on, flying like turtledoves in
their eagerness to help the argives. when they came to the part where
the bravest and most in number were gathered about mighty diomed,
fighting like lions or wild boars of great strength and endurance,
there juno stood still and raised a shout like that of brazen-voiced
stentor, whose cry was as loud as that of fifty men together.
"argives," she cried; "shame on cowardly creatures, brave in semblance
only; as long as achilles was fighting, if his spear was so deadly that
the trojans dared not show themselves outside the dardanian gates, but
now they sally far from the city and fight even at your ships."

with these words she put heart and soul into them all, while minerva
sprang to the side of the son of tydeus, whom she found near his
chariot and horses, cooling the wound that pandarus had given him. for
the sweat caused by the hand that bore the weight of his shield
irritated the hurt: his arm was weary with pain,
 
 ___________________________
 
r lay
the largest, fairest robe she has in her house--the one she sets most
store by; let her, moreover, promise to sacrifice twelve yearling
heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the temple of the
goddess, if she will take pity on the town, with the wives and little
ones of the trojans, and keep the son of tydeus from falling on the
goodly city of ilius; for he fights with fury and fills men's souls
with panic. i hold him mightiest of them all; we did not fear even
their great champion achilles, son of a goddess though he be, as we do
this man: his rage is beyond all bounds, and there is none can vie with
him in prowess."

hector did as his brother bade him. he sprang from his chariot, and
went about everywhere among the host, brandishing his spears, urging
the men on to fight, and raising the dread cry of battle. thereon they
rallied and again faced the achaeans, who gave ground and ceased their
murderous onset, for they deemed that some one of the immortals had
come down from starry
 
 ___________________________
 
the boy, but he did not speak, and andromache
stood by him weeping and taking his hand in her own. "dear husband,"
said she, "your valour will bring you to destruction; think on your
infant son, and on my hapless self who ere long shall be your
widow--for the achaeans will set upon you in a body and kill you. it
would be better for me, should i lose you, to lie dead and buried, for
i shall have nothing left to comfort me when you are gone, save only
sorrow. i have neither father nor mother now. achilles slew my father
when he sacked thebe the goodly city of the cilicians. he slew him, but
did not for very shame despoil him; when he had burned him in his
wondrous armour, he raised a barrow over his ashes and the mountain
nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing jove, planted a grove of elms about
his tomb. i had seven brothers in my father's house, but on the same
day they all went within the house of hades. achilles killed them as
they were with their sheep and cattle. my mother--her who had been
qu
 
 ___________________________
 
with these words he put on his armour; and then, o menelaus, your life
would have come to an end at the hands of hands of hector, for he was
far better the man, had not the princes of the achaeans sprung upon you
and checked you. king agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said,
"menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. be patient in spite of
passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself
as hector son of priam, who is feared by many another as well as you.
even achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from
meeting him in battle. sit down your own people, and the achaeans will
send some other champion to fight hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, i ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

with these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,
whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders.
then nestor rose and spoke, "of a truth," said he, "t
 
 ___________________________
 
ng his
shield in front of him like a wall--a shield of bronze with seven folds
of oxhide--the work of tychius, who lived in hyle and was by far the
best worker in leather. he had made it with the hides of seven full-fed
bulls, and over these he had set an eighth layer of bronze. holding
this shield before him, ajax son of telamon came close up to hector,
and menaced him saying, "hector, you shall now learn, man to man, what
kind of champions the danaans have among them even besides lion-hearted
achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. he now abides at the ships in
anger with agamemnon shepherd of his people, but there are many of us
who are well able to face you; therefore begin the fight."

and hector answered, "noble ajax, son of telamon, captain of the host,
treat me not as though i were some puny boy or woman that cannot fight.
i have been long used to the blood and butcheries of battle. i am quick
to turn my leathern shield either to right or left, for this i deem the
main thing in battle. i
 
 ___________________________
 
f jove
was with him. he would even have set fire to the ships and burned them,
had not queen juno put it into the mind of agamemnon, to bestir himself
and to encourage the achaeans. to this end he went round the ships and
tents carrying a great purple cloak, and took his stand by the huge
black hull of ulysses' ship, which was middlemost of all; it was from
this place that his voice would carry farthest, on the one hand towards
the tents of ajax son of telamon, and on the other towards those of
achilles--for these two heroes, well assured of their own strength, had
valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends of the line. from this
spot then, with a voice that could be heard afar, he shouted to the
danaans, saying, "argives, shame on you cowardly creatures, brave in
semblance only; where are now our vaunts that we should prove
victorious--the vaunts we made so vaingloriously in lemnos, when we ate
the flesh of horned cattle and filled our mixing-bowls to the brim? you
vowed that you would e
 
 ___________________________
 
ut by the labours
eurystheus had laid on him. he would weep till his cry came up to
heaven, and then jove would send me down to help him; if i had had the
sense to foresee all this, when eurystheus sent him to the house of
hades, to fetch the hell-hound from erebus, he would never have come
back alive out of the deep waters of the river styx. and now jove hates
me, while he lets thetis have her way because she kissed his knees and
took hold of his beard, when she was begging him to do honour to
achilles. i shall know what to do next time he begins calling me his
grey-eyed darling. get our horses ready, while i go within the house of
aegis-bearing jove and put on my armour; we shall then find out whether
priam's son hector will be glad to meet us in the highways of battle,
or whether the trojans will glut hounds and vultures with the fat of
their flesh as they be dead by the ships of the achaeans."

thus did she speak and white-armed juno, daughter of great saturn,
obeyed her words; she set abo
 
 ___________________________
 
e nor jutting headland but it stands out in the
ineffable radiance that breaks from the serene of heaven; the stars can
all of them be told and the heart of the shepherd is glad--even thus
shone the watchfires of the trojans before ilius midway between the
ships and the river xanthus. a thousand camp-fires gleamed upon the
plain, and in the glow of each there sat fifty men, while the horses,
champing oats and corn beside their chariots, waited till dawn should
come.



book ix

  the embassy to achilles.

thus did the trojans watch. but panic, comrade of blood-stained rout,
had taken fast hold of the achaeans, and their princes were all of them
in despair. as when the two winds that blow from thrace--the north and
the northwest--spring up of a sudden and rouse the fury of the main--in
a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter their sea-wrack
in all directions--even thus troubled were the hearts of the achaeans.

the son of atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a
cou
 
 ___________________________
 
e king over much people.
jove, moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the sceptre and to uphold
righteousness, that you may take thought for your people under you;
therefore it behooves you above all others both to speak and to give
ear, and to out the counsel of another who shall have been minded to
speak wisely. all turns on you and on your commands, therefore i will
say what i think will be best. no man will be of a truer mind than that
which has been mine from the hour when you, sir, angered achilles by
taking the girl briseis from his tent against my judgment. i urged you
not to do so, but you yielded to your own pride, and dishonoured a hero
whom heaven itself had honoured--for you still hold the prize that had
been awarded to him. now, however, let us think how we may appease him,
both with presents and fair speeches that may conciliate him."

and king agamemnon answered, "sir, you have reproved my folly justly. i
was wrong. i own it. one whom heaven befriends is in himself a host,
and j
 
 ___________________________
 
a god, and be obedient to his comfortable
ordinances. all this will i do if he will now forgo his anger. let him
then yield; it is only hades who is utterly ruthless and
unyielding--and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to
mankind. moreover i am older and more royal than himself. therefore,
let him now obey me."

then nestor answered, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon. the gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send
chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of achilles son of peleus
without delay. let those go whom i shall name. let phoenix, dear to
jove, lead the way; let ajax and ulysses follow, and let the heralds
odius and eurybates go with them. now bring water for our hands, and
bid all keep silence while we pray to jove the son of saturn, if so be
that he may have mercy upon us."

thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and hand
 
 ___________________________
 
 much as he was minded, the envoys set out from
the tent of agamemnon son of atreus; and nestor, looking first to one
and then to another, but most especially at ulysses, was instant with
them that they should prevail with the noble son of peleus.

they went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed
earnestly to earth-encircling neptune that the high spirit of the son
of aeacus might incline favourably towards them. when they reached the
ships and tents of the myrmidons, they found achilles playing on a
lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. it
was part of the spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city of
eetion, and he was now diverting himself with it and singing the feats
of heroes. he was alone with patroclus, who sat opposite to him and
said nothing, waiting till he should cease singing. ulysses and ajax
now came in--ulysses leading the way--and stood before him. achilles
sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his hand, and patroclus,
 
 ___________________________
 

when he saw the strangers, rose also. achilles then greeted them
saying, "all hail and welcome--you must come upon some great matter,
you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the achaeans."

with this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats covered with
purple rugs; then he said to patroclus who was close by him, "son of
menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water with the
wine, and give every man his cup, for these are very dear friends, who
are now under my roof."

patroclus did as his comrade bade him;
 
 ___________________________
 
 he set the chopping-block in
front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the loin also
of a goat, and the chine of a fat hog. automedon held the meat while
achilles chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and put them on spits
while the son of menoetius made the fire burn high. when the flame had
died down, he spread the embers, laid the spits on top of them, lifting
them up and setting them upon the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them
with salt. when the meat was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed
bread round the table in fair baskets, while achilles dealt them their
portions. then achilles took his seat facing ulysses against the
opposite wall, and b
 
 ___________________________
 
ade his comrade patroclus offer sacrifice to the
gods; so he cast the offerings into the fire, and they laid their hands
upon the good things that were before them. as soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink, ajax made a sign to phoenix, and when he saw
this, ulysses filled his cup with wine and pledged achilles.

"hail," said he, "achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer, neither
in the tent of agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat
and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. sir, we are in
the face of great disaster, and without your help know not whether we
shall save our fleet or lose it. the trojans and their allies have
camped hard by our ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires
throughout their host and deem that nothing can now prevent them from
falling on our fleet. jove, moreover, has 
 
 ___________________________
 
, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. all this
will he do if you will now forgo your anger. moreover, though you hate
both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the rest of the
achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they will honour you
as a god, and you will earn great glory at their hands. you might even
kill hector; he will come within your reach, for he is infatuated, and
declares that not a danaan whom the ships have brought can hold his own
against him."

achilles answered, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, i should give you
formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no
more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. him do i
hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides
another in his heart; therefore i will say what i mean. i will be
appeased neither by agamemnon son of atreus nor by any other of the
danaans, for i see that i have no thanks for all my fighting. he that
fights fares no better than he th
 
 ___________________________
 
nt them; tell them to find some other plan for the saving of their
ships and people, for so long as my displeasure lasts the one that they
have now hit upon may not be. as for phoenix, let him sleep here that
he may sail with me in the morning if he so will. but i will not take
him by force."

they all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which he had
denied them, till presently the old knight phoenix in his great fear
for the ships of the achaeans, burst into tears and said, "noble
achilles, if you are now minded to return, and in the fierceness of
your anger will do nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my son,
can i remain here without you? your father peleus bade me go with you
when he sent you as a mere lad from phthia to agamemnon. you knew
nothing neither of war nor of the arts whereby men make their mark in
council, and he sent me with you to train you in all excellence of
speech and action. therefore, my son, i will not stay here without
you--no, not though heaven i
 
 ___________________________
 
ough the closed doors of my room, and climbed the wall of the
outer court after passing quickly and unperceived through the men on
guard and the women servants. i then fled through hellas till i came to
fertile phthia, mother of sheep, and to king peleus, who made me
welcome and treated me as a father treats an only son who will be heir
to all his wealth. he made me rich and set me over much people,
establishing me on the borders of phthia where i was chief ruler over
the dolopians.

"it was i, achilles, who had the making of you; i loved you with all my
heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you had gone out
elsewhere, till i had first set you upon my knees, cut up the dainty
morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup to your lips. many a
time have you slobbered your wine in baby helplessness over my shirt; i
had infinite trouble with you, but i knew that heaven had vouchsafed me
no offspring of my own, and i made a son of you, achilles, that in my
hour of need you might pr
 
 ___________________________
 
, being fierce and fleet of foot, leaves them far
behind him, and ever baneful to mankind outstrips them even to the ends
of the world; but nevertheless the prayers come hobbling and healing
after. if a man has pity upon these daughters of jove when they draw
near him, they will bless him and hear him too when he is praying; but
if he deny them and will not listen to them, they go to jove the son of
saturn and pray that he may presently fall into sin--to his ruing
bitterly hereafter. therefore, achilles, give these daughters of jove
due reverence, and bow before them as all good men will bow. were not
the son of atreus offering you gifts and promising others later--if he
were still furious and implacable--i am not he that would bid you throw
off your anger and help the achaeans, no matter how great their need;
but he is giving much now, and more hereafter; he has sent his captains
to urge his suit, and has chosen those who of all the argives are most
acceptable to you; make not then their word
 
 ___________________________
 
he city of the
aetolians; but they now gave him nothing of those rich rewards that
they had offered earlier, and though he saved the city he took nothing
by it. be not then, my son, thus minded; let not heaven lure you into
any such course. when the ships are burning it will be a harder matter
to save them. take the gifts, and go, for the achaeans will then honour
you as a god; whereas if you fight without taking them, you may beat
the battle back, but you will not be held in like honour."

and achilles answered, "phoenix, old friend and father, i have no need
of such honour. i have honour from jove himself, which will abide with
me at my ships while i have breath in my body, and my limbs are strong.
i say further--and lay my saying to your heart--vex me no more with
this weeping and lamentation, all in the cause of the son of atreus.
love him so well, and you may lose the love i bear you. you ought to
help me rather in troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as i
am, and share like h
 
 ___________________________
 
yself; the others shall take my answer;
stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we
will consider whether to remain or go."

on this he nodded quietly to patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare
a bed for phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. ajax
son of telamon then said, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, let us be
gone, for i see that our journey is vain. we must now take our answer,
unwelcome though it be, to the danaans who are waiting to receive it.
achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for
the love his comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. he
is implacable--and yet if a man's brother or son has been slain he will
accept a fine by way of amends from him that killed him, and the
wrong-doer having paid in full remains in peace among his own people;
but as for you, achilles, the gods have put a wicked unforgiving spirit
in your heart, and this, all about one single girl, whereas we now
offer you the seven
 
 ___________________________
 
 best we have, and much else into the bargain. be
then of a more gracious mind, respect the hospitality of your own roof.
we are with you as messengers from the host of the danaans, and would
fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the achaeans."

"ajax," replied achilles, "noble son of telamon, you have spoken much
to my liking, but my blood boils when i think it all over, and remember
how the son of atreus treated me with contumely as though i were some
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the argives. go, then, and
deliver your message; say that i will have no concern with fighting
till hector, son of noble priam, reaches the tents of the myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. for all his
lust of battle, i take it he will 
 
 ___________________________
 
be held in check when he is at my own
tent and ship."

on this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, ulysses leading the way. but patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for
phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of
fine linen. the old man then laid himself down and waited till morning
came. but achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter
of phorbas lovely diomede, whom he had carried off from lesbos.
patroclus lay on the other side of the room, and with him fair iphis
whom achilles had given him when he took scyros the city of enyeus.

when the envoys reached the tents of the son of atreus, the achaeans
rose, pledged them in cups of gold, and began to question them. king
agamemnon was the first to do so. "tell me, ulysses," said he, "will he
save the ships from burning, or did
 
 ___________________________
 
 he refuse, and is he still furious?"

ulysses answered, "most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon,
achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely angry than ever, and
spurns both you and your gifts. he bids you take counsel with the
achaeans to save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself, he
said that at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water. he said
further that he should advise every one to sail home likewise, for that
you will not reach the goal of ilius. 'jove,' he said, 'has laid his
hand over the city to protect it, and the people have taken heart.'
this is what he sai
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and the others who were with me can tell you the
same story--ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be
trusted. the old man phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so
achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the morning
if he so would; but he will not take him by force."

they all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected,
by reason of the sternness with which achilles had refused them, till
presently diomed said, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the son of peleus nor offered him
gifts. he is proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged him in his
pride still further. let him stay or go as he will. he will fight later
when he is in the humour, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. now,
therefore, let us all do as i say; we have eaten and drunk our fill,
let us then take our rest, for in rest there is both stre
 
 ___________________________
 
unsel; my heart
beats as though it would leap out of my body, and my limbs fail me. if
then you can do anything--for you too cannot sleep--let us go the round
of the watch, and see whether they are drowsy with toil and sleeping to
the neglect of their duty. the enemy is encamped hard and we know not
but he may attack us by night."

nestor replied, "most noble son of atreus, king of men, agamemnon, jove
will not do all for hector that hector thinks he will; he will have
troubles yet in plenty if achilles will lay aside his anger. i will go
with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of tydeus, or
ulysses, or fleet ajax and the valiant son of phyleus. some one had
also better go and call ajax and king idomeneus, for their ships are
not near at hand but the farthest of all. i cannot however refrain from
blaming menelaus, much as i love him and respect him--and i will say so
plainly, even at the risk of offending you--for sleeping and leaving
all this trouble to yourself. he ought to be goi
 
 ___________________________
 
dizened chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the
flying night, get close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships
are still guarded as heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten
them, the achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are
neglecting to keep their watches."

ulysses smiled at him and answered, "you had indeed set your heart upon
a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of aeacus are hardly
to be kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than achilles
himself, whose mother was an immortal. but tell me, and tell me true,
where did you leave hector when you started? where lies his armour and
his horses? how, too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the
trojans ordered? what are their plans? will they stay here by the ships
and away from the city, or now that they have worsted the achaeans,
will they retire within their walls?"

and dolon answered, "i will tell you truly all. hector and the other
councillors are now holding conference by the
 
 ___________________________
 
selves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to minerva.



book xi

  in the forenoon the fight is equal, but agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by diomed--paris wounds
  diomed--ulysses, nestor, and idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--machaon is wounded--nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--this
  is the beginning of evil for patroclus--nestor makes a long
  speech.

and now as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, jove sent fierce discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the achaeans. she took her
stand by the huge black hull of ulysses' ship which was middlemost of
all, so that her voice might carry farthest on e
 
 ___________________________
 
ither side, on the one
hand towards the tents of ajax son of telamon, and on the other towards
those of achilles--for these two heroes, well-assured of their own
strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends of the
line. there she took her stand, and raised a cry both loud and shrill
that filled the achaeans with courage, giving them heart to fight
resolutely and with all their might, so that they had rather stay there
and do battle than go home in their ships.

the son of atreus shouted aloud and bade the argives gird themselves
for battle while he put on his armour. first he girded his g
 
 ___________________________
 
orehead with his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against
the weapon, which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were
battered in and he was killed in full fight.

agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their
breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. he then went on to kill
isus and antiphus two sons of priam, the one a bastard, the other born
in wedlock; they were in the same chariot--the bastard driving, while
noble antiphus fought beside him. achilles had once taken both of them
prisoners in the glades of ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as
they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now,
however, agamemnon son of atreus smote isus in the chest above the
nipple with his spear, while he struck antiphus hard by the ear and
threw him from his chariot. forthwith he stripped their goodly armour
from off them and recognized them, for he had already seen them at
ships when achilles brought them in from ida. as a lion fastens
 
 ___________________________
 
escue of great ajax son of telamon."

even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near,
and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their
shoulders so as to give him cover. ajax then made towards them, and
turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the mares
of neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing nestor out of the
fight, and with him machaon shepherd of his people. achilles saw and
took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the
hard stress and struggle of the fight. he called from the ship to his
comrade patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking like
mars himself--here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently
befell him. "why," said he, "achilles, do you call me? what do you want
with me?" and achilles answered, "noble son of menoetius, man after my
own heart, i take it that i shall now have the achaeans praying at m
 
 ___________________________
 
t by me at full speed."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running
by the ships and tents of the achaeans.

when nestor and machaon had reached the tents of the son of neleus,
they dismounted, and an esquire, eurymedon, took the horses from the
chariot. the pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the
sweat from their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside and
took their seats. fair hecamede, whom nestor had had awarded to him
from tenedos when achilles took it, mixed them a mess; she was daughter
of wise arsinous, and the achaeans had given her to nestor because he
excelled all of them in counsel. first she set for them a fair and
well-made table that had feet of cyanus; on it there was a vessel of
bronze and an onion to give relish to the drink, with honey and cakes
of barley-meal. there was also a cup of rare workmanship which the old
man had brought with him from home, studded with bosses of gold; it had
four handles, on each of which ther
 
 ___________________________
 
ment patroclus appeared at the door.

when the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand, led
him into the tent, and bade him take his place among them; but
patroclus stood where he was and said, "noble sir, i may not stay, you
cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me is not one to be trifled
with, and he bade me ask who the wounded man was whom you were bearing
away from the field. i can now see for myself that he is machaon,
shepherd of his people. i must go back and tell achilles. you, sir,
know what a terrible man he is, and how ready to blame even where no
blame should lie."

and nestor answered, "why should achilles care to know how many of the
achaeans may be wounded? he recks not of the dismay that reigns in our
host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave diomed, son of
tydeus, is wounded; so are ulysses and agamemnon; eurypylus has been
hit with an arrow in the thigh, and i have just been bringing this man
from the field--he too wounded with an arrow. ne
 
 ___________________________
 
vertheless, achilles,
so valiant though he be, cares not and knows no ruth. will he wait till
the ships, do what we may, are in a blaze, and we perish one upon the
other? as for me, i have no strength nor stay in me any longer; would
that i were still young and strong as in the days when there was a
fight between us and the men of elis about some cattle-raiding. i then
killed itymoneus, the valiant son of hypeirochus, a dweller in elis, as
i was driving in the spoil; he was hit by a dart thrown by my hand
while fig
 
 ___________________________
 
t victory, for we chased them far over the plain, killing
the men and bringing in their armour, till we had brought our horses to
buprasium, rich in wheat, and to the olenian rock, with the hill that
is called alision, at which point minerva turned the people back. there
i slew the last man and left him; then the achaeans drove their horses
back from buprasium to pylos and gave thanks to jove among the gods,
and among mortal men to nestor.

"such was i among my peers, as surely as ever was, but achilles is for
keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue it hereafter
when the host is being cut to pieces. my good friend, did not menoetius
charge you thus, on the day when he sent you from phthia to agamemnon?
ulysses and i were in the house, inside, and heard all that he said to
you; for we came to the fair house of peleus while beating up recruits
throughout all achaea, and when we got there we found menoetius and
yourself, and achilles with you. the old knight peleus was in the out
 
 ___________________________
 
er
court, roasting the fat thigh-bones of a heifer to jove the lord of
thunder; and he held a gold chalice in his hand from which he poured
drink-offerings of wine over the burning sacrifice. you two were busy
cutting up the heifer, and at that moment we stood at the gates,
whereon achilles sprang to his feet, led us by the hand into the house,
placed us at table, and set before us such hospitable entertainment as
guests expect. when we had satisfied ourselves with meat and drink, i
said my say and urged both of you to join us. you were ready enough to
do so, and the two old men charged you much and straitly. old peleus
bade his son achilles fight ever among the foremost and outvie his
peers, while menoetius the son of actor spoke thus to you: 'my son,'
said he, 'achilles is of no
 
 ___________________________
 
bler birth than you are, but you are older
than he, though he is far the better man of the two. counsel him
wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will follow you to his own
profit.' thus did your father charge you, but you have forgotten;
nevertheless, even now, say all this to achilles if he will listen to
you. who knows but with heaven's help you may talk him over, for it is
good to take a friend's advice. if, however, he is fearful about some
oracle, or if his mother has told him something from jove, then let him
send you, and let the rest of the myrmidons follow with you, if
perchance you may bring light and saving to the danaans. and let him
send you into battle clad in his own armour, that the trojans may
mistake you for him and leave off fighting; the sons of the achaea
 
 ___________________________
 
ns
may thus have time to get their breath, for they are hard pressed and
there is little breathing time in battle. you, who are fresh, might
easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls and away from the tents
and ships."

with these words he moved the heart of patroclus, who set off running
by the line of the ships to achilles, descendant of aeacus. when he had
got as far as the ships of ulysses, where was their place of assembly
and court of justice, with their altars dedicated to the gods,
eurypylus son of euaemon, met him, wounded in the thigh with an arrow,
and limping out of the fight. sweat rained from his head and shoulders,
and black blood welled from his cruel wound, but his mind did not
wander. the son of menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon him
and spoke piteously saying, "o unhappy princes and co
 
 ___________________________
 
ll they fall
now before his spear?"

wounded eurypylus made answer, "noble patroclus, there is no hope left
for the achaeans but they will perish at their ships. all they that
were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the hands of
the trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. but save me and take
me to your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash the black blood
from off it with warm water, and lay upon it those gracious herbs
which, so they say, have been shown you by achilles, who was himself
shown them by chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs. for of the
physicians podalirius and machaon, i hear that the one is lying wounded
in his tent and is himself in need of healing, while the other is
fighting the trojans upon the plain."

"hero eurypylus," replied the brave son of menoetius, "how may these
things be? what can i do? i am on my way to bear a message to noble
achilles from nestor of gerene, bulwark of the achaeans, but even so i
will not be unmindful of you
 
 ___________________________
 
the hurt of eurypylus within
the tent, but the argives and trojans still fought desperately, nor
were the trench and the high wall above it, to keep the trojans in
check longer. they had built it to protect their ships, and had dug the
trench all round it that it might safeguard both the ships and the rich
spoils which they had taken, but they had not offered hecatombs to the
gods. it had been built without the consent of the immortals, and
therefore it did not last. so long as hector lived and achilles nursed
his anger, and so long as the city of priam remained untaken, the great
wall of the achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of the trojans
were no more, and many also of the argives, though some were yet left
alive--when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth year, and the
argives had gone back with their ships to their own country--then
neptune and apollo took counsel to destroy the wall, and they turned on
to it the streams of all the rivers from mount ida into the sea,
rhesus, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 two
ajaxes and teucer, who is the finest archer of all the achaeans, and is
good also in a hand-to-hand fight. these will give hector son of priam
enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish their
indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of saturn fling a
firebrand upon them with his own hand. great ajax son of telamon will
yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of ceres, if
bronze and great stones can overthrow him. he would not yield even to
achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is none
to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing, that we may
know forthwith whether we are to give glory to some other, or he to us."

meriones, peer of fleet mars, then led the way till they came to the
part of the host which idomeneus had named.

now when the trojans saw idomeneus coming on like a flame of fire, him
and his squire clad in their richly wrought armour, they shouted and
made towards him all in a body, and a f
 
 ___________________________
 
ield bristled with the long and deadly spears which they bore.
dazzling was the sheen of their gleaming helmets, their fresh-burnished
breastplates, and glittering shields as they joined battle with one
another. iron indeed must be his courage who could take pleasure in the
sight of such a turmoil, and look on it without being dismayed.

thus did the two mighty sons of saturn devise evil for mortal heroes.
jove was minded to give victory to the trojans and to hector, so as to
do honour to fleet achilles, nevertheless he did not mean to utterly
overthrow the achaean host before ilius, and only wanted to glorify
thetis and her valiant son. neptune on the other hand went about among
the argives to incite them, having come up from the grey sea in secret,
for he was grieved at seeing them vanquished by the trojans, and was
furiously angry with jove. both were of the same race and country, but
jove was elder born and knew more, therefore neptune feared to defend
the argives openly, but in the likene
 
 ___________________________
 
oming out to survey the fight, being in
great anxiety, and when old nestor met them they were filled with
dismay. then king agamemnon said to him, "nestor son of neleus, honour
to the achaean name, why have you left the battle to come hither? i
fear that what dread hector said will come true, when he vaunted among
the trojans saying that he would not return to ilius till he had fired
our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it is all coming
true. alas! others of the achaeans, like achilles, are in such anger with
me that they refuse to fight by the sterns of our ships."

then nestor knight of gerene, answered, "it is indeed as you say; it is
all coming true at this moment, and even jove who thunders from on high
cannot prevent it. fallen is the wall on which we relied as an
impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet. the trojans are fighting
stubbornly and without ceasing at the ships; look where you may you
cannot see from what quarter the rout of the achaeans is coming; they
 
 ___________________________
 
 out of
the battle and beyond the range of the spears lest we get fresh wounds
in addition to what we have already, but we can spur on others, who
have been indulging their spleen and holding aloof from battle
hitherto."

thus did he speak; whereon they did even as he had said and set out,
king agamemnon leading the way.

meanwhile neptune had kept no blind look-out, and came up to them in
the semblance of an old man. he took agamemnon's right hand in his own
and said, "son of atreus, i take it achilles is glad now that he sees
the achaeans routed and slain, for he is utterly without remorse--may
he come to a bad end and heaven confound him. as for yourself, the
blessed gods are not yet so bitterly angry with you but that the
princes and counsellors of the trojans shall again raise the dust upon
the plain, and you shall see them flying from the ships and tents
towards their city."

with this he raised a mighty cry of battle, and sped forward to the
plain. the voice that came from his deep ches
 
 ___________________________
 
t be only for a short time while jove is
still sleeping. i have sent him into a sweet slumber, and juno has
beguiled him into going to bed with her."

sleep now departed and went his ways to and fro among mankind, leaving
neptune more eager than ever to help the danaans. he darted forward
among the first ranks and shouted saying, "argives, shall we let hector
son of priam have the triumph of taking our ships and covering himself
with glory? this is what he says that he shall now do, seeing that
achilles is still in dudgeon at his ship; we shall get on very well
without him if we keep each other in heart and stand by one another.
now, therefore, let us all do as i say. let us each take the best and
largest shield we can lay hold of, put on our helmets, and sally forth
with our longest spears in our hands; i will lead you on, and hector
son of priam, rage as he may, will not dare to hold out against us. if
any good staunch soldier has only a small shield, let him hand it over
to a worse man, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 come round to your and my way of thinking. if,
then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the
rank and file of the gods, and tell iris and apollo lord of the bow,
that i want them--iris, that she may go to the achaean host and tell
neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and apollo, that he may send
hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of achilles son of peleus. achilles will
then send his comrade patroclus into battle, and hector will kill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my
own noble son sarpedon. achilles will kill hector to avenge patroclus,
and from that time i will bring it about that the achaeans shall
persistently drive the trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of
minerva and take ilius. but i will not stay my anger, nor permit any
god to help the danaans till i have accomplished the des
 
 ___________________________
 
entertaining him with his conversation
and spreading herbs over his wound to ease his pain. when, however, he
saw the trojans swarming through the breach in the wall, while the
achaeans were clamouring and struck with panic, he cried aloud, and
smote his two thighs with the flat of his hands. "eurypylus," said he
in his dismay, "i know you want me badly, but i cannot stay with you
any longer, for there is hard fighting going on; a servant shall take
care of you now, for i must make all speed to achilles, and induce him
to fight if i can; who knows but with heaven's help i may persuade him.
a man does well to listen to the advice of a friend."

when he had thus spoken he went his way. the achaeans stood firm and
resisted the attack of the trojans, yet though these were fewer in
number, they could not drive them back from the ships, neither could
the trojans break the achaean ranks and make their way in among the
tents and ships. as a carpenter's line gives a true edge to a piece of
ship's timbe
 
 ___________________________
 
sea behind us, and far from our own
country. our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our hands and in
hard fighting."

as he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and when any
trojan made towards the ships with fire at hector's bidding, he would
be on the look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear.
twelve men did he thus kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships.



book xvi

  fire being now thrown on the ship of protesilaus, patroclus
  fights in the armour of achilles--he drives the trojans back,
  but is in the end killed by euphorbus and hector.

thus did they fight about the ship of protesilaus. then patroclus drew
near to achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from some spring
whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high precipice. when
achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said, "why,
patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes
running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried--she catc
 
 ___________________________
 
e
myrmidons or to myself? or have you had news from phthia which you
alone know? they tell me menoetius son of actor is still alive, as also
peleus son of aeacus, among the myrmidons--men whose loss we two should
bitterly deplore; or are you grieving about the argives and the way in
which they are being killed at the ships, through their own high-handed
doings? do not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may
know about it."

then, o knight patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "achilles, son
of peleus, foremost champion of the achaeans, do not be angry, but i
weep for the disaster that has now befallen the argives. all those who
have been their champions so far are lying at the ships, wounded by
sword or spear. brave diomed son of tydeus has been hit with a spear,
while famed ulysses and agamemnon have received sword-wounds; eurypylus
again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries
are attending to these heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are
you 
 
 ___________________________
 
still, o achilles, so inexorable? may it never be my lot to nurse
such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good name.
who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the
argives from ruin? you know no pity; knight peleus was not your father
nor thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore you and the sheer cliffs
begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you. if however you are kept
back through knowledge of some oracle, or if your mother thetis has
told you something from the mouth o
 
 ___________________________
 
f jove, at least send me and the
myrmidons with me, if i may bring deliverance to the danaans. let me
moreover wear your armour; the trojans may thus mistake me for you and
quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the achaeans may have
breathing time--which while they are fighting may hardly be. we who are
fresh might soon drive tired men back from our ships and tents to their
own city."

he knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own
destruction. achilles was deeply moved and answered, "what, noble
patroclus, are you saying? i know no prophesyings which i am heeding,
nor has my mother told me anything from the mouth of jove, but i am cut
to the very heart that one of my own rank should dare to rob me because
he is more powerful than i am. this, after all that i have gone
through, is more than i can endure. the girl whom the sons of the
achaeans chose for me, whom i won as the fruit of my spear on having
sacked a city--her has king agamemnon take
 
 ___________________________
 
he point was fastened on to the shaft of the
spear. ajax, therefore, had now nothing but a headless spear, while the
bronze point flew some way off and came ringing down on to the ground.
ajax knew the hand of heaven in this, and was dismayed at seeing that
jove had now left him utterly defenceless and was willing victory for
the trojans. therefore he drew back, and the trojans flung fire upon
the ship which was at once wrapped in flame.

the fire was now flaring about the ship's stern, whereon achilles smote
his two thighs and said to patroclus, "up, noble knight, for i see the
glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they destroy our ships,
and there be no way by which we may retreat. gird on your armour at
once while i call our people together."

as he spoke patroclus put on his armour. first he greaved his legs with
greaves of good make, and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver; after
this he donned the cuirass of the son of aeacus, richly inlaid and
studded. he hung his silver-studded s
 
 ___________________________
 
word of bronze about his
shoulders, and then his mighty shield. on his comely head he set his
helmet, well wrought, with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it. he grasped two redoubtable spears that suited his hands, but
he did not take the spear of noble achilles, so stout and strong, for
none other of the achaeans could wield it, though achilles could do so
easily. this was the ashen spear from mount pelion, which chiron had
cut upon a mountain top and had given to peleus, wherewith to deal out
death among heroes. he bade automedon yoke his horses with all speed,
for he was the man whom he held in honour next after achilles, and on
whose support in battle he could rely most firmly. automedon therefore
yoked the fleet horses xanthus and balius, steeds that could fly like
the wind: these were they whom the harpy podarge bore to the west 
 
 ___________________________
 
wind,
as she was grazing in a meadow by the waters of the river oceanus. in
the side traces he set the noble horse pedasus, whom achilles had
brought away with him when he sacked the city of eetion, and who,
mortal steed though he was, could take his place along with those that
were immortal.

meanwhile achilles went about everywhere among the tents, and bade his
myrmidons put on their armour. even as fierce ravening wolves that are
feasting upon a homed stag which they have killed upon the mountains,
and their jaws are red with blood--they go in a pack to lap water from
the clear spring with their long thin tongues; and they reek of blood
and slaughter; they know not what fear is, for it is hunger drives
them--even so did the leaders and counsellors of the myrmidons gather
round the good squire of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 fleet descendant of aeacus, and among them
stood achilles himself cheering on both men and horses.

fifty ships had noble achilles brought to troy, and in each there was a
crew of fifty oarsmen. over these he set five captains whom he could
trust, while he was himself commander over them all. menesthius of the
gleaming corslet, son to the river spercheius that streams from heaven,
was captain of the first company. fair polydora daughter of peleus bore
him to ever-flowing spercheius--a woman mated with a god--but he was
called son of borus son of perieres, with whom his mother was living as
his wedded wife, and who gave gre
 
 ___________________________
 
noble
son eudorus, singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. when
ilithuia goddess of the pains of child-birth brought him to the light
of day, and he saw the face of the sun, mighty echecles son of actor
took the mother to wife, and gave great wealth to gain her, but her
father phylas brought the child up, and took care of him, doting as
fondly upon him as though he were his own son. the third company was
led by pisander son of maemalus, the finest spearman among all the
myrmidons next to achilles' own comrade patroclus. the old knight
phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and alcimedon, noble son of
laerceus of the fifth.

when achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, "myrmidons, remember your
threats against the trojans while you were at the ships in the time of
my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'cruel son of peleus,'
you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless
are you. you k
 
 ___________________________
 
 the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high house
which is to give shelter from the winds--even so closely were the
helmets and bossed shields set against one another. shield pressed on
shield, helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the
horse-hair plumes on the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each
other as they bent their heads.

in front of them all two men put on their armour--patroclus and
automedon--two men, with but one mind to lead the myrmidons. then
achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest
which silver-footed thetis had given him to take on board ship, and
which she had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good
thick rugs. in this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which
no man but himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to
any other god save only to father jove. he took the cup from the chest
and cleansed it with sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and
after he had wash
 
 ___________________________
 
e turmoil
of war. afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of battle
from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armour and
his comrades, fighters in close combat."

thus did he pray, and all-counselling jove heard his prayer. part of it
he did indeed vouchsafe him--but not the whole. he granted that
patroclus should thrust back war and battle from the ships, but refused
to let him come safely out of the fight.

when he had made his drink-offering and had thus prayed, achilles went
inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest.

then he again came out, for he still loved to look upon the fierce
fight that raged between the trojans and achaeans.

meanwhile the armed band that was about patroclus marched on till they
sprang high in hope upon the trojans. they came swarming out like wasps
whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly children love to tease,
whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung--or again, if a
wayfarer going along the road vexe
 
 ___________________________
 
s them by accident, every wasp will
come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones--even with such
rage and courage did the myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their
cry of battle rose heavenwards. patroclus called out to his men at the
top of his voice, "myrmidons, followers of achilles son of peleus, be
men my friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory
for the son of peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the
argives--he, and his close fighting followers. the son of atreus king
agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the
bravest of the achaeans."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell in
a body upon the trojans. the ships rang again with the cry which the
achaeans raised, and when the trojans 
 
 ___________________________
 
 came together, and jove shed
a thick darkness over the fight, to increase the toil of the battle
over the body of his son.

at first the trojans made some headway against the achaeans, for one of
the best men among the myrmidons was killed, epeigeus, son of noble
agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with peleus and thetis, who sent him to ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the trojans under achilles. hector now struck him on the head
with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains
inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost
upon the body of sarpedon, and there died. patroclus was enraged by the
death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. even so swiftly,
o noble knight patroclus, did you make straight for the lycians and
trojans to avenge your comrade. forthwith h
 
 ___________________________
 
ils in spring when they are
brimming with milk--even so did they gather round sarpedon; nor did
jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept
looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill
patroclus, and considering whether hector should be allowed to end him
now in the fight round the body of sarpedon, and strip him of his
armour, or whether he should let him give yet further trouble to the
trojans. in the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire of
achilles son of peleus should drive hector and the trojans back towards
the city and take the lives of many. first, therefore, he made hector
turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and fled, bidding the
other trojans fly also, for he saw that the scales of jove had turned
against him. neither would the brave lycians stand firm; they were
dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap
of corpses--for when the son of saturn made the fight wax hot many had
fallen above h
 
 ___________________________
 
flew in all directions, had not phoebus apollo
taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the
trojans. thrice did patroclus charge at an angle of the high wall, and
thrice did apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his own
immortal hands. when patroclus was coming on like a god for yet a
fourth time, apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "draw
back, noble patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of the
trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of achilles who is a far
better man than you are." on hearing this, patroclus withdrew to some
distance and avoided the anger of apollo.

meanwhile hector was waiting with his horses inside the scaean gates,
in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call the
army inside the gates. as he was thus doubting phoebus apollo drew near
him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior asius, who was
hector's uncle, being own brother to hecuba, and son of dymas who lived
in phrygia by the waters
 
 ___________________________
 
e him as he moved about in the crush, for he was
enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his
back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his
eyes turned dizzy. phoebus apollo beat the helmet from off his head,
and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where its horse-hair
plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. never indeed had that
helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect the head and
comely forehead of the godlike hero achilles. now, however, zeus
delivered it over to be worn by hector. nevertheless the end of hector
also was near. the bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was
broken in the hand of patroclus, while his shield that covered him from
head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and
apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.

on this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as
one dazed; whereon euphorbus son of panthous a dardanian, the best
spearman of his 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the brave son of menoetius who had killed so many,
striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him the while.
"patroclus," said he, "you deemed that you should sack our city, rob
our trojan women of their freedom, and carry them off in your ships to
your own country. fool; hector and his fleet horses were ever straining
their utmost to defend them. i am foremost of all the trojan warriors
to stave the day of bondage from off them; as for you, vultures shall
devour you here. poor wretch, achilles with all his bravery availed you
nothing; and yet i ween when you left him he charged you straitly
saying, 'come not back to the ships, knight patroclus, till you have
rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous hector about his body.' thus i
ween did he charge you, and your fool's heart answered him 'yea' within
you."

then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, o knight patroclus:
"hector, vaunt as you will, for jove the son of saturn and apollo have
vouchsafed you victory; it is they who 
 
 ___________________________
 
have vanquished me so easily,
and they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had twenty
such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my
spear. fate and the son of leto have overpowered me, and among mortal
men euphorbus; you are yourself third only in the killing of me. i say
further, and lay my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a
little season; death and the day of your doom are close upon you, and
they will lay you low by the hand of achilles son of aeacus."

when he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left
his body and flitted down to the house of hades, mourning its sad fate
and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. dead though
he was, hector still spoke to him saying, "patroclus, why should you
thus foretell my doom? who knows but achilles, son of lovely thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?"

as he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body
 
 ___________________________
 
 and will not come close to him, for they are pale with
fear--even so no one had the courage to face valiant menelaus. the son
of atreus would have then carried off the armour of the son of panthous
with ease, had not phoebus apollo been angry, and in the guise of
mentes chief of the cicons incited hector to attack him. "hector," said
he, "you are now going after the horses of the noble son of aeacus, but
you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven by
mortal man, save only by achilles, who is son to an immortal mother.
meanwhile menelaus son of atreus has bestridden the body of patroclus
and killed the noblest of the trojans, euphorbus son of panthous, so
that he can fight no more."

the god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of
hector was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the ranks
and saw euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still flowing from
his wound, and menelaus stripping him of his armour. on this he made
his way to the front
 
 ___________________________
 
me. still if
for my honour's sake i fight hector and the trojans single-handed, they
will prove too many for me, for hector is bringing them up in force.
why, however, should i thus hesitate? when a man fights in despite of
heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue it. let no
danaan think ill of me if i give place to hector, for the hand of
heaven is with him. yet, if i could find ajax, the two of us would
fight hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of
patroclus for achilles son of peleus. this, of many evils would be the
least."

while he was thus in two minds, the trojans came up to him with hector
at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off--even so did menelaus son of atreus turn and leave the body
of patroclus. when among the body of his men, he looked around for
mighty ajax son of tela
 
 ___________________________
 
mon, and presently saw him on the extreme left
of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep on
fighting, for phoebus apollo had spread a great panic among them. he
ran up to him and said, "ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to
dead patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to achilles--as for
his armour, hector already has it."

these words stirred the heart of ajax, and he made his way among the
front ranks, menelaus going with him. hector had stripped patroclus of
his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the
body to fling before the dogs of troy. but ajax came up with his shield
like wall before him, on which hector withdrew under shelter of his
men, and sprang on to his chariot, giving the armour over to the
trojans to take to the city, as a grea
 
 ___________________________
 
atches victory from his grasp, while at another he will set him
on to fight. come hither then, my friend, stand by me and see indeed
whether i shall play the coward the whole day through as you say, or
whether i shall not stay some even of the boldest danaans from fighting
round the body of patroclus."

as he spoke he called loudly on the trojans saying, "trojans, lycians,
and dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and fight
might and main, while i put on the goodly armour of achilles, which i
took when i killed patroclus."

with this hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men who
were taking the armour of achilles to troy, but had not yet got far.
standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed his
armour. his own he sent to the strong city of ilius and to the trojans,
while he put on the immortal armour of the son of peleus, which the
gods had given to peleus, who in his age gave it to his son; but the
son did not grow old in his father's armour.

 
 ___________________________
 
ell stretched--even so did the two sides tug the
dead body hither and thither within the compass of but a little
space--the trojans steadfastly set on dragging it into ilius, while the
achaeans were no less so on taking it to their ships; and fierce was
the fight between them. not mars himself the lord of hosts, nor yet
minerva, even in their fullest fury could make light of such a battle.

such fearful turmoil of men and horses did jove on that day ordain
round the body of patroclus. meanwhile achilles did not know that he
had fallen, for the fight was under the wall of troy a long way off the
ships. he had no idea, therefore, that patroclus was dead, and deemed
that he would return alive as soon as he had gone close up to the
gates. he knew that he was not to sack the city neither with nor
without himself, for his mother had often told him this when he had sat
alone with her, and she had informed him of the counsels of great jove.
now, however, she had not told him how great a disaster had b
 
 ___________________________
 
ent her to encourage the
danaans. as when jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token to
mankind either of war or of the chill storms that stay men from their
labour and plague the flocks--even so, wrapped in such radiant raiment,
did minerva go in among the host and speak man by man to each. first
she took the form and voice of phoenix and spoke to menelaus son of
atreus, who was standing near her. "menelaus," said she, "it will be
shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of achilles
under the walls of troy. therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be
so also."

menelaus answered, "phoenix, my good old friend, may minerva vouchsafe
me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall i stand by
patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but hector is
as a raging fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for jove is now
granting him a time of triumph."

minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the other
gods. therefore she put streng
 
 ___________________________
 
their chariots are alike hidden in
darkness. o father jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the
achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we
perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight."

father jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. forthwith he
chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and all
the fighting was revealed. ajax then said to menelaus, "look, menelaus,
and if antilochus son of nestor be still living, send him at once to
tell achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his comrades has
fallen."

menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a
stockyard--the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep
watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of
their herd. in his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain,
for darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt
him for all his hunger, so in the morning he slinks sulkily away--even
so did menelaus sor
 
 ___________________________
 
stor still alive. presently menelaus saw him on the extreme left of
the battle cheering on his men and exhorting them to fight boldly.
menelaus went up to him and said, "antilochus, come here and listen to
sad news, which i would indeed were untrue. you must see with your own
eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the danaans, and giving
victory to the trojans. patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of
the achaeans, and sorely will the danaans miss him. run instantly to
the ships and tell achilles, that he may come to rescue the body and
bear it to the ships. as for the armour, hector already has it."

antilochus was struck with horror. for a long time he was speechless;
his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did
as menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his
armour to a comrade, laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round, close
beside him.

thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to
achilles son of peleus. n
 
 ___________________________
 
or were you, o menelaus, minded to succour his
harassed comrades, when antilochus had left the pylians--and greatly
did they miss him--but he sent them noble thrasymedes, and himself went
back to patroclus. he came running up to the two ajaxes and said, "i
have sent antilochus to the ships to tell achilles, but rage against
hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour.
what then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and
our own escape from death amid the battle-cries of the trojans?"

ajax answered, "menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and
meriones stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while
we two behind you keep off hector and the trojans, one in heart as in
name, and long used to fighting side by side with one another."

on 
 
 ___________________________
 
ring on towards them and foremost among them all was aeneas son
of anchises with valiant hector. as a flock of daws or starlings fall
to screaming and chattering when they see a falcon, foe to all small
birds, come soaring near them, even so did the achaean youth raise a
babel of cries as they fled before aeneas and hector, unmindful of
their former prowess. in the rout of the danaans much goodly armour
fell round about the trench, and of fighting there was no end.



book xviii

  the grief of achilles over patroclus--the visit of thetis
  to vulcan and the armour that he made for achilles.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the fleet
runner antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached achilles,
and found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that which was
indeed too surely true. "alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of
his heart, "why are the achaeans again scouring the plain and flocking
towards the ships? heaven grant the gods be not now bringin
 
 ___________________________
 
 own daring and yet i bade him return
to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing
fire against them, and not join battle with hector."

as he was thus pondering, the son of nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "alas," he cried, "son of noble
peleus, i bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue.
patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked body--for
hector holds his armour."

a dark cloud of grief fell upon achilles as he listened. he filled both
hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head,
disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refuse settle over his
shirt so fair and new. he flung himself down all huge and hugely at
full length, and tore his hair with his hands. the bondswomen whom
achilles and patroclus had taken captive screamed aloud for grief,
beating their breasts, and with their limbs failing them for sorrow.
antilochus bent over him the while, weeping and holding both hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s hands
as he lay groaning for he feared that he might plunge a knife into his
own throat. then achilles gave a loud cry and his mother heard him as
she was sitting in the depths of the sea by the old man her father,
whereon she screamed, and all the goddesses daughters of nereus that
dwelt at the bottom of the sea, came gathering round her. there were
glauce, thalia and cymodoce, nesaia, speo, thoe and dark-eyed halie,
cymothoe, actaea and limnorea, melite, iaera, amphithoe and agave, doto
and proto, pherusa and dynamene, dexamene, amphinome and callianeira,
doris, panope, and the famous sea-nymp
 
 ___________________________
 
eaviness,
and though i go to him i cannot help him. nevertheless i will go, that
i may see my dear son and learn what sorrow has befallen him though he
is still holding aloof from battle."

she left the cave as she spoke, while the others followed weeping
after, and the waves opened a path before them. when they reached the
rich plain of troy, they came up out of the sea in a long line on to
the sands, at the place where the ships of the myrmidons were drawn up
in close order round the tents of achilles. his mother went up to him
as he lay groaning; she laid her hand upon his head and spoke
piteously, saying, "my son, why are you thus weeping? what sorrow has
now befallen you? tell me; hide it not from me. surely jove has granted
you the prayer you made him, when you lifted up your hands and besought
him that the achaeans might all of them be pent up at their ships, and
rue it bitterly in that you were no longer with them."

achilles groaned and answered, "mother, olympian jove has indeed
vouc
 
 ___________________________
 
ou were still dwelling among the
immortal sea-nymphs, and that peleus had taken to himself some mortal
bride. for now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of
that son whom you can never welcome home--nay, i will not live nor go
about among mankind unless hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for
having slain patroclus son of menoetius."

thetis wept and answered, "then, my son, is your end near at hand--for
your own death awaits you full soon after that of hector."

then said achilles in his great grief, "i would die here and now, in
that i could not save my comrade. he has fallen far from home, and in
his hour of need my hand was not there to help him. what is there for
me? return to my own land i shall not, and i have brought no saving
neither to patroclus nor to my other comrades of whom so many have been
slain by mighty hector; i stay here by my ships a bootless burden upon
the earth, i, who in fight have no peer among the achaeans, though in
council there are better tha
 
 ___________________________
 
about whom this fearful
fight is now raging by the ships. men are killing one another, the
danaans in defence of the dead body, while the trojans are trying to
hale it away, and take it to windy ilius: hector is the most furious of
them all; he is for cutting the head from the body and fixing it on the
stakes of the wall. up, then, and bide here no longer; shrink from the
thought that patroclus may become meat for the dogs of troy. shame on
you, should his body suffer any kind of outrage."

and achilles said, "iris, which of the gods was it that sent you to me?"

iris answered, "it was juno the royal spouse of jove, but the son of
saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of the
immortals who dwell on the snowy summits of olympus."

then fleet achilles answered her saying, "how can i go up into the
battle? they have my armour. my mother forbade me to arm till i should
see her come, for she promised to bring me goodly armour from vulcan; i
know no man whose arms i can put on, sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ve only the shield of ajax son
of telamon, and he surely must be fighting in the front rank and
wielding his spear about the body of dead patroclus."

iris said, "we know that your armour has been taken, but go as you are;
go to the deep trench and show yourself before the trojans, that they
may fear you and cease fighting. thus will the fainting sons of the
achaeans gain some brief breathing-time, which in battle may hardly be."

iris left him when she had so spoken. but achilles dear to jove arose,
and minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong shoulders; she
crowned his head with a halo of golden cloud from which she kindled a
glow of gleaming fire. as the smoke that goes up into heaven from some
city that is being beleaguered on an island far out at sea--all day
long do men sally from the city and fight their hardest, and at the
going down of the sun the line of beacon-fires blazes forth, flaring
high for those that dwell near them to behold, if so be that th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey may
come with their ships and succour them--even so did the light flare
from the head of achilles, as he stood by the trench, going beyond the
wall--but he did not join the achaeans for he heeded the charge which
his mother laid upon him.

there did he stand and shout aloud. minerva also raised her voice from
afar, and spread terror unspeakable among the trojans. ringing as the
note of a trumpet that sounds alarm then the foe is at the gates of a
city, even so brazen was the voice of the son of aeacus, and when the
trojans heard its clarion tones they were dismayed; the horses turned
back w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith their chariots for they boded mischief, and their drivers
were awe-struck by the steady flame which the grey-eyed goddess had
kindled above the head of the great son of peleus.

thrice did achilles raise his loud cry as he stood by the trench, and
thrice were the trojans and their brave allies thrown into confusion;
whereon twelve of their noblest champions fell beneath the wheels of
their chariots and perished by their own spears. the achaeans to their
great joy then drew patroclus out of reach of the weapons, and laid him
on a litter: his comrades stood mourning round him, and among them
fleet achilles who wept bitterly as he saw his true comrade lying dead
upon his bier. he had sent hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m out with horses and chariots into
battle, but his return he was not to welcome.

then juno sent the busy sun, loth though he was, into the waters of
oceanus; so he set, and the achaeans had rest from the tug and turmoil
of war.

now the trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoked their
horses and gathered in assembly before preparing their supper. they
kept their feet, nor would any dare to sit down, for fear had fallen
upon them all because achilles had shown himself after having held
aloof so long from battle. polydamas son of panthous was first to
speak, a man of judgement, who alone among them could look both before
and after. he was comrade to hector, and they had been born upon the
same night; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed
them thus:--

"look to it well, my friends; i would urge you to go back now to your
city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from
our walls. so long as this man was
 
 ___________________________
 
 hem the achaeans in at their ships, prate no more in this fool's
wise among the people. you will have no man with you; it shall not be;
do all of you as i now say;--take your suppers in your companies
throughout the host, and keep your watches and be wakeful every man of
you. if any trojan is uneasy about his possessions, let him gather them
and give them out among the people. better let these, rather than the
achaeans, have them. at daybreak we will arm and fight about the ships;
granted that achilles has again come forward to defend them, let it be
as he will, but it shall go hard with him. i shall not shun him, but
will fight him, to fall or conquer. the god of war deals out like
measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain."

thus spoke hector; and the trojans, fools that they were, shouted in
applause, for pallas minerva had robbed them of their understanding.
they gave ear to hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words of
polydamas no man would heed. they took their supper throu
 
 ___________________________
 
ghout the
host, and meanwhile through the whole night the achaeans mourned
patroclus, and the son of peleus led them in their lament. he laid his
murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again and
again as a bearded lion when a man who was chasing deer has robbed him
of his young in some dense forest; when the lion comes back he is
furious, and searches dingle and dell to track the hunter if he can
find him, for he is mad with rage--even so with many a sigh did
achilles speak among the myrmidons saying, "alas! vain were the words
with which i cheered the hero menoetius in his own house; i said that i
would bring his brave son back again to opoeis after he had sacked
ilius and taken his share of the spoils--but jove does not give all men
their heart's desire. the same soil shall be reddened here at troy by
the blood of us both, for i too shall never be welcomed home by the old
knight peleus, nor by my mother thetis, but even in this place shall
the earth cover 
 
 ___________________________
 
me. nevertheless, o patroclus, now that i am left
behind you, i will not bury you, till i have brought hither the head
and armour of mighty hector who has slain you. twelve noble sons of
trojans will i behead before your bier to avenge you; till i have done
so you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women of troy and
dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we
sacked men's goodly cities, shall weep over you both night and day."

then achilles told his men to set a large tripod upon the fire that
they might wash the clotted gore from off patroclus. thereon they set a
tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire: they threw sticks on to
it to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played about
the belly of the tripod. when the water in the cauldron was boiling
they washed the body, anointed it with oil, and closed its wounds with
ointment that had been kept nine years. then they laid it on a bier and
covered it with a li
 
 ___________________________
 
nen cloth from head to foot, and over this they
laid a fair white robe. thus all night long did the myrmidons gather
round achilles to mourn patroclus.

then jove said to juno his sister-wife, "so, queen juno, you have
gained your end, and have roused fleet achilles. one would think that
the achaeans were of your own flesh and blood."

and juno answered, "dread son of saturn, why should you say this thing?
may not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than we do, do
what he can for another person? and shall not i--foremost of all
goddesses both by descent and as wife to you who reign in
heaven--devise evil for the trojans if i am angry with them?"

thus did they converse. meanwhile thetis came to the house of vulcan,
imperishable, star-bespangled, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ith his ships to ilius to fight
the trojans, but never shall i welcome him back to the house of peleus.
so long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun, he is in
heaviness, and though i go to him i cannot help him; king agamemnon has
made him give up the maiden whom the sons of the achaeans had awarded
him, and he wastes with sorrow for her sake. then the trojans hemmed
the achaeans in at their ships' sterns and would not let them come
forth; the elders, therefore, of the argives besought achilles and
offered him great treasure, whereon he refused to bring deliverance to
them himself, but put his own armour on patroclus and sent him into the
fight with much people after him. all day long they fought by the
scaean gates and would have taken the city there and then, had not
apollo vouchsafed glory to hector and slain the valiant son of
menoetius after he had done the trojans much evil. therefore i am
suppliant at your knees if haply you may be pleased to provide my son,
whose end is near a
 
 ___________________________
 
idst of them when the man struck up with his tune.

all round the outermost rim of the shield he set the mighty stream of
the river oceanus.

then when he had fashioned the shield so great and strong, he made a
breastplate also that shone brighter than fire. he made a helmet, close
fitting to the brow, and richly worked, with a golden plume overhanging
it; and he made greaves also of beaten tin.

lastly, when the famed lame god had made all the armour, he took it and
set it before the mother of achilles; whereon she darted like a falcon
from the snowy summits of olympus and bore away the gleaming armour
from the house of vulcan.



book xix

  achilles is reconciled with agamemnon, puts on the armour
  which vulcan had made him, and goes out to fight.

now when dawn in robe of saffron was hasting from the streams of
oceanus, to bring light to mortals and immortals, thetis reached the
ships with the armour that the god had given her. she found her son
fallen about the body of patroclus and weep
 
 ___________________________
 
ing bitterly. many also of
his followers were weeping round him, but when the goddess came among
them she clasped his hand in her own, saying, "my son, grieve as we may
we must let this man lie, for it is by heaven's will that he has
fallen; now, therefore, accept from vulcan this rich and goodly armour,
which no man has ever yet borne upon his shoulders."

as she spoke she set the armour before achilles, and it rang out
bravely as she did so. the myrmidons were struck with awe, and none
dared look full at it, for they were afraid; but achilles was roused to
still greater fury, and his eyes gleamed with a fierce light, for he
was glad when he handled the splendid present which the god had made
him. then, as soon as he had satisfied himself with looking at it, he
said to his mother, "mother, the god has given me armour, meet
handiwork for an immortal and such as no-one living could have
fashione
 
 ___________________________
 
im from the swarms of noisome
flies that prey on the bodies of men who have been killed in battle. he
may lie for a whole year, and his flesh shall still be as sound as
ever, or even sounder. call, therefore, the achaean heroes in assembly;
unsay your anger against agamemnon; arm at once, and fight with might
and main."

as she spoke she put strength and courage into his heart, and she then
dropped ambrosia and red nectar into the wounds of patroclus, that his
body might suffer no change.

then achilles went out upon the seashore, and with a loud cry called on
the achaean heroes. on this even those who as yet had stayed always at
the ships, the pilots and helmsmen, and even the stewards who were
about the ships and served out rations, all came to the place of
assembly because achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so
long from fighting. two sons of mars, ulysses and the son of tydeus,
came limping, for their wounds still pained them; nevertheless they
came, and took their seats in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the front row of the assembly. last of
all came agamemnon, king of men, he too wounded, for coon son of
antenor had struck him with a spear in battle.

when the achaeans were got together achilles rose and said, "son of
atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you and me,
when we two were in such high anger about briseis, surely it would have
been better, had diana's arrow slain her at the ships on the day when i
took her after having sacked lyrnessus. for so, many an achaean the
less would have bitten dust before the foe in the days of my anger. it
has been well for hector and the trojans, but the achaeans will long
indeed remember our quarrel. now, however, let it be, fo
 
 ___________________________
 
up to speak, and it is not seemly
to interrupt him, or it will go hard even with a practised speaker. who
can either hear or speak in an uproar? even the finest orator will be
disconcerted by it. i will expound to the son of peleus, and do you
other achaeans heed me and mark me well. often have the achaeans spoken
to me of this matter and upbraided me, but it was not i that did it:
jove, and fate, and erinys that walks in darkness struck me mad when we
were assembled on the day that i took from achilles the meed that had
been awarded to him. what could i do? all things are in the hand of
heaven, and folly, eldest of jove's daughters, shuts men's eyes to
their destruction. she walks delicately, not on the solid earth, but
hovers over the heads of men to make them stumble or to ensnare them.

"time was when she fooled jove himself, who they say is greatest
whether of gods or men; for juno, woman though she was, beguiled him on
the day when alcmena was to bring forth mighty hercules in the fair
c
 
 ___________________________
 
t their ships, and all the time i kept
thinking of folly who had so baned me. i was blind, and jove robbed me
of my reason; i will now make atonement, and will add much treasure by
way of amends. go, therefore, into battle, you and your people with
you. i will give you all that ulysses offered you yesterday in your
tents: or if it so please you, wait, though you would fain fight at
once, and my squires shall bring the gifts from my ship, that you may
see whether what i give you is enough."

and achilles answered, "son of atreus, king of men agamemnon, you can
give such gifts as you think proper, or you can withhold them: it is in
your own hands. let us now set battle in array; it is not well to tarry
talking about trifles, for there is a deed which is as yet to do.
achilles shall again be seen fighting among the foremost, and laying
low the ranks of the trojans: bear this in mind each one of you when he
is fighting."

then ulysses said, "achilles, godlike and brave, send not the achaeans
thus 
 
 ___________________________
 
ou in his tents with a feast of
reconciliation, that so you may have had your dues in full. as for you,
son of atreus, treat people more righteously in future; it is no
disgrace even to a king that he should make amends if he was wrong in
the first instance."

and king agamemnon answered, "son of laertes, your words please me
well, for throughout you have spoken wisely. i will swear as you would
have me do; i do so of my own free will, neither shall i take the name
of heaven in vain. let, then, achilles wait, though he would fain fight
at once, and do you others wait also, till the gifts come from my tent
and we ratify the oath with sacrifice. thus, then, do i charge you:
take some noble young achaeans with you, and bring from my tents the
gifts that i promised yesterday to achilles, and bring the women also;
furthermore let talthybius find me a boar from those that are with the
host, and make it ready for sacrifice to jove and to the sun."

then said achilles, "son of atreus, king of men agam
 
 ___________________________
 
hom hector
son of priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain? let the sons
of the achaeans, say i, fight fasting and without food, till we have
avenged them; afterwards at the going down of the sun let them eat
their fill. as for me, patroclus is lying dead in my tent, all hacked
and hewn, with his feet to the door, and his comrades are mourning
round him. therefore i can take thought of nothing save only slaughter
and blood and the rattle in the throat of the dying."

ulysses answered, "achilles, son of peleus, mightiest of all the
achaeans, in battle you are better than i, and that more than a little,
but in counsel i am much before you, for i am older and of greater
knowledge. therefore be patient under my words. fighting is a thing of
which men soon surfeit, and when jove, who is war's steward, weighs the
upshot, it may well prove that the straw which our sickles have reaped
is far heavier than the grain. it may not be that the achaeans should
mourn the dead with their bellies; day 
 
 ___________________________
 
also earth and sun and the erinyes who dwell below and take
vengeance on him who shall swear falsely, that i have laid no hand upon
the girl briseis, neither to take her to my bed nor otherwise, but that
she has remained in my tents inviolate. if i swear falsely may heaven
visit me with all the penalties which it metes out to those who perjure
themselves."

he cut the boar's throat as he spoke, whereon talthybius whirled it
round his head, and flung it into the wide sea to feed the fishes. then
achilles also rose and said to the argives, "father jove, of a truth
you blind men's eyes and bane them. the son of atreus had not else
stirred me to so fierce an anger, nor so stubbornly taken briseis from
me against my will. surely jove must have counselled the destruction of
many an argive. go, now, and take your food that we may begin fighting."

on this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
ship. the myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to the
ship of achille
 
 ___________________________
 
oclus,
flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck,
and her lovely face with both her hands. beautiful as a goddess she
wept and said, "patroclus, dearest friend, when i went hence i left you
living; i return, o prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows
multiply upon me one after the other. i saw him to whom my father and
mother married me, cut down before our city, and my three own dear
brothers perished with him on the self-same day; but you, patroclus,
even when achilles slew my husband and sacked the city of noble mynes,
told me that i was not to weep, for you said you would make achilles
marry me, and take me back with him to phthia, we should have a wedding
feast among the myrmidons. you were always kind to me and i shall never
cease to grieve for you."

she wept as she spoke, and the women joined in her lament-making as
though their tears were for patroclus, but in truth each was weeping
for her own sorrows. the elders of the achaeans gathered round achille
 
 ___________________________
 
y the ships all desolate for the loss of
his dear comrade, and though the others are gone to their dinner he
will neither eat nor drink. go then and drop nectar and ambrosia into
his breast, that he may know no hunger."

with these words he urged minerva, who was already of the same mind.
she darted down from heaven into the air like some falcon sailing on
his broad wings and screaming. meanwhile the achaeans were arming
throughout the host, and when minerva had dropped nectar and ambrosia
into achilles so that no cruel hunger should cause his limbs to fail
him, she went back to the house of her mighty father. thick as the
chill snow-flakes shed from the hand of jove and borne on the keen
blasts of the north wind, even so thick did the gleaming helmets, the
bossed shields, the strongly plated breastplates, and the ashen spears
stream from the ships. the sheen pierced the sky, the whole land was
radiant with their flashing armour, and the sound of the tramp of their
treading rose from under the
 
 ___________________________
 
ir feet. in the midst of them all achilles
put on his armour; he gnashed his teeth, his eyes gleamed like fire,
for his grief was greater than he could bear. thus, then, full of fury
against the trojans, did he don the gift of the god, the armour that
vulcan had made him.

first he put on the goodly greaves fitted with ancle-clasps, and next
he did on the breastplate about his chest. he slung the silver-studded
sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then took up the shield so
great and strong that shone afar with a splendour as of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 moon. as
the light seen by sailors from out at sea, when men have lit a fire in
their homestead high up among the mountains, but the sailors are
carried out to sea by wind and storm far from the haven where they
would be--even so did the gleam of achilles' wondrous shield strike up
into the heavens. he lifted the redoubtable helmet, and set it upon his
head, from whence it shone like a star, and the golden plumes which
vulcan had set thick about the ridge of the helmet, waved all around
it. then achilles made trial of himself in his armour to see whether it
fitted him, so that his limbs could play freely under it, and it seemed
to buoy him up as though it had been wings.

he also drew his father's spear out of the spear-stand, a spear so
great a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd heavy and strong that none of the achaeans save only achilles
had strength to wield it; this was the spear of pelian ash from the
topmost ridges of mt. pelion, which chiron had once given to peleus,
fraught with the death of heroes. automedon and alcimus busied
themselves with the harnessing of his horses; they made the bands fast
about them, and put the bit in their mouths, drawing the reins back
towards the chariot. automedon, whip in hand, sprang up behind the
horses, and after him achilles mounted in full armour, resplendent as
the sun-god hyperion. then with a loud voice he chided with his
father's horses saying, "xanthus and balius, famed offspring of
podarge--this time when we have done fighting be sure and bring your
driver safely back to the host of the achaeans, and do not leave him
dead on the plain as you did patroclus."

then fleet xanthus answered under the yoke--for white-armed juno had
endowed him with human speech--and he bowed his head till his mane
touched the grou
 
 ___________________________
 
nd as it hung down from under the yoke-band. "dread
achilles," said he, "we will indeed save you now, but the day of your
death is near, and the blame will not be ours, for it will be heaven
and stern fate that will destroy you. neither was it through any sloth
or slackness on our part that the trojans stripped patroclus of his
armour; it was the mighty god whom lovely leto bore that slew him as he
fought among the foremost, and vouchsafed a triumph to hector. we two
can fly as swiftly as zephyrus who they say is fleetest of all winds;
nevertheless it is
 
 ___________________________
 
 your doom to fall by the hand of a man and of a god."

when he had thus said the erinyes stayed his speech, and achilles
answered him in great sadness, saying, "why, o xanthus, do you thus
foretell my death? you need not do so, for i well know that i am to
fall here, far from my dear father and mother; none the more, however,
shall i stay my hand till i have given the trojans their fill of
fighting."

so saying, with a loud cry he drove his horses to the front.



book xx

  the gods hold a council and determine to watch the fight, from
  the hill callicolone, and the barrow of hercules--a fight
  between achille
 
 ___________________________
 
s and aeneas is interrupted by neptune, who
  saves aeneas--achilles kills many trojans.

thus, then, did the achaeans arm by their ships round you, o son of
peleus, who were hungering for battle; while the trojans over against
them armed upon the rise of the plain.

meanwhile jove from the top of many-delled olympus, bade themis gather
the gods in council, whereon she went about and called them to the
house of jove. there was not a river absent except oceanus, nor a
single one of the nymphs that haunt fair groves, or springs of rivers
and meadows of green grass
 
 ___________________________
 
ds in council? are you considering
some matter that concerns the trojans and achaeans--for the blaze of
battle is on the point of being kindled between them?"

and jove answered, "you know my purpose, shaker of earth, and wherefore
i have called you hither. i take thought for them even in their
destruction. for my own part i shall stay here seated on mt. olympus
and look on in peace, but do you others go about among trojans and
achaeans, and help either side as you may be severally disposed. if
achilles fights the trojans without hindrance they will make no stand
against him; they have ever trembled at the sight of him, and now that
he is roused to such fury about his comrade, he will override fate
itself and storm their city."

thus spoke jove and gave the word for war, whereon the gods took their
several sides and went into battle. juno, pallas minerva,
earth-encircling neptune, mercury bringer of good luck and excellent in
all cunning--all these joined the host that came from the ships; wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h
them also came vulcan in all his glory, limping, but yet with his thin
legs plying lustily under him. mars of gleaming helmet joined the
trojans, and with him apollo of locks unshorn, and the archer goddess
diana, leto, xanthus, and laughter-loving venus.

so long as the gods held themselves aloof from mortal warriors the
achaeans were triumphant, for achilles who had long refused to fight
was now with them. there was not a trojan but his limbs failed him for
fear as he beheld the fleet son of peleus all glorious in his armour,
and looking like mars himself. when, however, the olympians came to
take their part among men, forthwith uprose strong strife, rouser of
hosts, and minerva raised her loud voice, now standing by the deep
trench that ran outside the wall, and now shouting with all her might
upon the shore of the sounding sea. mars also bellowed
 
 ___________________________
 
f them. such was the uproar as the gods came together in battle.
apollo with his arrows took his stand to face king neptune, while
minerva took hers against the god of war; the archer-goddess diana with
her golden arrows, sister of far-darting apollo, stood to face juno;
mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced leto, while the mighty
eddying river whom men can scamander, but gods xanthus, matched himself
against vulcan.

the gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. but the heart of
achilles was set on meeting hector son of priam, for it was with his
blood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of
battle. meanwhile apollo set aeneas on to attack the son of peleus, and
put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of lycaon son of
priam. in his likeness therefore, he said to aeneas, "aeneas,
counsellor of the trojans, where are now the brave words with which you
vaunted over your wine before the trojan princes, saying that you would
fight achilles son o
 
 ___________________________
 
f peleus in single combat?"

and aeneas answered, "why do you thus bid me fight the proud son of
peleus, when i am in no mind to do so? were i to face him now, it would
not be for the first time. his spear has already put me to flight from
ida, when he attacked our cattle and sacked lyrnessus and pedasus; jove
indeed saved me in that he vouchsafed me strength to fly, else had i
fallen by the hands of achilles and minerva, who went before him to
protect him and urged him to fall upon the lelegae and trojans. no man
may fight achilles, for one of the gods is always with him as his
guardian angel, and even were it not so, his weapon flies ever
straight, and fails not to pierce the flesh of him who is against him;
if heaven would let me fight him on even terms he should not soon
overcome me, though he boasts that he is made of bronze."

then said king apollo, son to jove, "nay, hero, pray to the ever-li
 
 ___________________________
 
ving
gods, for men say that you were born of jove's daughter venus, whereas
achilles is son to a goddess of inferior rank. venus is child to jove,
while thetis is but daughter to the old man of the sea. bring,
therefore, your spear to bear upon him, and let him not scare you with
his taunts and menaces."

as he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his
people, and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the foremost
fighters. nor did the son of anchises escape the notice of white-armed
juno, as he went forth into the throng to meet achilles. she called the

 
 ___________________________
 
gods about her, and said, "look to it, you two, neptune and minerva,
and consider how this shall be; phoebus apollo has been sending aeneas
clad in full armour to fight achilles. shall we turn him back at once,
or shall one of us stand by achilles and endow him with strength so
that his heart fail not, and he may learn that the chiefs of the
immortals are on his side, while the others who have all along been
defending the trojans are but vain helpers? let us all come down from
olympus and join in the fight, that this day he may take no hurt at the
hands of the trojans. hereafter let him suffer whatever fate may have
spun out for him when he was begotten and his mother bore him. if
achilles be not thus assured by the voice of a god, he ma
 
 ___________________________
 
y come to fear
presently when one of us meets him in battle, for the gods are terrible
if they are seen face to face."

neptune lord of the earthquake answered her saying, "juno, restrain
your fury; it is not well; i am not in favour of forcing the other gods
to fight us, for the advantage is too greatly on our own side; let us
take our places on some hill out of the beaten track, and let mortals
fight it out among themselves. if mars or phoebus apollo begin
fighting, or keep achilles in check so that he cannot fight, we too,
will at once raise the cry of battle, and in that case they will soon
leave the field and go back vanquished to olympus among the other gods."

with these words the dark-haired god led the way to the high
earth-barrow of hercules, built round solid masonry, and made by the
trojans and pallas minerva for him to fly to when the sea-monster was
chasing him from the shore on to the plain. here neptune and those that
were with him took their seats, wrapped i
 
 ___________________________
 
e waster of cities.

thus did the gods sit apart and form their plans, but neither side was
willing to begin battle with the other, and jove from his seat on high
was in command over them all. meanwhile the whole plain was alive with
men and horses, and blazing with the gleam of armour. the earth rang
again under the tramp of their feet as they rushed towards each other,
and two champions, by far the foremost of them all, met between the
hosts to fight--to wit, aeneas son of anchises, and noble achilles.

aeneas was first to stride forward in attack, his doughty helmet
tossing defiance as he came on. he held his strong shield before his
breast, and brandished his bronze spear. the son of peleus from the
other side sprang forth to meet him, like some fierce lion that the
whole country-side has met to hunt and kill--at first he bodes no ill,
but when some daring youth has struck him with a spear, he crouches
openmouthed, his jaws foam, he roars with fury, he lashes his tail from
side to side abo
 
 ___________________________
 
ut his ribs and loins, and glares as he springs
straight before him, to find out whether he is to slay, or be slain
among the foremost of his foes--even with such fury did achilles burn
to spring upon aeneas.

when they were now close up with one another achilles was first to
speak. "aeneas," said he, "why do you stand thus out before the host to
fight me? is it that you hope to reign over the trojans in the seat of
priam? nay, though you kill me priam will not hand his kingdom over to
you. he is a man of sound judgement, and he has sons of his own. or
have the trojans been allotting you a demesne of passing richness, fair
with orchard lawns and corn lands, if you should slay me? this you
shall hardly do. i have discomfited you once already. have you
fo
 
 ___________________________
 
old them. the tongue can run all whithers and talk all wise;
it can go here and there, and as a man says, so shall he be gainsaid.
what is the use of our bandying hard like women who when they fall foul
of one another go out and wrangle in the streets, one half true and the
other lies, as rage inspires them? no words of yours shall turn me now
that i am fain to fight--therefore let us make trial of one another
with our spears."

as he spoke he drove his spear at the great and terrible shield of
achilles, which rang out as the point struck it. the son of peleus held
the shield before him with his strong hand, and he was afraid, for he
deemed that aeneas's spear would go through it quite easily, not
reflecting that the god's glorious gifts were little likely to yield
before the blows of mortal men; and indeed aeneas's spear did not
pierce the shield, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the
point. it went through two layers, but the god had made the shield in
five, two of bronze, the t
 
 ___________________________
 
wo innermost ones of tin, and one of gold; it
was in this that the spear was stayed.

achilles in his turn threw, and struck the round shield of aeneas at
the very edge, where the bronze was thinnest; the spear of pelian ash
went clean through, and the shield rang under the blow; aeneas was
afraid, and crouched backwards, holding the shield away from him; the
spear, however, flew over his back, and stuck quivering in the ground,
after having gone through both circles of the sheltering shield. aeneas
though he had avoided the spear, stood still, blinded with fear and
grief because the wea
 
 ___________________________
 
pon had gone so near him; then achilles sprang
furiously upon him, with a cry as of death and with his keen blade
drawn, and aeneas seized a great stone, so huge that two men, as men
now are, would be unable to lift it, but aeneas wielded it quite easily.

aeneas would then have struck achilles as he was springing towards him,
either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered him, and achilles
would have closed with him and despatched him with his sword, had not
neptune lord of the earthquake been quick to mark, and said forthwith
to the immortals, "alas, i am sorry for great aeneas, who will now go
down to the house of hades, vanquished by the son of peleus. fool that
he was to give ear to the counsel of apollo. apollo will never save him
from destruction. why should this man suffer when he is guiltless, to
no purpose, and in another's quarrel? has he not at all times offered
accept
 
 ___________________________
 
able sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven? let us then
snatch him from death's jaws, lest the son of saturn be angry should
achilles slay him. it is fated, moreover, that he should escape, and
that the race of dardanus, whom jove loved above all the sons born to
him of mortal women, shall not perish utterly without seed or sign. for
now indeed has jove hated the blood of priam, while aeneas shall reign
over the trojans, he and his children's children that shall be born
hereafter."

then answered juno, "earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself, and
consider concerning aeneas, whether you will save him, or suffer him,
brave 
 
 ___________________________
 
though he be, to fall by the hand of achilles son of peleus. for
of a truth we two, i and pallas minerva, have sworn full many a time
before all the immortals, that never would we shield trojans from
destruction, not even when all troy is burning in the flames that the
achaeans shall kindle."

when earth-encircling neptune heard this he went into the battle amid
the clash of spears, and came to the place where achilles and aeneas
were. forthwith he shed a darkness before the eyes of the son of
peleus, drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of aeneas,
and laid it at the feet of achilles. then he lifted aeneas on high from
off the earth and hurried him away. over the heads of many a band of
warriors both horse and foot did he soar as the god's hand sped him,
till he came to the very fringe of the battle where the cauconians were
arming themselves for fight. neptune, shaker of the earth, then came
ne
 
 ___________________________
 
ar to him and said, "aeneas, what god has egged you on to this folly
in fighting the son of peleus, who is both a mightier man of valour and
more beloved of heaven than you are? give way before him whensoever you
meet him, lest you go down to the house of hades even though fate would
have it otherwise. when achilles is dead you may then fight among the
foremost undaunted, for none other of the achaeans shall slay you."

the god left him when he had given him these instructions, and at once
removed the darkness from before the eyes of achilles, who opened them
wide indeed and said in great anger, "alas! what marvel am i now
beholding? here is my spear upon the ground, but i see not him whom i
meant to kill when i hurled it. of a truth aeneas also must be under
heaven's protection, although i had thought his
 
 ___________________________
 
t give chase to so many and fight all of them. even mars, who is
an immortal, or minerva, would shrink from flinging himself into the
jaws of such a fight and laying about him; nevertheless, so far as in
me lies i will show no slackness of hand or foot nor want of endurance,
not even for a moment; i will utterly break their ranks, and woe to the
trojan who shall venture within reach of my spear."

thus did he exhort them. meanwhile hector called upon the trojans and
declared that he would fight achilles. "be not afraid, proud trojans,"
said he, "to face the son of peleus; i could fight gods myself if the
battle were one of words only, but they would be more than a match for
me, if we had to use our spears. even so the deed of achilles will fall
somewhat short of his word; he will do in part, and the other part he
will clip short. i will go up against him though his hands be as
fire--though his hands be fire and his strength iron."

thus urged the trojans lifted up their spears against the acha
 
 ___________________________
 
eans, and
raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves into the midst of
their ranks. but phoebus apollo came up to hector and said, "hector, on
no account must you challenge achilles to single combat; keep a lookout
for him while you are under cover of the others and away from the thick
of the fight, otherwise he will either hit you with a spear or cut you
down at close quarters."

thus he spoke, and hector drew back within the crowd, for he was afraid
when he heard what the god had said to him. achilles then sprang upon
the trojans with a terrible cry, clothed in valour as with a garment.
first he killed iphition son of otrynteus, a leader of much people whom
a naiad nymph
 
 ___________________________
 
 had borne to otrynteus waster of cities, in the land of
hyde under the snowy heights of mt. tmolus. achilles struck him full on
the head as he was coming on towards him, and split it clean in two;
whereon he fell heavily to the ground and achilles vaunted over him
saying, "you be low, son of otrynteus, mighty hero; your death is here,
but your lineage is on the gygaean lake where your father's estate
lies, by hyllus, rich in fish, and the eddying waters of hermus."

thus did he vaunt, but darkness closed the eyes of the other. the
chariots of the achaeans cut him up as their wheels passed over him in
the front of the battle, and after him achilles killed demoleon, a
valiant man of war and son to antenor. he struck him on the temple
throu
 
 ___________________________
 
he helmet did not stay the spear,
but it went right on, crushing the bone so that the brain inside was
shed in all directions, and his lust of fighting was ended. then he
struck hippodamas in the midriff as he was springing down from his
chariot in front of him, and trying to escape. he breathed his last,
bellowing like a bull bellows when young men are dragging him to offer
him in sacrifice to the king of helice, and the heart of the
earth-shaker is glad; even so did he bellow as he lay dying. achilles
then went in pursuit of polydorus son of priam, whom his father had
always forbidden to fight because he was the youngest of his sons, the
one he loved best, and the fastest runner. he, in his folly and showing
off the fleetness of his feet, was rushing about among front ranks
until he lost his life, for achilles struck him in the middle of the
back as he was darting past him: he struck him just at the golden
fastenings of his belt and where the two pieces of the double
breastplate overlapped. 
 
 ___________________________
 
the point of the spear pierced him through and
came out by the navel, whereon he fell groaning on to his knees and a
cloud of darkness overshadowed him as he sank holding his entrails in
his hands.

when hector saw his brother polydorus with his entrails in his hands
and sinking down upon the ground, a mist came over his eyes, and he
could not bear to keep longer at a distance; he therefore poised his
spear and darted towards achilles like a flame of fire. when achilles
saw him he bounded forward and vaunted saying, "this is he that has
wounded my heart most deeply and has slain my beloved comrade. not for
long shall we two quail before one another on the highways of war."

he looked fiercely on hector and said, "draw near, that you may meet
your doom the sooner." hector feared him not and answered, "son of
peleus, think not that your words can scare me as though i were a
child; i too if i will can brag and talk unseemly; i know that you are
a mighty warrior, 
 
 ___________________________
 
mightier by far than i, nevertheless the issue lies
in the lap of heaven whether i, worse man though i be, may not slay you
with my spear, for this too has been found keen ere now."

he hurled his spear as he spoke, but minerva breathed upon it, and
though she breathed but very lightly she turned it back from going
towards achilles, so that it returned to hector and lay at his feet in
front of him. achilles then sprang furiously on him with a loud cry,
bent on killing him, but apollo caught him up easily as a god can, and
hid him in a thick darkness. thrice did achilles spring towards him
spear in hand, and thrice did he waste his blow upon the air. when he
rushed forward for the fourth time as though he were a god, he shouted
aloud saying, "hound, this time too you have escaped death--but of a
truth it came exceedingly near you. phoebus apollo, to whom it seems
you pray before you go into battle,
 
 ___________________________
 
pear, about the middle of his neck,
and he fell headlong at his feet. there he let him lie and stayed
demouchus son of philetor, a man both brave and of great stature, by
hitting him on the knee with a spear; then he smote him with his sword
and killed him. after this he sprang on laogonus and dardanus, sons of
bias, and threw them from their chariot, the one with a blow from a
thrown spear, while the other he cut down in hand-to-hand fight. there
was also tros the son of alastor--he came up to achilles and clasped
his knees in the hope that he would spare him and not kill him but let
him go, because they were both of the same age. fool, he might have
known that he should not prevail with him, for the man was in no mood
for pity or forbearance but was in grim earnest. therefore when tros
laid hold of his knees and sought a hearing for his prayers, achilles
drove his sword into his liver, and the liver came rolling out, while
his bosom was all covered with the black blood that welled from the
w
 
 ___________________________
 
ound. thus did death close his eyes as he lay lifeless.

achilles then went up to mulius and struck him on the ear with a spear,
and the bronze spear-head came right out at the other ear. he also
struck echeclus son of agenor on the head with his sword, which became
warm with the blood, while death and stern fate closed the eyes of
echeclus. next in order the bronze point of his spear wounded deucalion
in the fore-arm where the sinews of the elbow are united, whereon he
waited achilles' onset with his arm hanging down and death staring him
in the face. achilles cut his head off with a blow from his sword and
flung it helmet and all away from him, and the marrow came oozing out
of his backbone as he lay. he then went in pursuit of rhigmus, noble
son of peires, who had come from fertile thrace, and struck him through
the middle with a spear which fixed itself in his belly, so that he
fell headlong from his chariot. he also speared areithous squire to
rhigmus in the back as he w
 
 ___________________________
 
as turning his horses in flight, and thrust
him from his chariot, while the horses were struck with panic.

as a fire raging in some mountain glen after long drought--and the
dense forest is in a blaze, while the wind carries great tongues of
fire in every direction--even so furiously did achilles rage, wielding
his spear as though he were a god, and giving chase to those whom he
would slay, till the dark earth ran with blood. or as one who yokes
broad-browed oxen that they may tread barley in a threshing-floor--and
it is soon bruised small under the feet of the lowing cattle--even so
did the horses of achilles trample on the shields and bodies of the
slain. the axle underneath and the railing that ran round the car were
bespattered with clots of blood thrown up by the horses' hoofs, and
 
 ___________________________
 

from the tyres of the wheels; but the son of peleus pressed on to win
still further glory, and his hands were bedrabbled with gore.



book xxi

  the fight between achilles and the river scamander--the gods
  fight among themselves--achilles drives the trojans within
  their gates.

now when they came to the ford of the full-flowing river xanthus,
begotten of immortal jove, achilles cut their forces in two: one half
he chased over the plain towards the city by the same way that the
achaeans had taken when flying panic-stricken on the preceding day with
hector in full triumph; this way did they fly pell-mell, and juno sent
down a thick mist in front of them to stay them. the other half were
hemmed in by the deep silver-eddying stream, and fell into it with a
great uproar. the waters resounded, and the banks rang again, as they
swam hither and thither with loud cries amid th
 
 ___________________________
 
e whirling eddies. as
locusts flying to a river before the blast of a grass fire--the flame
comes on and on till at last it overtakes them and they huddle into the
water--even so was the eddying stream of xanthus filled with the uproar
of men and horses, all struggling in confusion before achilles.

forthwith the hero left his spear upon the bank, leaning it against a
tamarisk bush, and plunged into the river like a god, armed with his
sword only. fell was his purpose as he hewed the trojans down on every
side. their dying groans rose hideous as the sword smote them, and the
river ran red with blood. as when fish fly scared before a huge
dolphin, and fill every nook and corner of some fair haven--for he is
sure to eat all he can catch--even so did the trojans cower under the
banks of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 mighty river, and when achilles' arms grew weary with
killing them, he drew twelve youths alive out of the water, to
sacrifice in revenge for patroclus son of menoetius. he drew them out
like dazed fawns, bound their hands behind them with the girdles of
their own shirts, and gave them over to his men to take back to the
ships. then he sprang into the river, thirsting for still further blood.

there he found lycaon, son of priam seed of dardanus, as he was
escaping out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken prisoner
w
 
 ___________________________
 
hen he was in his father's vineyard, having set upon him by night, as
he was cutting young shoots from a wild fig-tree to make the wicker
sides of a chariot. achilles then caught him to his sorrow unawares,
and sent him by sea to lemnos, where the son of jason bought him. but a
guest-friend, eetion of imbros, freed him with a great sum, and sent
him to arisbe, whence he had escaped and returned to his father's
house. he had spent eleven days happily with his friends after he had
come from lemnos, but on the twelfth heaven again delivered him into
the hands of achilles, who was to send him to the house of hades sorely
against his will. he was unarmed when ach
 
 ___________________________
 
illes caught sight of him, and
had neither helmet nor shield; nor yet had he any spear, for he had
thrown all his armour from him on to the bank, and was sweating with
his struggles to get out of the river, so that his strength was now
failing him.

then achilles said to himself in his surprise, "what marvel do i see
here? if this man can come back alive after having been sold over into
lemnos, i shall have the trojans also whom i have slain rising from the
world below. could not even the waters of the grey sea imprison him, as
they do many another whether he will or no? this time let him taste my
spear, that i may know for certain whether mother earth who can keep
even a strong man down, will be able to hold him, or whether thence too
he will return."

 
 ___________________________
 

thus did he pause and ponder. but lycaon came up to him dazed and
trying hard to embrace his knees, for he would fain live, not die.
achilles thrust at him with his spear, meaning to kill him, but lycaon
ran crouching up to him and caught his knees, whereby the spear passed
over his back, and stuck in the ground, hungering though it was for
blood. with one hand he caught achilles' knees as he besought him, and
with the other he clutched the spear and would not let it go. then he
said, "achilles, have mercy upon me and spare me, for i am your
suppliant. it was in your tents that i first broke bread on the day
when you took me prisoner in the vineyard; after which you sold me away
to lemnos far from my father and my friends, and i brought you the
price of a hundred oxen. i have paid three times as much to gain my
freedom; it is but twelve days that i have come to ilius after much
suffering, and now cruel fate has again thrown me into your hands.
surely father jove must hate me, that he 
 
 ___________________________
 
m married his
daughter along with many other women and two sons were born of her,
both of whom you will have slain. your spear slew noble polydorus as he
was fighting in the front ranks, and now evil will here befall me, for
i fear that i shall not escape you since heaven has delivered me over
to you. furthermore i say, and lay my saying to your heart, spare me,
for i am not of the same womb as hector who slew your brave and noble
comrade."

with such words did the princely son of priam beseech achilles; but
achilles answered him sternly. "idiot," said he, "talk not to me of
ransom. until patroclus fell i preferred to give the trojans quarter,
and sold beyond the sea many of those whom i had taken alive; but now
not a man shall live of those whom heaven delivers into my hands before
the city of ilius--and of all trojans it shall fare hardest with the
sons of priam. therefore, my friend, you too shall die. why should you
whine in this way? patroclus fell, and he was a better man than you
are. i
 
 ___________________________
 
 too--see you not how i am great and goodly? i am son to a noble
father, and have a goddess for my mother, but the hands of doom and
death overshadow me all as surely. the day will come, either at dawn or
dark, or at the noontide, when one shall take my life also in battle,
either with his spear, or with an arrow sped from his bow."

thus did he speak, and lycaon's heart sank within him. he loosed his
hold of the spear, and held out both hands before him; but achilles
drew his keen blade, and struck him by the collar-bone on his neck; he
plunged his two-edged sword into him to the very hilt, whereon he lay
at full length on the ground, with the dark blood welling from him till
the earth was soaked. then achilles caught him by the foot and flung
him into the river to go down stream, vaunting over him the while, and
saying, "lie there among the fishes, who will lick the blood from your
wound and gloat over it; your mother shall not lay you on any bier to
mourn
 
 ___________________________
 
rish all of you
till we reach the citadel of strong ilius--you in flight, and i
following after to destroy you. the river with its broad silver stream
shall serve you in no stead, for all the bulls you offered him and all
the horses that you flung living into his waters. none the less
miserably shall you perish till there is not a man of you but has paid
in full for the death of patroclus and the havoc you wrought among the
achaeans whom you have slain while i held aloof from battle."

so spoke achilles, but the river grew more and more angry, and pondered
within himself how he should stay the hand of achilles and save the
trojans from disaster. meanwhile the son of peleus, spear in hand,
sprang upon asteropaeus son of pelegon to kill him. he was son to the
broad river axius and periboea eldest daughter of acessamenus; for the
river had lain with her. asteropaeus stood up out of the water to face
him with a spear in either hand, and xanthus filled him with courage,
being angry for the death of
 
 ___________________________
 
 the youths whom achilles was slaying
ruthlessly within his waters. when they were close up with one another
achilles was first to speak. "who and whence are you," said he, "who
dare to face me? woe to the parents whose son stands up against me."
and the son of pelegon answered, "great son of peleus, why should you
ask my lineage. i am from the fertile land of far paeonia, captain of
the paeonians, and it is now eleven days that i am at ilius. i am of
the blood of the river axius--of axius that is the fairest of all
rivers that run. he begot the famed warrior pelegon, whose son men call
me. let us now fight, a
 
 ___________________________
 
chilles."

thus did he defy him, and achilles raised his spear of pelian ash.
asteropaeus failed with both his spears, for he could use both hands
alike; with the one spear he struck achilles' shield, but did not
pierce it, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the point;
with the other spear he grazed the elbow of achilles' right arm drawing
dark blood, but the spear itself went by him and fixed itself in the
ground, foiled of its bloody banquet. then achilles, fain to kill him,
hurled his spear at asteropaeus, but failed to hit him and struck the
steep bank of the river, driving the spear half its length into the
earth. the son of peleus then drew his sword and sprang furiously upon
him. asteropaeus vainly tried to draw achilles' spear out of the bank
by main force; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his might to
draw it out, and thrice he had to leave off trying; the fourth time he
tried to bend and break it, but ere he could do so achilles s
 
 ___________________________
 
mote him
with his sword and killed him. he struck him in the belly near the
navel, so that all his bowels came gushing out on to the ground, and
the darkness of death came over him as he lay gasping. then achilles
set his foot on his chest and spoiled him of his armour, vaunting over
him and saying, "lie there--begotten of a river though you be, it is
hard for you to strive with the offspring of saturn's son. you declare
yourself sprung from the blood of a broad river, but i am of the seed
of mighty jove. my father is peleus, son of aeacus ruler over the many
myrmidons, and aeacus was the son of jove. therefore as jove is
mightier than any river that flows into the sea, so are his children
stronger than 
 
 ___________________________
 
e
dark water flowing over him and the eels and fishes busy nibbling and
gnawing the fat that was about his kidneys. then he went in chase of
the paeonians, who were flying along the bank of the river in panic
when they saw their leader slain by the hands of the son of peleus.
therein he slew thersilochus, mydon, astypylus, mnesus, thrasius,
oeneus, and ophelestes, and he would have slain yet others, had not the
river in anger taken human form, and spoken to him from out the deep
waters saying, "achilles, if you excel all in strength, so do you also
in wickedness, for the gods are ever with you to protect you: if, then,
the son of saturn has vouchsafed it to you to destroy all the trojans,
at any rate drive them out of my stream, and do your grim work on land.
my fair waters are now filled with corpses, nor can i find any channel
by which i may pour myself into the sea for i am choked with dead, and
yet you go on mercilessly slaying. i am in despair, therefore, o
captain of your host, trouble m
 
 ___________________________
 
e no further."

achilles answered, "so be it, scamander, jove-descended; but i will
never cease dealing out death among the trojans, till i have pent them
up in their city, and made trial of hector face to face, that i may
learn whether he is to vanquish me, or i him."

as he spoke he set upon the trojans with a fury like that of the gods.
but the river said to apollo, "surely, son of jove, lord of the silver
bow, you are not obeying the commands of jove who charged you straitly
that you should stand by the trojans and
 
 ___________________________
 
 defend them, till twilight
fades, and darkness is over the earth."

meanwhile achilles sprang from the bank into mid-stream, whereon the
river raised a high wave and attacked him. he swelled his stream into a
torrent, and swept away the many dead whom achilles had slain and left
within his waters. these he cast out on to the land, bellowing like a
bull the while, but the living he saved alive, hiding them in his
mighty eddies. the great and terrible wave gathered about achilles,
falling upon him and beating on his shield, so that he could not keep
his feet; he caught hold of a great elm-tree, but it came up by the
roots, and tore away the bank, damming the stream with its thick
branches and bridging it all across; whereby achilles struggled out of
the stream, and fled full speed over the plain, for he was afraid.

but the mighty god ceased not in his pursuit, and sprang upon him with
a dark-crested wave, to stay his hands and save the trojans from
destruction. the son
 
 ___________________________
 
f all birds, even so did he spring forward, and the armour
rang loudly about his breast. he fled on in front, but the river with a
loud roar came tearing after. as one who would water his garden leads a
stream from some fountain over his plants, and all his ground--spade in
hand he clears away the dams to free the channels, and the little
stones run rolling round and round with the water as it goes merrily
down the bank faster than the man can follow--even so did the river
keep catching up with achilles albeit he was a fleet runner, for the
gods are stronger than men. as often as he would strive to stand his
ground, and see whether or no all the gods in heaven were in league
against him, so often would the mighty wave come beating down upon his
shoulders, and he would have to keep flying on and on in great dismay;
for the angry flood was tiring him out as it flowed past him and ate
the ground from under his feet.

then the son of peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying, "father
jove, is th
 
 ___________________________
 
e with jove's sanction to assist you, i,
and pallas minerva. it is not your fate to perish in this river; he
will abate presently as you will see; moreover we strongly advise you,
if you will be guided by us, not to stay your hand from fighting till
you have pent the trojan host within the famed walls of ilius--as many
of them as may escape. then kill hector and go back to the ships, for
we will vouchsafe you a triumph over him."

when they had so said they went back to the other immortals, but
achilles strove onward over the plain, encouraged by the charge the
gods had laid upon him. all was now covered with the flood of waters,
and much goodly armour of the youths that had been slain was rifting
about, as also many corpses, but he forced his way against the stream,
speeding right onwards, nor could the broad waters stay him, for
minerva had endowed him with great strength. nevertheless scamander did
not slacken in his pursuit, but was still more furious with the son of
peleus. he lifted his 
 
 ___________________________
 
re who is now lording it as though he
were a god. nothing shall serve him longer, not strength nor
comeliness, nor his fine armour, which forsooth shall soon be lying low
in the deep waters covered over with mud. i will wrap him in sand, and
pour tons of shingle round him, so that the achaeans shall not know how
to gather his bones for the silt in which i shall have hidden him, and
when they celebrate his funeral they need build no barrow."

on this he upraised his tumultuous flood high against achilles,
seething as it was with foam and blood and the bodies of the dead. the
dark waters of the river stood upright and would have overwhelmed the
son of peleus, but juno, trembling lest achilles should be swept away
in the mighty torrent, lifted her voice on high and called out to
vulcan her son. "crook-foot," she cried, "my child, be up and doing,
for i deem it is with you that xanthus is fain to fight; help us at
once, kindle a fierce fire; i will then bring up the west and the white
south wind i
 
 ___________________________
 
n a mighty hurricane from the sea, that shall bear the
flames against the heads and armour of the trojans and consume them,
while you go along the banks of xanthus burning his trees and wrapping
him round with fire. let him not turn you back neither by fair words
nor foul, and slacken not till i shout and tell you. then you may stay
your flames."

on this vulcan kindled a fierce fire, which broke out first upon the
plain and burned the many dead whom achilles had killed and whose
bodies were lying about in great numbers; by this means the plain was
dried and the flood stayed. as the north wind, blowing on an orchard
that has been sodden with autumn rain, soon dries it, and the heart of
the owner is glad--even so the whole plain was dried and the dead
bodies were consumed. then he turned tongues of fire on to the river.
he burned the elms the willows and the tamarisks, the lotus also, with
the rushes and marshy herbage that grew abundantly by the ban
 
 ___________________________
 
ks of the
river. the eels and fishes that go darting about everywhere in the
water, these, too, were sorely harassed by the flames that cunning
vulcan had kindled, and the river himself was scalded, so that he spoke
saying, "vulcan, there is no god can hold his own against you. i cannot
fight you when you flare out your flames in this way; strive with me no
longer. let achilles drive the trojans out of their city immediately.
what have i to do with quarrelling and helping people?"

he was boiling as he spoke, and all his waters were seething. as a
cauldron upon a large fire boils when it is melting the lard of some
fatted hog, and the lard keeps bubbling up all over when the dry
faggots blaze under it--even so were the goodly waters of xanthus
heated with the fire till they were boiling. he could flow no longer
but stayed his stream, so afflicted was he by the blasts 
 
 ___________________________
 
wife juno,
father, who has been beating me; it is always her doing when there is
any quarrelling among the immortals."

thus did they converse, and meanwhile phoebus apollo entered the strong
city of ilius, for he was uneasy lest the wall should not hold out and
the danaans should take the city then and there, before its hour had
come; but the rest of the ever-living gods went back, some angry and
some triumphant to olympus, where they took their seats beside jove
lord of the storm cloud, while achilles still kept on dealing out death
alike on the trojans and on their horses. as when the smoke from some
burning city ascends to heaven when the anger of the gods has kindled
it--there is then toil for all, and sorrow for not a few--even so did
achilles bring toil and sorrow on the trojans.

old king priam stood on a high tower of the wall looking down on huge
achilles as the trojans fled panic-stricken before him, and there was
none to help them. presently he came down from off the tower and with
 
 ___________________________
 

many a groan went along the wall to give orders to the brave warders of
the gate. "keep the gates," said he, "wide open till the people come
flying into the city, for achilles is hard by and is driving them in
rout before him. i see we are in great peril. as soon as our people are
inside and in safety, close the strong gates for i fear lest that
terrible man should come bounding inside along with the others."

as he spoke they drew back the bolts and opened the gates, and when
these were opened there was a haven of refuge for the trojans. apollo
then came full speed out of the city to meet them and protect them.
right for the city and the high wall, parched with thir
 
 ___________________________
 
st and grimy
with dust, still they fied on, with achilles wielding his spear
furiously behind them. for he was as one possessed, and was thirsting
after glory.

then had the sons of the achaeans taken the lofty gates of troy if
apollo had not spurred on agenor, valiant and noble son to antenor. he
put courage into his heart, and stood by his side to guard him, leaning
against a beech tree and shrouded in thick darkness. when agenor saw
achilles he stood still and his heart was clouded with care. "alas,"
said he to himself in his dismay, "if i fly before mighty achilles, and
go where all the others are being driven in rout, he will none the less
catch me and kill me for a coward. how would it be were i to let
achilles drive the others before him, and then fly from the wall to the
plain that is behind ilius till i reach the spurs of ida and can hide
in the underwood that is thereon? i could then wash the sweat from off
me in the river a
 
 ___________________________
 
 this way? like enough he would see me as i am hurrying
from the city over the plain, and would speed after me till he had
caught me--i should stand no chance against him, for he is mightiest of
all mankind. what, then, if i go out and meet him in front of the city?
his flesh too, i take it, can be pierced by pointed bronze. life is the
same in one and all, and men say that he is but mortal despite the
triumph that jove son of saturn vouchsafes him."

so saying he stood on his guard and awaited achilles, for he was now
fain to fight him. as a leopardess that bounds from out a thick covert
to attack a hunter--she knows no fear and is not dismayed by the baying
of the hounds; even though the man be too quick for her and wound her
either with thrust or spear, still, though the spear has pierced her
she will not give in till she has either caught him in her grip or been
killed outright--even so did noble agenor son of antenor refuse to fly
till he had made trial of achilles, and took aim at him wi
 
 ___________________________
 
th his spear,
holding his round shield before him and crying with a loud voice. "of a
truth," said he, "noble achilles, you deem that you shall this day sack
the city of the proud trojans. fool, there will be trouble enough yet
before it, for there is many a brave man of us still inside who will
stand in front of our dear parents with our wives and children, to
defend ilius. here therefore, huge and mighty warrior though you be,
here shall you die."

as he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the spear
struck achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of newly
wrought tin rang loudly, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t the spear recoiled from the body of him
whom it had struck, and did not pierce it, for the god's gift stayed
it. achilles in his turn attacked noble agenor, but apollo would not
vouchsafe him glory, for he snatched agenor away and hid him in a thick
mist, sending him out of the battle unmolested. then he craftily drew
the son of peleus away from going after the host, for he put on the
semblance of agenor and stood in front of achilles, who ran towards him
to give him chase and pursued him over the corn lands of the plain,
turning him towards the deep waters of the river scamander. apollo ran
but a little way before him and beguiled achilles by making him think
all the time that he was on the point of overtaking him. meanwhile the
rabble of routed trojans was thankful to crowd within the city till
their numbers thronged it; no longer did they dare wait for one another
outside the city walls, to learn who had escaped and who w
 
 ___________________________
 
o the walls. but stern fate bade hector stay
where he was before ilius and the scaean gates. then phoebus apollo
spoke to the son of peleus saying, "why, son of peleus, do you, who are
but man, give chase to me who am immortal? have you not yet found out
that it is a god whom you pursue so furiously? you did not harass the
trojans whom you had routed, and now they are within their walls, while
you have been decoyed hither away from them. me you cannot kill, for
death can take no hold upon me."

achilles was greatly angered and said, "you have baulked me,
far-darter, most malicious of all gods, and have drawn me away from the
wall, where many another man would have bitten the dust ere he got
within ilius; you have robbed me of great glory and have saved the
trojans at no risk to yourself, for you have nothing to fear, but i
would indeed have my revenge if it were in my power to do so."

on this, with fell intent he made towards the city, and as the winning
horse in a chariot race strains every 
 
 ___________________________
 
nerve when he is flying over the
plain, even so fast and furiously did the limbs of achilles bear him
onwards. king priam was first to note him as he scoured the plain, all
radiant as the star which men call orion's hound, and whose beams blaze
forth in time of harvest more brilliantly than those of any other that
shines by night; brightest of them all though he be, he yet bodes ill
for mortals, for he brings fire and fever in his train--even so did
achilles' armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. priam raised a
cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted
out to his dear son, imploring him to return; but hector still stayed
before the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle with
achilles. the old man reached out his arms towards him and bade him for
pity's sake come within the walls. "hector," he cried, "my son, stay
not to face this man alone and unsupported, or you will meet death at
the hands of the son o
 
 ___________________________
 
s
from among the trojans who have thronged within the city, lycaon and
polydorus, whom laothoe peeress among women bore me. should they be
still alive and in the hands of the achaeans, we will ransom them with
gold and bronze, of which we have store, for the old man altes endowed
his daughter richly; but if they are already dead and in the house of
hades, sorrow will it be to us two who were their parents; albeit the
grief of others will be more short-lived unless you too perish at the
hands of achilles. come, then, my son, within the city, to be the
guardian of trojan men and trojan women, or you will both lose your own
life and afford a mighty triumph to the son of peleus. have pity also
on your unhappy father while life yet remains to him--on me, whom the
son of saturn will destroy by a terrible doom on the threshold of old
age, after i have seen my sons slain and my daughters haled away as
captives, my bridal chambers pillaged, little children dashed to earth
amid the rage of battle, and m
 
 ___________________________
 
 me too: if i have ever given you comfort
from my own bosom, think on it now, dear son, and come within the wall
to protect us from this man; stand not without to meet him. should the
wretch kill you, neither i nor your richly dowered wife shall ever
weep, dear offshoot of myself, over the bed on which you lie, for dogs
will devour you at the ships of the achaeans."

thus did the two with many tears implore their son, but they moved not
the heart of hector, and he stood his ground awaiting huge achilles as
he drew nearer towards him. as a serpent in its den upon the mountains,
full fed with deadly poisons, waits for the approach of man--he is
filled with fury and his eyes glare terribly as he goes writhing round
his den--even so hector leaned his shield against a tower that jutted
out from the wall and stood where he was, undaunted.

"alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, "if i go
within the gates, polydamas will be the first to heap reproach upon me,
for it was he that urge
 
 ___________________________
 
d me to lead the trojans back to the city on
that awful night when achilles again came forth against us. i would not
listen, but it would have been indeed better if i had done so. now that
my folly has destroyed the host, i dare not look trojan men and trojan
women in the face, lest a worse man should say, 'hector has ruined us
by his self-confidence.' surely it would be better for me to return
after having fought achilles and slain him, or to die gloriously here
before the city. what, again, if i were to lay down my shield and
helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight up to noble
achilles? what if i were to promise to give up helen, who was the
fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure that alexandrus
brought with him in his ships to troy, aye, and to let the achaeans
divide the half of everything that the city contains among themselves?
i might make the trojans, by the mouths of their prin
 
 ___________________________
 
y would hide nothing, but would divide into two shares all
that is within the city--but why argue with myself in this way? were i
to go up to him he would show me no kind of mercy; he would kill me
then and there as easily as though i were a woman, when i had off my
armour. there is no parleying with him from some rock or oak tree as
young men and maidens prattle with one another. better fight him at
once, and learn to which of us jove will vouchsafe victory."

thus did he stand and ponder, but achilles came up to him as it were
mars himself, plumed lord of battle. from his right shoulder he
brandished his terrible spear of pelian ash, and the bronze gleamed
around him like flashing fire or the rays of the rising sun. fear fell
upon hector as he beheld him, and he dared not stay longer where he was
but fled in dismay from before the gates, while achilles darted after
him at his utmost speed. as a mountain falcon, swiftest of all birds,
swoops down upon some cowering dove--the dove flies before
 
 ___________________________
 
 him but the
falcon with a shrill scream follows close after, resolved to have
her--even so did achilles make straight for hector with all his might,
while hector fled under the trojan wall as fast as his limbs could take
him.

on they flew along the waggon-road that ran hard by under the wall,
past the lookout station, and past the weather-beaten wild fig-tree,
till they came to two fair springs which feed the river scamander. one
of these two springs is warm, and steam rises from it as smoke from a
burning fire, but the other even in summer is as cold as hail or snow,
or the ice that forms on wa
 
 ___________________________
 
od or woman--at the games in honour
of some dead hero, so did these two run full speed three times round
the city of priam. all the gods watched them, and the sire of gods and
men was the first to speak.

"alas," said he, "my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued
round the walls of troy; my heart is full of pity for hector, who has
burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my honour, one while on the
crests of many-valleyed ida, and again on the citadel of troy; and now
i see noble achilles in full pursuit of him round the city of priam.
what say you? consider among yourselves and decide whether we shall now
save him or let him fall, valiant though he be, before achilles, son of
peleus."

then minerva said, "father, wielder of the lightning, lord of cloud and
storm, what mean you? would you pluck this mortal whose doom has long
been decreed out of the jaws of death? do as you will, but we others
shall not be of a mind with you."

and jove answered, "my child, trito-born, take hear
 
 ___________________________
 
t. i did not speak
in full earnest, and i will let you have your way. do without let or
hindrance as you are minded."

thus did he urge minerva who was already eager, and down she darted
from the topmost summits of olympus.

achilles was still in full pursuit of hector, as a hound chasing a fawn
which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and hunts
through glade and thicket. the fawn may try to elude him by crouching
under cover of a bush, but he will scent her out and follow her up
until he gets her--even so there was no escape for hector from the
fleet son of peleus. whenever he made a set to get near the dardanian
gates and under the walls, that his people might help him by showering
down weapons from above, a
 
 ___________________________
 
chilles would gain on him and head him back
towards the plain, keeping himself always on the city side. as a man in
a dream who fails to lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing--the
one cannot escape nor the other overtake--even so neither could
achilles come up with hector, nor hector break away from achilles;
nevertheless he might even yet have escaped death had not the time come
when apollo, who thus far had sustained his strength and nerved his
running, was now no longer to stay by him. achilles made signs to the
achaean host, and shook his head to show that no man was to aim a dart
at hector, lest another might win the glory of having hit him and he
might himself come in second. then, at last, as they were nearing the
fountains for the fourth time, the father of all balanced his golden
scales and placed a doom in each of them, one for achilles and the
other for hector. as he held the scales by the middle, the doom of
hector fell down deep into the house of hades--and then phoebus apol
 
 ___________________________
 
lo
left him. thereon minerva went close up to the son of peleus and said,
"noble achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely take back to
the ships a triumph for the achaeans by slaying hector, for all his
lust of battle. do what apollo may as he lies grovelling before his
father, aegis-bearing jove, hector cannot escape us longer. stay here
and take breath, while i go up to him and persuade him to make a stand
and fight you."

thus spoke minerva. achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while minerva left him and
went after hector in the form and with the voice of deiphobus. she came
close up to him and said, "dear brother, i see you are hard pressed by
achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of priam, let
us await his onset and stand on our defence."

and hector answered, "deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of
all my brothers, children of hecuba and priam, but henceforth
 
 ___________________________
 
 i shall
rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the
wall for my sake when all the others remain inside."

then minerva said, "dear brother, my father and mother went down on
their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but i was in an agony of
grief when i beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we may
learn whether achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to the
ships, or whether he shall fall before you."

thus did minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were now
close to one another great hector was first to speak. "i will no longer
fly you, son of peleus," said he, "as i have been doing hitherto. three
times have i fled round the mighty city of priam, without daring to
withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for i am in the
mind to face you. let us, then, give pledges to one 
 
 ___________________________
 
another by our
gods, who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let
it be agreed between us that if jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and
i take your life, i am not to treat your dead body in any unseemly
fashion, but when i have stripped you of your armour, i am to give up
your body to the achaeans. and do you likewise."

achilles glared at him and answered, "fool, prate not to me about
covenants. there can be no covenants between men and lions, wolves and
lambs can never be of one mind, but hate each other out and out all
through. therefore there can be no understanding between you and me,
nor may there be any covenants between us, till one or other shall fall
and glut grim mars with his life's blood. put forth all your strength;
you have need now to prove yourself indeed a bold soldier and man of
war. you have no more 
 
 ___________________________
 
chance, and pallas minerva will forthwith
vanquish you by my spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief
you have caused me on account of my comrades whom you have killed in
battle."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. hector saw it coming and
avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it flew over his
head and stuck in the ground beyond; minerva then snatched it up and
gave it back to achilles without hector's seeing her; hector thereon
said to the son of peleus, "you have missed your aim, achilles, peer of
the gods, and jove has not yet revealed to you the hour of my doom,
though you made sure that he had done so. you were a false-tongued liar
when you deemed that i should forget my valour and quail before you.
you shall not drive your spear into the back of a runaway--drive it,
should heaven so grant you power, drive it into me as i make straight
towards you; and now for your own p
 
 ___________________________
 
art avoid my spear if you can--would
that you might receive the whole of it into your body; if you were once
dead the trojans would find the war an easier matter, for it is you who
have harmed them most."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. his aim was true for he
hit the middle of achilles' shield, but the spear rebounded from it,
and did not pierce it. hector was angry when he saw that the weapon had
sped from his hand in vain, and stood there in dismay for he had no
second spear. with a loud cry he called deiphobus and asked him for
one, but there was no man; then he saw the truth and said to himself,
"alas! the gods have lured me on to my destruction. i deemed that the
hero deiphobus was by my side, but he is within the wall, and minerva
has inveigled me; death is now indeed e
 
 ___________________________
 
xceedingly near at hand and
there is no way out of it--for so jove and his son apollo the
far-darter have willed it, though heretofore they have been ever ready
to protect me. my doom has come upon me; let me not then die
ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me first do some great
thing that shall be told among men hereafter."

as he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong by his
side, and gathering himself together be sprang on achilles like a
soaring eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some lamb or
timid hare--even so did hector brandish his sword and spring upon
achilles. achilles mad with rage darted towards him, with his wondrous
shield before his breast, and his gleaming helmet, made with four
layers of metal, nodding fiercely forward. the thick tresses of gold
with which vulcan had crested the helmet floated round it, and as the
evening star that shines brighter than all others through the stillness
of night, e
 
 ___________________________
 
ven such was the gleam of the spear which achilles poised in
his right hand, fraught with the death of noble hector. he eyed his
fair flesh over and over to see where he could best wound it, but all
was protected by the goodly armour of which hector had spoiled
patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat where the
collar-bones divide the neck from the shoulders, and this is a most
deadly place: here then did achilles strike him as he was coming on
towards him, and the point of his spear went right through the fleshy
part of the neck, but it did not sever his windpipe so that he could
still speak. hector fell headlong, and achilles vaunted over him
saying, "hector, you deemed that you should come off scatheless when
you were spoiling patroclus, and recked not of myself who was not with
him. fool that you were: for i, his comrade, mightier far than he, was
still left behind him at the ships, and now i have la
 
 ___________________________
 
id you low. the
achaeans shall give him all due funeral rites, while dogs and vultures
shall work their will upon yourself."

then hector said, as the life ebbed out of him, "i pray you by your
life and knees, and by your parents, let not dogs devour me at the
ships of the achaeans, but accept the rich treasure of gold and bronze
which my father and mother will offer you, and send my body home, that
the trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when i am dead."

achilles glared at him and answered, "dog, talk not to me neither of
knees nor parents; would that i could be as sure of being able to cut
your flesh into pieces and eat it raw, for the ill you have done me, as
i am that nothing shall save you from the dogs--it shall not be, though
they bring ten or twenty-fold ransom and weigh it out for me on the
spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. though priam son of dardanus
should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall
never lay you 
 
 ___________________________
 

hector with his dying breath then said, "i know you what you are, and
was sure that i should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron;
look to it that i bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day when
paris and phoebus apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the
scaean gates."

when he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his
soul went out of him and flew down to the house of hades, lamenting its
sad fate that it should enjoy youth and strength no longer. but
achilles said, speaking to the dead body, "die; for my part i will
accept my fate whensoever jove and the other gods see fit to send it."

as he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side;
then he stripped the blood-stained armour from hector's shoulders while
the other achaeans came running up to view his wondrous strength and
beauty; and no one came near him without giving him a fresh wound. then
would one turn to his neighbour and say, "it is easier to handle hector
now than when he
 
 ___________________________
 
 was flinging fire on to our ships"--and as he spoke he
would thrust his spear into him anew.

when achilles had done spoiling hector of his armour, he stood among
the argives and said, "my friends, princes and counsellors of the
argives, now that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome this man, who
has done us more hurt than all the others together, consider whether we
should not attack the city in force, and discover in what mind the
trojans may be. we should thus learn whether they will desert their
city now that hector has fallen, or will still hold out even though he
is no longer living. but why ar
 
 ___________________________
 
llen upon you."

hector's wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to tell her
that her husband had remained without the gates. she was at her loom in
an inner part of the house, weaving a double purple web, and
embroidering it with many flowers. she told her maids to set a large
tripod on the fire, so as to have a warm bath ready for hector when he
came out of battle; poor woman, she knew not that he was now beyond the
reach of baths, and that minerva had laid him low by the hands of
achilles. she heard the cry coming as from the wall, and trembled in
every limb; the shuttle fell from her hands, and again she spoke to her
waiting-women. "two of you," she said, "come with me that i may learn
what it is that has befallen; i heard the voice of my husband's
honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it would come into my
mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great misfortune for
priam's children must be at hand. may i never live to hear it, but i
greatly fear that achilles has 
 
 ___________________________
 
 fine and
goodly raiment made by hands of women. this will i now burn; it is of
no use to you, for you can never again wear it, and thus you will have
respect shown you by the trojans both men and women."

in such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women joined in
her lament.



book xxiii

  the funeral of patroclus, and the funeral games.

thus did they make their moan throughout the city, while the achaeans
when they reached the hellespont went back every man to his own ship.
but achilles would not let the myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave
comrades saying, "myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends,
not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw near
to the body and mourn patroclus, in due honour to the dead. when we
have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take
supper all of us here."

on this they all joined in a cry of wailing and achilles led them in
their lament. thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing ro
 
 ___________________________
 
ieving among his myrmidons by the shore of the sounding
sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in one after
another. here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and eased the
burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing hector
round windy ilius. presently the sad spirit of patroclus drew near him,
like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of his beaming
eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. the spirit hovered over
his head and said--

"you sleep, achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living, but
now that i am dead you think for me no further. bury me with all speed
that i may pass the gates of hades; the ghosts, vain shadows of men
that can labour no more, drive me away from them; they will not yet
suffer me to join those that are beyond the river, and i wander all
desolate by the wide gates of the house of hades. give me now your hand
i pray you, for when you have once given me my dues of fire, never
shall i again come forth out of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
house of hades. nevermore shall we
sit apart and take sweet counsel among the living; the cruel fate which
was my birth-right has yawned its wide jaws around me--nay, you too
achilles, peer of gods, are doomed to die beneath the wall of the noble
trojans.

"one prayer more will i make you, if you will grant it; let not my
bones be laid apart from yours, achilles, but with them; even as we
were brought up together in your own home, what time menoetius brought
me to you as a child from opoeis because by a sad spite i had killed
the son of amphidamas--not of set purpose, but in childish quarrel over
the dice. the knight peleus took me into his house, entreated me
kindly, and named me to be your squire; therefore let our bones lie in
but a single urn, the two-handled golden vase given to you by your
mother."

and achilles answered, "why, true heart, are yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u come hither to lay
these charges upon me? i will of my own self do all as you have bidden
me. draw closer to me, let us once more throw our arms around one
another, and find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows."

he opened his arms towards him as he spoke and would have clasped him
in them, but there was nothing, and the spirit vanished as a vapour,
gibbering and whining into the earth. achilles sprang to his feet,
smote his two hands, and made lamentation saying, "of a truth even in
the house of hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life in
them; all night long the sad spirit of patroclus has hovered over head
making piteous moan, telling me what i am to do for him, and looking
wondrously like himself."

thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning about
the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. then king
agamemnon sent men and mules from al
 
 ___________________________
 
ght
ways and crooked, and when they reached the heights of many-fountained
ida, they laid their axes to the roots of many a tall branching oak
that came thundering down as they felled it. they split the trees and
bound them behind the mules, which then wended their way as they best
could through the thick brushwood on to the plain. all who had been
cutting wood bore logs, for so meriones squire to idomeneus had bidden
them, and they threw them down in a line upon the seashore at the place
where achilles would make a mighty monument for patroclus and for
himself.

when they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole
ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but achilles ordered
his brave myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man his
horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted each
his chariot--they and their charioteers with them. the chariots went
before, and they that were on foot followed as a cloud in their tens of
thousands after. in th
 
 ___________________________
 
e midst of them his comrades bore patroclus and
covered him with the locks of their hair which they cut off and threw
upon his body. last came achilles with his head bowed for sorrow, so
noble a comrade was he taking to the house of hades.

when they came to the place of which achilles had told them they laid
the body down and built up the wood. achilles then bethought him of
another matter. he went a space away from the pyre, and cut off the
yellow lock which he had let grow for the river spercheius. he looked
all sorrowfully out upon the dark sea, and said, "spercheius, in vain
did my father peleus vow to you that when i returned home to my loved
native land i should cut off this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb;
fifty she-goats was i to sacrifice to you there at your springs, where
is your grove and your altar fragrant with burnt-offerings
 
 ___________________________
 
. thus did my
father vow, but you have not fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore, that
i shall see my home no more, i give this lock as a keepsake to the hero
patroclus."

as he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and
all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. the sun
would have gone down upon their mourning had not achilles presently
said to agamemnon, "son of atreus, for it is to you that the people
will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from
mourning; bid the people now leave the pyre and set about getting their
dinners: we, to whom the dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted
here, and let the other princes also stay by me."

when king agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their ships,
but those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built a pyre a
hundred feet this way and
 
 ___________________________
 
 that; then they laid the dead all sorrowfully
upon the top of it. they flayed and dressed many fat sheep and oxen
before the pyre, and achilles took fat from all of them and wrapped the
body therein from head to foot, heaping the flayed carcases all round
it. against the bier he leaned two-handled jars of honey and unguents;
four proud horses did he then cast upon the pyre, groaning the while he
did so. the dead hero had had house-dogs; two of them did achilles slay
and threw upon the pyre; he also put twelve brave sons of noble trojans
to the sword and laid them with the rest, for he was full of bitterness
and fury. then he committed all to the resistless and devouring might
of the fire; he groaned aloud and called on his dead comrade by name.
"fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in the house of hades; i am now
doing all that i have promised you. twelve brave sons of noble trojans
shall the flames consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, s
 
 ___________________________
 
hall
devour the flesh of hector son of priam."

thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of hector, for
jove's daughter venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him
with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when
achilles was dragging him about. phoebus apollo moreover sent a dark
cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

now the pyre about dead patroclus would not kindle. achilles therefore
bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two
winds boreas and zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. he made them
many drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come and
help him that the wood mi
 
 ___________________________
 
eard him praying and started off to fetch the
winds. they were holding high feast in the house of boisterous zephyrus
when iris came running up to the stone threshold of the house and stood
there, but as soon as they set eyes on her they all came towards her
and each of them called her to him, but iris would not sit down. "i
cannot stay," she said, "i must go back to the streams of oceanus and
the land of the ethiopians who are offering hecatombs to the immortals,
and i would have my share; but achilles prays that boreas and shrill
zephyrus will come to him, and he vows them goodly offerings; he would
have you blow upon the pyre of patroclus for whom all the achaeans are
lamenting."

with this she left them, and the two winds rose with a cry that rent
the air and swept the clouds before them. they blew on and on until
they came to the sea, and the waves rose high beneath them, but when
they reached troy they fell upon the pyre till the mighty flames roared
under the blast that they blew. all n
 
 ___________________________
 
ight long did they blow hard and
beat upon the fire, and all night long did achilles grasp his double
cup, drawing wine from a mixing-bowl of gold, and calling upon the
spirit of dead patroclus as he poured it upon the ground until the
earth was drenched. as a father mourns when he is burning the bones of
his bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his parents,
even so did achilles mourn while burning the body of his comrade,
pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation.

at length as the morning star was beginning to herald the light which
saffron-mantled dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames fell
and the fire began to die. the winds then went home beyond the thracian
sea, which roared and boiled as they swept over it. the son of peleus
now turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with toil, till he
fell into a sweet slumber. presently 
 
 ___________________________
 
d of the son of peleus. first they
poured red wine upon the thick layer of ashes and quenched the fire.
with many tears they singled out the whitened bones of their loved
comrade and laid them within a golden urn in two layers of fat: they
then covered the urn with a linen cloth and took it inside the tent.
they marked off the circle where the barrow should be, made a
foundation for it about the pyre, and forthwith heaped up the earth.
when they had thus raised a mound they were going away, but achilles
stayed the people and made them sit in assembly. he brought prizes from
the ships--cauldrons, tripods, horses and mules, noble oxen, women with
fair girdles, and swart iron.

the first prize he offered was for the chariot races--a woman skilled
in all useful arts, and a three-legged cauldron that had ears for
handles, and would hold twenty-two measures. this was for the man who
came in first. for the second there was a six-year old mare, unbroken,
and in foal to a he-ass; the third was to have 
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the man in
front of him. i will give you this certain token which cannot escape
your notice. there is a stump of a dead tree--oak or pine as it may
be--some six feet above the ground, and not yet rotted away by rain; it
stands at the fork of the road; it has two white stones set one on each
side, and there is a clear course all round it. it may have been a
monument to some one long since dead, or it may have been used as a
doubling-post in days gone by; now, however, it has been fixed on by
achilles as the mark round which the chariots shall turn; hug it as
close as you can, but as you stand in your chariot lean over a little
to the left; urge on your right-hand horse with voice and lash, and
give him a loose rein, but let the left-hand horse keep so close in,
that the nave of your wheel shall almost graze the post; but mind the
stone, or you will wound your horses and break your chariot in pieces,
which would be sport for others but confusion for yourself. therefore,
my dear son, mind wel
 
 ___________________________
 
l what you are about, for if you can be first to
round the post there is no chance of any one giving you the go-by
later, not even though you had adrestus's horse arion behind you--a
horse which is of divine race--or those of laomedon, which are the
noblest in this country."

when nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in his
place, and fifth in order meriones got ready his horses. they then all
mounted their chariots and cast lots. achilles shook the helmet, and
the lot of antilochus son of nestor fell out first; next came that of
king eumelus, and after his, those of menelaus son of atreus and of
meriones. the last place fell to the lot of diomed son of tydeus, who
was the best man of them all. they took their places in line; achilles
showed them the doubling-post round which they were to turn, some way
off upon the plain; here he stationed his father's follower phoenix as
umpire, to note the running, and report truly.

at the sa
 
 ___________________________
 
have been, and he is
on the chariot holding the reins."

the captain of the cretans was angry, and answered, "ajax you are an
excellent railer, but you have no judgement, and are wanting in much
else as well, for you have a vile temper. i will wager you a tripod or
cauldron, and agamemnon son of atreus shall decide whose horses are
first. you will then know to your cost."

ajax son of oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there would
have been yet further brawling between them, had not achilles risen in
his place and said, "cease your railing, ajax and idomeneus; it is not
seemly; you would be scandalised if you saw any one else do the like:
sit down and keep your eyes on the horses; they are speeding towards
the winning-post and will be here directly. you will then both of you
know whose horses are first, and whose come after."

as he was speaking, the son of tydeus came driving in, plying his whip
lustily from his shoulder, and his horses stepping high as they flew
over the course. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 first he had been a full disc's throw
behind him. he had soon caught him up again, for agamemnon's mare aethe
kept pulling stronger and stronger, so that if the course had been
longer he would have passed him, and there would not even have been a
dead heat. idomeneus's brave squire meriones was about a spear's cast
behind menelaus. his horses were slowest of all, and he was the worst
driver. last of them all came the son of admetus, dragging his chariot
and driving his horses on in front. when achilles saw him he was sorry,
and stood up among the argives saying, "the best man is coming in last.
let us give him a prize for it is reasonable. he shall have the second,
but the first must go to the son of tydeus."

thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying, and
were for doing as he had said, but nestor's son antilochus stood up and
claimed his rights from the son of peleus. "achilles," said he, "i
shall take it much amiss if you do this thing; you would rob me of my
prize, 
 
 ___________________________
 
re thrown out,
and himself too, good man that he is. he should have prayed duly to the
immortals; he would not have come in last if he had done so. if you are
sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents, with
bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. take something from this store if you
would have the achaeans speak well of you, and give him a better prize
even than that which you have now offered; but i will not give up the
mare, and he that will fight me for her, let him come on."

achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with antilochus, who
was one of his dearest comrades. so he said--

"antilochus, if you would have me find eumelus another prize, i will
give him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running all round it
which i took from asteropaeus. it will be worth much money to him."

he bade his comrade automedon bring the breastplate from his tent, and
he did so. achilles then gave it over to eumelus, who received it
gladly.

but menelaus got up in a rage, furi
 
 ___________________________
 
und so easily, but your good father,
your brother, and yourself have all of you had infinite trouble on my
behalf; i therefore yield to your entreaty, and will give up the mare
to you, mine though it indeed be; the people will thus see that i am
neither harsh nor vindictive."

with this he gave the mare over to antilochus's comrade noemon, and
then took the cauldron. meriones, who had come in fourth, carried off
the two talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the two-handled urn,
being unawarded, achilles gave it to nestor, going up to him among the
assembled argives and saying, "take this, my good old friend, as an
heirloom and memorial of the funeral of patroclus--for you shall see
him no more among the argives. i give you this prize though you cannot
win one; you can now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot enter for
the javelin-match nor foot-races, for the hand of age has been laid
heavily upon you."

so saying he gave the urn over to nestor, who received it gladly and
answered, "my son, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 ulysses did not forget
his cunning. he hit ajax in the hollow at back of his knee, so that he
could not keep his feet, but fell on his back with ulysses lying upon
his chest, and all who saw it marvelled. then ulysses in turn lifted
ajax and stirred him a little from the ground but could not lift him
right off it, his knee sank under him, and the two fell side by side on
the ground and were all begrimed with dust. they now sprang towards one
another and were for wrestling yet a third time, but achilles rose and
stayed them. "put not each other further," said he, "to such cruel
suffering; the victory is with both alike, take each of you an equal
prize, and let the other achaeans now compete."

thus did he speak and they did even as he had said, and put on their
shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.

the son of peleus then offered prizes for speed in running--a
mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. it would hold six
measures, and far exceeded all others in the who
 
 ___________________________
 
le world for beauty; it
was the work of cunning artificers in sidon, and had been brought into
port by phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it
to thoas. eueneus son of jason had given it to patroclus in ransom of
priam's son lycaon, and achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of
his comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. for the second
prize he offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there
was to be half a talent of gold. he then rose and said among the
argives, "stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

forthwith uprose fleet ajax son of oileus, with cunning ulysses, and
nestor's son antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of his
time. they stood side by side and achilles showed them th
 
 ___________________________
 
ll shouted applause as they saw him straining
his utmost, and cheered him as he shot past them; but when they were
now nearing the end of the course ulysses prayed inwardly to minerva.
"hear me," he cried, "and help my feet, o goddess." thus did he pray,
and pallas minerva heard his prayer; she made his hands and his feet
feel light, and when the runners were at the point of pouncing upon the
prize, ajax, through minerva's spite slipped upon some offal that was
lying there from the cattle which achilles had slaughtered in honour of
patroclus, and his mouth and nostrils were all filled with cow dung.
ulysses therefore carried off the mixing-bowl, for he got before ajax
and came in first. but ajax took the ox and stood with his hand on one
of its horns, spitting the dung out of his mouth. then he said to the
argives, "alas, the goddess has spoiled my running; she watches over
ulysses and stands by him as though she were his own mother." thus did
he speak and they all of them laughed heartily.

a
 
 ___________________________
 
ntilochus carried off the last prize and smiled as he said to the
bystanders, "you all see, my friends, that now too the gods have shown
their respect for seniority. ajax is somewhat older than i am, and as
for ulysses, he belongs to an earlier generation, but he is hale in
spite of his years, and no man of the achaeans can run against him save
only achilles."

he said this to pay a compliment to the son of peleus, and achilles
answered, "antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose; i
shall give you an additional half talent of gold." he then gave the
half talent to antilochus, who received it gladly.

then the son of peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that
had been borne by sarpedon, and were taken from him by patroclus. he
stood up and said among the argives, "we bid two champions put on their
armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the
presence of the multitude; whi
 
 ___________________________
 
rvelled as they beheld
them, and when the two were now close up with one another, thrice did
they spring forward and thrice try to strike each other in close
combat. ajax pierced diomed's round shield, but did not draw blood, for
the cuirass beneath the shield protected him; thereon the son of tydeus
from over his huge shield kept aiming continually at ajax's neck with
the point of his spear, and the achaeans alarmed for his safety bade
them leave off fighting and divide the prize between them. achilles
then gave the great sword to the son of tydeus, with its scabbard, and
the leathern belt with which to hang it.

achilles next offered the massive iron quoit which mighty eetion had
erewhile been used to hurl, until achilles had slain him and carried it
off in his ships along with other spoils. he stood up and said among
the argives, "stand forward, you who would essay this contest. he who
wins it will have a store of iron that will last him five years as they
go rolling round, and if his fair 
 
 ___________________________
 
ich set all the
achaeans laughing. after him threw leonteus of the race of mars. ajax
son of telamon threw third, and sent the quoit beyond any mark that had
been made yet, but when mighty polypoetes took the quoit he hurled it
as though it had been a stockman's stick which he sends flying about
among his cattle when he is driving them, so far did his throw
out-distance those of the others. all who saw it roared applause, and
his comrades carried the prize for him and set it on board his ship.

achilles next offered a prize of iron for archery--ten double-edged
axes and ten with single edges: he set up a ship's mast, some way off
upon the sands, and with a fine string tied a pigeon to it by the foot;
this was what they were to aim at. "whoever," he said, "can hit the
pigeon shall have all the axes and take them away with him; he who hits
the string without hitting the bird will have taken a worse aim and
shall have the single-edged axes."

then uprose king teucer, and meriones the stalwart squ
 
 ___________________________
 
d with all her feathers drooping; the life went out
of her, and she fell heavily from the mast. meriones, therefore, took
all ten double-edged axes, while teucer bore off the single-edged ones
to his ships.

then the son of peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had never
been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a pattern of
flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up--to wit the son of
atreus, king of men agamemnon, and meriones, stalwart squire of
idomeneus. but achilles spoke saying, "son of atreus, we know how far
you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take
the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let
us give the spear to meriones; this at least is what i should myself
wish."

king agamemnon assented. so he gave the bronze spear to meriones, and
handed the goodly cauldron to talthybius his esquire.



book xxiv

  priam ransoms the body of hector--hector's funeral.

the assembly now broke up and the people we
 
 ___________________________
 
nt their ways each to his
own ship. there they made ready their supper, and then bethought them
of the blessed boon of sleep; but achilles still wept for thinking of
his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could take no
hold upon him. this way and that did he turn as he yearned after the
might and manfulness of patroclus; he thought of all they had done
together, and all they had gone through both on the field of battle and
on the waves of the weary sea. as he dwelt on these things he wept
bitterly and lay now on his side, now on his back, and now face
downwards, till at last he rose and went out as one distraught
 
 ___________________________
 
saw dawn breaking over beach
and sea, he yoked his horses to his chariot, and bound the body of
hector behind it that he might drag it about. thrice did he drag it
round the tomb of the son of menoetius, and then went back into his
tent, leaving the body on the ground full length and with its face
downwards. but apollo would not suffer it to be disfigured, for he
pitied the man, dead though he now was; therefore he shielded him with
his golden aegis continually, that he might take no hurt while achilles
was dragging him.

thus shamefully did achilles in his fury dishonour hector; but the
blessed gods looked down in pity from heaven, and urged mercury, slayer
of argus, to steal the body. all were of this mind save only juno,
neptune, and jove's grey-eyed daughter, who persisted in the hate which
they had ever borne towards ilius with priam and his people; for they
forgave not the wrong done them by alexandrus in disdaining the
goddesses who came to him when he was in his sheepyards, and preferr
 
 ___________________________
 
ing of the twelfth day had now come, phoebus
apollo spoke among the immortals saying, "you gods ought to be ashamed
of yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. did not hector burn you
thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished goats? and now dare you not
rescue even his dead body, for his wife to look upon, with his mother
and child, his father priam, and his people, who would forthwith commit
him to the flames, and give him his due funeral rites? so, then, you
would all be on the side of mad achilles, who knows neither right nor
ruth? he is like some savage lion that in the pride of his great
strength and daring springs upon men's flocks and gorges on them. even
so has achilles flung aside all pity, and all that conscience which at
once so greatly banes yet greatly boons him that will heed it. a man
may lose one far dearer than achilles has lost--a son, it may be, or a
brother born from his own mother's womb; yet when he has mourned him
and wept over him he will let him bide, for it takes m
 
 ___________________________
 
uch sorrow to
kill a man; whereas achilles, now that he has slain noble hector, drags
him behind his chariot round the tomb of his comrade. it were better of
him, and for him, that he should not do so, for brave though he be we
gods may take it ill that he should vent his fury upon dead clay."

juno spoke up in a rage. "this were well," she cried, "o lord of the
silver bow, if you would give like honour to hector and to achilles;
but hector was mortal and suckled at a woman's breast, whereas achilles
is the offspring of a goddess whom i myself reared and brought up. i
married her to peleus, who is above measure dear to the immortals; you
gods came all of you to her wedding; you feasted along with them
yourself and brought your lyre--false, and fond of low company, that
you have ever been."

then said jove, "juno, be not so bitter. their honour shall not be
equal, but of all that dwell in ilius, hector was dearest to the gods,
as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. never was m
 
 ___________________________
 
y
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we claim of right. i shall therefore permit the body of
mighty hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without achilles
coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside him. let
some one of you, therefore, send thetis to me, and i will impart my
counsel to her, namely that achilles is to accept a ransom from priam,
and give up the body."

on this iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message. down
she plunged into the dark sea midway between samos and rocky imbrus;
the waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank into the bottom
as the lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is sped to carry death to
fishes. she found thetis sitting in a great cave with the other
sea-goddesses gathered round her; there she sat in the midst of them
weeping for her noble son who
 
 ___________________________
 
ve up her seat to her, and she sat down by the side of father
jove. juno then placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and spoke to her
in words of comfort, whereon thetis drank and gave her back the cup;
and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.

"so, goddess," said he, "for all your sorrow, and the grief that i well
know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to olympus, and i
will tell you why i have sent for you. this nine days past the
immortals have been quarrelling about achilles waster of cities and the
body of hector. the gods would have mercury slayer of argus steal the
body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, i will
concede such honour to your son as i will now tell you. go, then, to
the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry
with him, and that i am myself more angry than them all, in that he
keeps hector at the ships and will not give him up. he may thus fear me
and let the body go. at the same time i will send iris t
 
 ___________________________
 
o great priam
to bid him go to the ships of the achaeans, and ransom his son, taking
with him such gifts for achilles as may give him satisfaction."

silver-footed thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down
she darted from the topmost summits of olympus. she went to her son's
tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades
round him were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had
killed a great woolly sheep. his mother sat down beside him and
caressed him with her hand saying, "my son, how long will you keep on
thus grieving and making moan? you are gnawing at your
 
 ___________________________
 
 own heart, and
think neither of food nor of woman's embraces; and yet these too were
well, for you have no long time to live, and death with the strong hand
of fate are already close beside you. now, therefore, heed what i say,
for i come as a messenger from jove; he says that the gods are angry
with you, and himself more angry than them all, in that you keep hector
at the ships and will not give him up. therefore let him go, and accept
a ransom for his body."

and achilles answered, "so be it. if olympian jove of his own motion
thus commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the body away."

thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long discourse
with one another. meanwhile the son of saturn sent iris to the strong
city of ilius. "go," said he, "fleet iris, from the mansions of
olympus, and tell king priam in ilius, that he is to go to the ships of
the achaeans and free the body of his dear son. he is to take such
gifts with him as shall give s
 
 ___________________________
 
atisfaction to achilles, and he is to go
alone, with no other trojan, save only some honoured servant who may
drive his mules and waggon, and bring back the body of him whom noble
achilles has slain. let him have no thought nor fear of death in his
heart, for we will send the slayer of argus to escort him, and bring
him within the tent of achilles. achilles will not kill him nor let
another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he
will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

on this iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her message. she
went to priam's house, and found weeping and lamentation therein. his
sons were seated round their father in the outer courtyard, and their
raiment was wet with tears: the old man sat in the midst of them with
his mantle wrapped close about his body, and his head and neck al
 
 ___________________________
 
and brave men who lay dead, slain by
the argives. the messenger of jove stood by priam and spoke softly to
him, but fear fell upon him as she did so. "take heart," she said,
"priam offspring of dardanus, take heart and fear not. i bring no evil
tidings, but am minded well towards you. i come as a messenger from
jove, who though he be not near, takes thought for you and pities you.
the lord of olympus bids you go and ransom noble hector, and take with
you such gifts as shall give satisfaction to achilles. you are to go
alone, with no trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive
your mules and waggon, and bring back to the city the body of him whom
noble achilles has slain. you are to have no thought, nor fear of
death, for jove will send the slayer of argus to escort you. when he
has brought you within achilles' tent, achilles will not kill you nor
let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and
he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

iris went
 
 ___________________________
 
 her way when she had thus spoken, and priam told his sons to
get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast upon
the top of its bed. then he went down into his fragrant store-room,
high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were
kept, and he called hecuba his wife. "wife," said he, "a messenger has
come to me from olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of the
achaeans to ransom my dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall give
satisfaction to achilles. what think you of this matter? for my own
part i am greatly moved to pass through the camps of the achaeans and
go to their ships."

his wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, "alas, what has become
of that judgement for which you have been ever famous both among
strangers and your own people? how can you venture alone to the ships
of the achaeans, and look into the face of him who has slain so many of
your brave sons? you must have iron courage, for if the cruel savage
sees you and lays
 
 ___________________________
 
 hold on you, he will know neither respect nor pity.
let us then weep hector from afar here in our own house, for when i
gave him birth the threads of overruling fate were spun for him that
dogs should eat his flesh far from his parents, in the house of that
terrible man on whose liver i would fain fasten and devour it. thus
would i avenge my son, who showed no cowardice when achilles slew him,
and thought neither of flight nor of avoiding battle as he stood in
defence of trojan men and trojan women."

then priam said, "i would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as a bird
of ill omen in my house, for you will not move me. had it been some
mortal man who had sent me some prophet or priest who divines from
sacrifice--i should have deemed him false and have given him no heed;
but now i have heard the goddess and seen her face to face, therefore i
will go and her saying shall n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot be in vain. if it be my fate to die at
the ships of the achaeans even so would i have it; let achilles slay
me, if i may but first have taken my son in my arms and mourned him to
my heart's comforting."

so saying he lifted the lids of his chests, and took out twelve goodly
vestments. he took also twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs,
twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. he weighed out ten
talents of gold, and brought moreover two burnished tripods, four
cauldrons, and a very beautiful cup which the thracians had given him
when he had gone to them on an embassy; it was very p
 
 ___________________________
 
in prayer to jove, if so be he may have mercy upon me."

with this the old man bade the serving-woman pour pure water over his
hands, and the woman came, bearing the water in a bowl. he washed his
hands and took the cup from his wife; then he made the drink-offering
and prayed, standing in the middle of the courtyard and turning his
eyes to heaven. "father jove," he said, "that rulest from ida, most
glorious and most great, grant that i may be received kindly and
compassionately in the tents of achilles; and send your swift messenger
upon my right hand, the bird of omen which is strongest and most dear
to you of all birds, that i may see it with my own eyes and trust it as
i go forth to the ships of the danaans."

so did he pray, and jove the lord of counsel heard his prayer.
forthwith he sent an eagle, the most unerring portent of all birds that
fly, the dusky hunter that men also call the black eagle. his wings
were spread abroad on either side as wide as the well-made and
well-bolted door o
 
 ___________________________
 
llen
who was the bravest man among you and was never lacking in battle with
the achaeans?"

and priam said, "who are you, my friend, and who are your parents, that
you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy son?"

the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, answered him, "sir, you would
prove me, that you question me about noble hector. many a time have i
set eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the argives to their
ships and putting them to the sword. we stood still and marvelled, for
achilles in his anger with the son of atreus suffered us not to fight.
i am his squire, and came with him in the same ship. i am a myrmidon,
and my father's name is polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as
you are; he has six sons besides myself, and i am the seventh. we cast
lots, and it fell upon me to sail hither with achilles. i am now come
from the ships on to the plain, for with daybreak the achaeans will set
battle in array about the city. they chafe at doing nothing, and are so
eager that 
 
 ___________________________
 
their princes cannot hold them back."

then answered priam, "if you are indeed the squire of achilles son of
peleus, tell me now the whole truth. is my son still at the ships, or
has achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him to his hounds?"

"sir," replied the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, "neither hounds
nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying at the tents
by the ship of achilles, and though it is now twelve days that he has
lain there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the worms eaten him
although they feed on warriors. at daybreak achilles drags him cruelly
round the sepulchre of his dear comrade, but it does him no hurt. you
should come yourself and see how he lies fresh as dew, with the blood
all washed away, and his wounds every one of them closed though many
pierced him with their spears. such care have the blessed gods taken of
your brave son, for he was dear to t
 
 ___________________________
 
have made due offerings to the immortals; for as
sure as that he was born my son never forgot the gods that hold
olympus, and now they requite it to him even in death. accept therefore
at my hands this goodly chalice; guard me and with heaven's help guide
me till i come to the tent of the son of peleus."

then answered the slayer of argus, guide and guardian, "sir, you are
tempting me and playing upon my youth, but you shall not move me, for
you are offering me presents without the knowledge of achilles whom i
fear and hold it great guilt to defraud, lest some evil presently
befall me; but as your guide i would go with you even to argos itself,
and would guard you so carefully whether by sea or land, that no one
should attack you through making light of him who was with you."

the bringer of good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing the
whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses. when
they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships, those
who we
 
 ___________________________
 
n
his waggon. ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of
peleus for which the myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built
for their king; when they had built it they thatched it with coarse
tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and all round it
they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes set close
together. the gate was barred with a single bolt of pine which it took
three men to force into its place, and three to draw back so as to open
the gate, but achilles could draw it by himself. mercury opened the
gate for the old man, and brought in the treasure that he was taking
with him for the son of peleus. then he sprang from the chariot on to
the ground and said, "sir, it is i, immortal mercury, that am come with
you, for my father sent me to escort you. i will now leave you, and
will not enter into the presence of achilles, for it might anger him
that a god should befriend mortal men thus openly. go you within, and
embrace the knees of the son of pele
 
 ___________________________
 
us: beseech him by his father, his
lovely mother, and his son; thus you may move him."

with these words mercury went back to high olympus. priam sprang from
his chariot to the ground, leaving idaeus where he was, in charge of
the mules and horses. the old man went straight into the house where
achilles, loved of the gods, was sitting. there he found him with his
men seated at a distance from him: only two, the hero automedon, and
alcimus of the race of mars, were busy in attendance about his person,
for he had but just done eating and drinking, and the table was still
there. king priam entered without their seeing him, and going right up
to achilles he clasped his knees and kissed the dread murderous hands
that had slain so many of his sons.

as when some cruel spite has befallen a man that h
 
 ___________________________
 
e should have killed
some one in his own country, and must fly to a great man's protection
in a land of strangers, and all marvel who see him, even so did
achilles marvel as he beheld priam. the others looked one to another
and marvelled also, but priam besought achilles saying, "think of your
father, o achilles like unto the gods, who is such even as i am, on the
sad threshold of old age. it may be that those who dwell near him
harass him, and there is none to keep war and ruin from him. yet when
he hears of you being still alive, he is glad, and his days are full of
hope that he shall see his dear son come home to him from troy; but i,
wretched man that i am, had the bravest in all troy for my sons, and
there is not one of them left. i had fifty sons when the achaeans came
here; nineteen of them were
 
 ___________________________
 
 from a single womb, and the others were
borne to me by the women of my household. the greater part of them has
fierce mars laid low, and hector, him who was alone left, him who was
the guardian of the city and ourselves, him have you lately slain;
therefore i am now come to the ships of the achaeans to ransom his body
from you with a great ransom. fear, o achilles, the wrath of heaven;
think on your own father and have compassion upon me, who am the more
pitiable, for i have steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled
himself before me, and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew
my son."

thus spoke priam, and the heart of achilles yearned as he bethought him
of his father. he took the old man's hand and moved him gently away.
the two wept bitterly--priam, as he lay at achilles' feet, weeping for
hector, and achilles now for his father and now
 
 ___________________________
 
 for patroclus, till the
house was filled with their lamentation. but when achilles was now
sated with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he
left his seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white
hair and beard; then he said, "unhappy man, you have indeed been
greatly daring; how could you venture to come alone to the ships of the
achaeans, and enter the presence of him who has slain so many of your
brave sons? you must have iron courage: sit now upon this seat, and for
all our grief we will hide our sorrows in our hearts, for weeping will
 
 ___________________________
 
for your brave son, you will take nothing
by it. you cannot raise him from the dead, ere you do so yet another
sorrow shall befall you."

and priam answered, "o king, bid me not be seated, while hector is
still lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great ransom
which i have brought you, and give him to me at once that i may look
upon him. may you prosper with the ransom and reach your own land in
safety, seeing that you have suffered me to live and to look upon the
light of the sun."

achilles looked at him sternly and said, "vex me, sir, no longer; i am
of myself minded to give up the body of hector. my mother, daughter of
the old man of the sea, came to me from jove to bid me deliver it to
you. moreover i know well, o priam, and you cannot hide it, that some
god has brought you to the ships of the achaeans, for else, no man
however strong and in his prime would dare to come to our host; he
could neither pass our guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus
easily; therefore, pr
 
 ___________________________
 
ou are, within my tents."

the old man feared him and obeyed. then the son of peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his
two squires automedon and alcimus who were closer to him than any
others of his comrades now that patroclus was no more. these unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. they lifted the ransom for hector's body from the
waggon, but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. then he
called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint it,
but he first took it to a place where priam should not see it, lest if
he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of his grief, and
enrage achilles, who might then kill him and sin against the word of
jove. when the servants had washed the body and anointed it, and had
wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle, achilles himself lifted it on to
a bier, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd he and his men then laid it on the waggon. he cried aloud
as he did so and called on the name of his dear comrade, "be not angry
with me, patroclus," he said, "if you hear even in the house of hades
that i have given hector to his father for a ransom. it has been no
unworthy one, and i will share it equitably with you."

achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right
angles to the one against which priam was sitting. "sir," he said,
"your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to
desire; you shall look upon him when you take him away at daybreak; for
the present let us prepare our supper. even lovely niobe had to think
about eating, though her twelve children--six daughters and six lusty
sons--had been all slain i
 
 ___________________________
 
 gods in heaven
themselves buried them, and niobe then took food, being worn out with
weeping. they say that somewhere among the rocks on the mountain
pastures of sipylus, where the nymphs live that haunt the river
achelous, there, they say, she lives in stone and still nurses the
sorrows sent upon her by the hand of heaven. therefore, noble sir, let
us two now take food; you can weep for your dear son hereafter as you
are bearing him back to ilius--and many a tear will he cost you."

with this achilles sprang from his seat and killed a sheep of silvery
whiteness, which his followers skinned and made ready all in due order.
they cut the meat carefully up into smaller pieces, spitted them, and
drew them off again when they were well roasted. automedon brought
bread in fair baskets and served it round the table, while achilles
dealt out the meat, and they laid their hands on the good things that
were before them. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
priam, descendant of dardanus, mar
 
 ___________________________
 
velled at the strength and beauty of
achilles for he was as a god to see, and achilles marvelled at priam as
he listened to him and looked upon his noble presence. when they had
gazed their fill priam spoke first. "and now, o king," he said, "take
me to my couch that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of
sleep. never once have my eyes been closed from the day your hands took
the life of my son; i have grovelled without ceasing in the mire of my
stable-yard, making moan and brooding over my countless sorrows. now,
moreover, i have eaten bread and drunk wine; hitherto i hav
 
 ___________________________
 
e tasted
nothing."

as he spoke achilles told his men and the women-servants to set beds in
the room that was in the gatehouse, and make them with good red rugs,
and spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for priam
and idaeus to wear. so the maids went out carrying a torch and got the
two beds ready in all haste. then achilles said laughingly to priam,
"dear sir, you shall lie outside, lest some counsellor of those who in
due course keep coming to advise with me should see you here in the
darkness of the flying night, and tell it to agamemnon. this might
cause delay in the delivery of the body. and now tell me and tell me
true, for how many days would you celebrate the funeral rites of noble
hector? tell me, that i may hold aloof from war and restrain the host."

and priam answered, "since, then, you suffer me to bur
 
 ___________________________
 
y my noble son
with all due rites, do thus, achilles, and i shall be grateful. you
know how we are pent up within our city; it is far for us to fetch wood
from the mountain, and the people live in fear. nine days, therefore,
will we mourn hector in my house; on the tenth day we will bury him and
there shall be a public feast in his honour; on the eleventh we will
build a mound over his ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be need, we
will fight."

and achilles answered, "all, king priam, shall be as you have said. i
will stay our fighting for as long a time as you have named."

as he spoke he laid his hand on the old man's right wrist, in token
that he should have no fear; thus then did priam and his attendant
sleep there in the forecourt, full of thought, while achilles lay in an
inner room of the house, with fair briseis by his side.

and now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the livelong
night, but upon mercury alone, the bringer of g
 
 ___________________________
 
ood luck, sleep could
take no hold for he was thinking all the time how to get king priam
away from the ships without his being seen by the strong force of
sentinels. he hovered therefore over priam's head and said, "sir, now
that achilles has spared your life, you seem to have no fear about
sleeping in the thick of your foes. you have paid a great ransom, and
have received the body of your son; were you still alive and a prisoner
the sons whom you have left at home would have to give three times as
much to free you; and so it would be if agamemnon and the other
achaeans were to know of your being here."

when he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant.
mercury then yoked their horses and mules, and drove them qu
 
 ___________________________
 
nd my own grief is greatest of all, for you did not
stretch forth your arms and embrace me as you lay dying, nor say to me
any words that might have lived with me in my tears night and day for
evermore."

bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her lament.
hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. "hector," she cried,
"dearest to me of all my children. so long as you were alive the gods
loved you well, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful
of you; for when achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him
beyond the seas, to samos imbrus or rugged lemnos; and when he had
slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the
sepulchre of his comrade--though this could not give him life--yet here
you lie all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom apollo has slain with
his painless shafts."

thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then
helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "hector,"
said she, "deares
 
 ___________________________
 
iam was as kind to me as though he were my own
father--you would rebuke and check them with words of gentleness and
goodwill. therefore my tears flow both for you and for my unhappy self,
for there is no one else in troy who is kind to me, but all shrink and
shudder as they go by me."

she wept as she spoke and the vast crowd that was gathered round her
joined in her lament. then king priam spoke to them saying, "bring
wood, o trojans, to the city, and fear no cunning ambush of the
argives, for achilles when he dismissed me from the ships gave me his
word that they should not attack us until the morning of the twelfth
day."

forthwith they yoked their oxen and mules and gathered together before
the city. nine days long did they bring in great heaps of wood, and on
the morning of the tenth day with many tears they took brave hector
forth, laid his dead body upon the summit of the pile, and set the fire
thereto. then when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared
on the eleventh day, th