him to be the bane of the
trojans, and of priam and priam's sons. could i but see him go down
into the house of hades, my heart would forget its heaviness."

his mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who
gathered the matrons throughout the city. she then went down into her
fragrant store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept, the work of
sidonian women, whom alexandrus had brought over from sidon when he
sailed the seas upon that voyage during which he carried off helen.
hecuba took out the largest robe, and the one that was most beautifully
enriched with embroidery, as an offering to minerva: it glittered like
a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. with this she went on
her way and many matrons with her.

when they reached the temple of minerva, lovely theano, daughter of
cisseus and wife of antenor, opened the doors, for the trojans had made
her priestess of minerva. the women lifted up their hands to the
goddess with a loud cry, and theano took the robe t
 
 ___________________________
 
or
because some soothsayer had told them."

and hector answered, "wife, i too have thought upon all this, but with
what face should i look upon the trojans, men or women, if i shirked
battle like a coward? i cannot do so: i know nothing save to fight
bravely in the forefront of the trojan host and win renown alike for my
father and myself. well do i know that the day will surely come when
mighty ilius shall be destroyed with priam and priam's people, but i
grieve for none of these--not even for hecuba, nor king priam, nor for
my brothers many and brave who may fall in the dust before their
foes--for none of these do i grieve as for yourself when the day shall
come on which some one of the achaeans shall rob you for ever of your
freedom, and bear you weeping away. it may be that you will have to ply
the loom in argos at the bidding of a mistress, or to fetch water from
the springs messeis or hypereia, treated brutally by some cruel
task-master; then will one say who sees you weeping, 'she was
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of achilles who is a far
better man than you are." on hearing this, patroclus withdrew to some
distance and avoided the anger of apollo.

meanwhile hector was waiting with his horses inside the scaean gates,
in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call the
army inside the gates. as he was thus doubting phoebus apollo drew near
him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior asius, who was
hector's uncle, being own brother to hecuba, and son of dymas who lived
in phrygia by the waters of the river sangarius; in his likeness jove's
son apollo now spoke to hector saying, "hector, why have you left off
fighting? it is ill done of you. if i were as much better a man than
you, as i am worse, you should soon rue your slackness. drive straight
towards patroclus, if so be that apollo may grant you a triumph over
him, and you may rule him."

with this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and hector bade
cebriones drive again int
 
 ___________________________
 
."

thus spoke minerva. achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while minerva left him and
went after hector in the form and with the voice of deiphobus. she came
close up to him and said, "dear brother, i see you are hard pressed by
achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of priam, let
us await his onset and stand on our defence."

and hector answered, "deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of
all my brothers, children of hecuba and priam, but henceforth i shall
rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the
wall for my sake when all the others remain inside."

then minerva said, "dear brother, my father and mother went down on
their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but i was in an agony of
grief when i beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 myself more than of all
others. many a son of mine has he slain in the flower of his youth, and
yet, grieve for these as i may, i do so for one--hector--more than for
them all, and the bitterness of my sorrow will bring me down to the
house of hades. would that he had died in my arms, for so both his
ill-starred mother who bore him, and myself, should have had the
comfort of weeping and mourning over him."

thus did he speak with many tears, and all the people of the city
joined in his lament. hecuba then raised the cry of wailing among the
trojans. "alas, my son," she cried, "what have i left to live for now
that you are no more? night and day did i glory in you throughout the
city, for you were a tower of strength to all in troy, and both men and
women alike hailed you as a god. so long as you lived you were their
pride, but now death and destruction have fallen upon you."

hector's wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to tell her
that her husband had remained without the ga
 
 ___________________________
 
he
has brought you within achilles' tent, achilles will not kill you nor
let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and
he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and priam told his sons to
get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast upon
the top of its bed. then he went down into his fragrant store-room,
high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were
kept, and he called hecuba his wife. "wife," said he, "a messenger has
come to me from olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of the
achaeans to ransom my dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall give
satisfaction to achilles. what think you of this matter? for my own
part i am greatly moved to pass through the camps of the achaeans and
go to their ships."

his wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, "alas, what has become
of that judgement for which you have been ever famous both among
strangers and your o
 
 ___________________________
 
e knob, and bending the thong
of the yoke beneath it. this done, they brought from the store-chamber
the rich ransom that was to purchase the body of hector, and they set
it all orderly on the waggon; then they yoked the strong harness-mules
which the mysians had on a time given as a goodly present to priam; but
for priam himself they yoked horses which the old king had bred, and
kept for his own use.

thus heedfully did priam and his servant see to the yolking of their
cars at the palace. then hecuba came to them all sorrowful, with a
golden goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might make a
drink-offering before they set out. she stood in front of the horses
and said, "take this, make a drink-offering to father jove, and since
you are minded to go to the ships in spite of me, pray that you may
come safely back from the hands of your enemies. pray to the son of
saturn lord of the whirlwind, who sits on ida and looks down over all
troy, pray him to send his swift messenger on your righ
 
 ___________________________
 
ther whom hector slew; many of them have indeed bitten the dust at
his hands, for your father's hand in battle was no light one. therefore
do the people mourn him. you have left, o hector, sorrow unutterable to
your parents, and my own grief is greatest of all, for you did not
stretch forth your arms and embrace me as you lay dying, nor say to me
any words that might have lived with me in my tears night and day for
evermore."

bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her lament.
hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. "hector," she cried,
"dearest to me of all my children. so long as you were alive the gods
loved you well, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful
of you; for when achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him
beyond the seas, to samos imbrus or rugged lemnos; and when he had
slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the
sepulchre of his comrade--though this could not give him life--yet here
you lie all fresh a