and bring her
hither; if he will not give her i shall come with others and take
her--which will press him harder."

he charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the myrmidons. they found achilles sitting by his tent and
his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. they stood
fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak,
but he knew them and said, "welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and
men; draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with agamemnon who has
sent you for the girl briseis. therefore, patroclus, bring her and give
her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by mortal
men, and by the fierceness of agamemnon's anger, that if ever again
there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they shall seek and
they shall not find. agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to
look before and after that the achaeans may fight by 
 
 ___________________________
 
their ships in
safety."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. he brought briseis
from the tent and gave her over to the heralds, who took her with them
to the ships of the achaeans--and the woman was loth to go. then
achilles went all alone by the side of the hoar sea, weeping and
looking out upon the boundless waste of waters. he raised his hands in
prayer to his immortal mother, "mother," he cried, "you bore me doomed
to live but for a little season; surely jove, who thunders from
olympus, might have made that little glorious. it is not so. agamemnon,
son of atreus, has done me dishonour, and has robbed me of my pr
 
 ___________________________
 
then the god
sent a deadly dart upon the argives, and the people died thick on one
another, for the arrows went everywhither among the wide host of the
achaeans. at last a seer in the fulness of his knowledge declared to us
the oracles of apollo, and i was myself first to say that we should
appease him. whereon the son of atreus rose in anger, and threatened
that which he has since done. the achaeans are now taking the girl in a
ship to chryse, and sending gifts of sacrifice to the god; but the
heralds have just taken from my tent the daughter of briseus, whom the
achaeans had awarded to myself.

"help your brave son, therefore, if you are able. go to olympus, and if
you have ever done him service in word or deed, implore the aid of
jove. ofttimes in my father's house have i heard you glory in that you
alone of the immortals saved the son of saturn from ruin, when the
others, with juno, neptune, and pallas minerva would have put him in
bonds. it was you, goddess, who delivered him by calli
 
 ___________________________
 
nother hard-fought fight in store alike for danaans and trojans.
then presently he woke, with the divine message still ringing in his
ears; so he sat upright, and put on his soft shirt so fair and new, and
over this his heavy cloak. he bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
and slung his silver-studded sword about his shoulders; then he took
the imperishable staff of his father, and sallied forth to the ships of
the achaeans.

the goddess dawn now wended her way to vast olympus that she might
herald day to jove and to the other immortals, and agamemnon sent the
criers round to call the people in assembly; so they called them and
the people gathered thereon. but first he summoned a meeting of the
elders at the ship of nestor king of pylos, and when they were
assembled he laid a cunning counsel before them.

"my friends," said he, "i have had a dream from heaven in the dead of
night, and its face and figure resembled none but nestor's. it hovered
over my head and said, 'you are sleeping, s
 
 ___________________________
 
o hear. they swarmed like bees that sally from
some hollow cave and flit in countless throng among the spring flowers,
bunched in knots and clusters; even so did the mighty multitude pour
from ships and tents to the assembly, and range themselves upon the
wide-watered shore, while among them ran wildfire rumour, messenger of
jove, urging them ever to the fore. thus they gathered in a pell-mell
of mad confusion, and the earth groaned under the tramp of men as the
people sought their places. nine heralds went crying about among them
to stay their tumult and bid them listen to the kings, till at last
they were got into their several places and ceased their clamour. then
king agamemnon rose, holding his sceptre. this was the work of vulcan,
who gave it to jove the son of saturn. jove gave it to mercury, slayer
of argus, guide and guardian. king mercury gave it to pelops, the
mighty charioteer, and pelops to atreus, shepherd of his people.
atreus, when he died, left it to thyestes, rich in floc
 
 ___________________________
 
t down frightened and in pain, looking foolish as he
wiped the tears from his eyes. the people were sorry for him, yet they
laughed heartily, and one would turn to his neighbour saying, "ulysses
has done many a good thing ere now in fight and council, but he never
did the argives a better turn than when he stopped this fellow's mouth
from prating further. he will give the kings no more of his insolence."

thus said the people. then ulysses rose, sceptre in hand, and minerva
in the likeness of a herald bade the people be still, that those who
were far off might hear him and consider his council. he therefore with
all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus:--

"king agamemnon, the achaeans are for making you a by-word among all
mankind. they forget the promise they made you when they set out from
argos, that you should not return till you had sacked the town of troy,
and, like children or widowed women, they murmur and would set off
homeward. true it is that they have had toil enough to 
 
 ___________________________
 
they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small, put the
pieces upon spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off;
then, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, they
ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied.
as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, nestor, knight of
gerene, began to speak. "king agamemnon," said he, "let us not stay
talking here, nor be slack in the work that heaven has put into our
hands. let the heralds summon the people to gather at their several
ships; we will then go about among the host, that we may begin fighting
at once."

thus did he speak, and agamemnon heeded his words. he at once sent the
criers round to call the people in assembly. so they called them, and
the people gathered thereon. the chiefs about the son of atreus chose
their men and marshalled them, while minerva went among them holding
her priceless aegis that knows neither age nor death. from it there
waved a hundred tass
 
 ___________________________
 
oremost of the achaeans upon the soil
of troy. still, though his people mourned their chieftain, they were
not without a leader, for podarces, of the race of mars, marshalled
them; he was son of iphiclus, rich in sheep, who was the son of
phylacus, and he was own brother to protesilaus, only younger,
protesilaus being at once the elder and the more valiant. so the people
were not without a leader, though they mourned him whom they had lost.
with him there came forty ships.

and those that held pherae by the boebean lake, with boebe, glaphyrae,
and the populous city of iolcus, these with their eleven ships were led
by eumelus, son of admetus, whom alcestis bore to him, loveliest of the
daughters of pelias.

and those that held methone and thaumacia, with meliboea and rugged
olizon, these were led by the skilful archer philoctetes, and they had
seven ships, each with fifty oarsmen all of them good archers; but
philoctetes was lying in great pain in the island of lemnos, where the
sons of the
 
 ___________________________
 
haeans whose names i could
tell you, but there are two whom i can nowhere find, castor, breaker of
horses, and pollux the mighty boxer; they are children of my mother,
and own brothers to myself. either they have not left lacedaemon, or
else, though they have brought their ships, they will not show
themselves in battle for the shame and disgrace that i have brought
upon them."

she knew not that both these heroes were already lying under the earth
in their own land of lacedaemon.

meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy oath-offerings through the
city--two lambs and a goatskin of wine, the gift of earth; and idaeus
brought the mixing bowl and the cups of gold. he went up to priam and
said, "son of laomedon, the princes of the trojans and achaeans bid you
come down on to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant. alexandrus
and menelaus are to fight for helen in single combat, that she and all
her wealth may go with him who is the victor. we are to swear to a
solemn covenant of peace wh
 
 ___________________________
 
e achaeans."

thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown
it into the helmet of agamemnon son of atreus, the people lifted their
hands in prayer, and thus would one of them say as he looked into the
vault of heaven, "father jove, grant that the lot fall on ajax, or on
the son of tydeus, or upon the king of rich mycene himself."

as they were speaking, nestor knight of gerene shook the helmet, and
from it there fell the very lot which they wanted--the lot of ajax. the
herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the
achaeans, going from left to right; but they none of them owned it.
when, however, in due course he reached the man who had written upon it
and had put it into the helmet, brave ajax held out his hand, and the
herald gave him the lot. when ajax saw his mark he knew it and was
glad; he threw it to the ground and said, "my friends, the lot is mine,
and i rejoice, for i shall vanquish hector. i will put on my armour;
meanwhile, pray to kin
 
 ___________________________
 
 rugged and huge, that was lying upon the plain; with this he
struck the shield of ajax on the boss that was in its middle, so that
the bronze rang again. but ajax in turn caught up a far larger stone,
swung it aloft, and hurled it with prodigious force. this millstone of
a rock broke hector's shield inwards and threw him down on his back
with the shield crushing him under it, but apollo raised him at once.
thereon they would have hacked at one another in close combat with
their swords, had not heralds, messengers of gods and men, come
forward, one from the trojans and the other from the
achaeans--talthybius and idaeus both of them honourable men; these
parted them with their staves, and the good herald idaeus said, "my
sons, fight no longer, you are both of you valiant, and both are dear
to jove; we know this; but night is now falling, and the behests of
night may not be well gainsaid."

ajax son of telamon answered, "idaeus, bid hector say so, for it was he
that challenged our princes. l
 
 ___________________________
 
o bring sheep and
cattle from the city; bring wine also and corn for your horses and
gather much wood, that from dark till dawn we may burn watchfires whose
flare may reach to heaven. for the achaeans may try to fly beyond the
sea by night, and they must not embark scatheless and unmolested; many
a man among them must take a dart with him to nurse at home, hit with
spear or arrow as he is leaping on board his ship, that others may fear
to bring war and weeping upon the trojans. moreover let the heralds
tell it about the city that the growing youths and grey-bearded men are
to camp upon its heaven-built walls. let the women each of them light a
great fire in her house, and let watch be safely kept lest the town be
entered by surprise while the host is outside. see to it, brave
trojans, as i have said, and let this suffice for the moment; at
daybreak i will instruct you further. i pray in hope to jove and to the
gods that we may then drive those fate-sped hounds from our land, for
'tis the f
 
 ___________________________
 
ok ix

  the embassy to achilles.

thus did the trojans watch. but panic, comrade of blood-stained rout,
had taken fast hold of the achaeans, and their princes were all of them
in despair. as when the two winds that blow from thrace--the north and
the northwest--spring up of a sudden and rouse the fury of the main--in
a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter their sea-wrack
in all directions--even thus troubled were the hearts of the achaeans.

the son of atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a
council man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made haste also
himself to call them, and they sat sorry at heart in their assembly.
agamemnon shed tears as it were a running stream or cataract on the
side of some sheer cliff; and thus, with many a heavy sigh he spoke to
the achaeans. "my friends," said he, "princes and councillors of the
argives, the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. cruel jove
gave me his solemn promise that i should sack the city o
 
 ___________________________
 
achaean argos, wealthiest of
all lands, he shall be my son-in-law and i will show him like honour
with my own dear son orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. i
have three daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa, let him
take the one of his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the
house of peleus; i will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave
his daughter, and will give him seven well established cities,
cardamyle, enope, and hire, where there is grass; holy pherae and the
rich meadows of anthea; aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of
pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy pylos. the men
that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour him
with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient to his comfortable
ordinances. all this will i do if he will now forgo his anger. let him
then yield; it is only hades who is utterly ruthless and
unyielding--and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to
mankind. moreover i am ol
 
 ___________________________
 
der and more royal than himself. therefore,
let him now obey me."

then nestor answered, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon. the gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send
chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of achilles son of peleus
without delay. let those go whom i shall name. let phoenix, dear to
jove, lead the way; let ajax and ulysses follow, and let the heralds
odius and eurybates go with them. now bring water for our hands, and
bid all keep silence while we pray to jove the son of saturn, if so be
that he may have mercy upon us."

thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings,
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the en
 
 ___________________________
 
, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his
son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear son
orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. agamemnon has three
daughters, chrysothemis, laodice, and iphianassa; you may take the one
of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of
peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his
daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities, cardamyle,
enope, and hire where there is grass; holy pheras and the rich meadows
of anthea; aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of pedasus, all near
the sea, and on the borders of sandy pylos. the men that dwell there
are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though
were a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. all this
will he do if you will now forgo your anger. moreover, though you hate
both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the rest of the
achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they wi
 
 ___________________________
 
d your gifts. he bids you take counsel with the
achaeans to save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself, he
said that at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water. he said
further that he should advise every one to sail home likewise, for that
you will not reach the goal of ilius. 'jove,' he said, 'has laid his
hand over the city to protect it, and the people have taken heart.'
this is what he said, and the others who were with me can tell you the
same story--ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be
trusted. the old man phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so
achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the morning
if he so would; but he will not take him by force."

they all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected,
by reason of the sternness with which achilles had refused them, till
presently diomed said, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the son of peleus nor offered him
 
 ___________________________
 
ther peak or
crest; it is called a skull-cap and is a common headgear. meriones
found a bow and quiver for ulysses, and on his head he set a leathern
helmet that was lined with a strong plaiting of leathern thongs, while
on the outside it was thickly studded with boar's teeth, well and
skilfully set into it; next the head there was an inner lining of felt.
this helmet had been stolen by autolycus out of eleon when he broke
into the house of amyntor son of ormenus. he gave it to amphidamas of
cythera to take to scandea, and amphidamas gave it as a guest-gift to
molus, who gave it to his son meriones; and now it was set upon the
head of ulysses.

when the pair had armed, they set out, and left the other chieftains
behind them. pallas minerva sent them a heron by the wayside upon their
right hands; they could not see it for the darkness, but they heard its
cry. ulysses was glad when he heard it and prayed to minerva: "hear
me," he cried, "daughter of aegis-bearing jove, you who spy out all my
 
 ___________________________
 
im a chariot and a couple of horses, the fleetest
that can be found at the ships of the achaeans, if he will dare this
thing; and he will win infinite honour to boot; he must go to the ships
and find out whether they are still guarded as heretofore, or whether
now that we have beaten them the achaeans design to fly, and through
sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches."

they all held their peace; but there was among the trojans a certain
man named dolon, son of eumedes, the famous herald--a man rich in gold
and bronze. he was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son
among five sisters. he it was that now addressed the trojans. "i,
hector," said he, "will to the ships and will exploit them. but first
hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot,
bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of
peleus. i will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. i will go
through the host from one end to the other till i come to the sh
 
 ___________________________
 
a vast
quantity of booty from the plain, fifty herds of cattle and as many
flocks of sheep; fifty droves also of pigs, and as many wide-spreading
flocks of goats. of horses, moreover, we seized a hundred and fifty,
all of them mares, and many had foals running with them. all these did
we drive by night to pylus, the city of neleus, taking them within the
city; and the heart of neleus was glad in that i had taken so much,
though it was the first time i had ever been in the field. at daybreak
the heralds went round crying that all in elis to whom there was a debt
owing should come; and the leading pylians assembled to divide the
spoils. there were many to whom the epeans owed chattels, for we men of
pylus were few and had been oppressed with wrong; in former years
hercules had come, and had laid his hand heavy upon us, so that all our
best men had perished. neleus had had twelve sons, but i alone was
left; the others had all been killed. the epeans presuming upon all
this had looked down upo
 
 ___________________________
 
st with a spear as he
was bringing fire towards the ship. he fell heavily to the ground and
the torch dropped from his hand. when hector saw his cousin fallen in
front of the ship he shouted to the trojans and lycians saying,
"trojans, lycians, and dardanians good in close fight, bate not a jot,
but rescue the son of clytius lest the achaeans strip him of his armour
now that he has fallen."

he then aimed a spear at ajax, and missed him, but he hit lycophron a
follower of ajax, who came from cythera, but was living with ajax
inasmuch as he had killed a man among the cythereans. hector's spear
struck him on the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the
ship's prow on to the ground with no life left in him. ajax shook with
rage and said to his brother, "teucer, my good fellow, our trusty
comrade the son of mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from
cythera and whom we honoured as much as our own parents. hector has
just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow wh
 
 ___________________________
 
n, and the youths danced to the
music of flute and lyre, while the women stood each at her house door
to see them.

meanwhile the people were gathered in assembly, for there was a
quarrel, and two men were wrangling about the blood-money for a man who
had been killed, the one saying before the people that he had paid
damages in full, and the other that he had not been paid. each was
trying to make his own case good, and the people took sides, each man
backing the side that he had taken; but the heralds kept them back, and
the elders sate on their seats of stone in a solemn circle, holding the
staves which the heralds had put into their hands. then they rose and
each in his turn gave judgement, and there were two talents laid down,
to be given to him whose judgement should be deemed the fairest.

about the other city there lay encamped two hosts in gleaming armour,
and they were divided whether to sack it, or to spare it and accept the
half of what it contained. but the men of the city woul
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and all night long did achilles grasp his double
cup, drawing wine from a mixing-bowl of gold, and calling upon the
spirit of dead patroclus as he poured it upon the ground until the
earth was drenched. as a father mourns when he is burning the bones of
his bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his parents,
even so did achilles mourn while burning the body of his comrade,
pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation.

at length as the morning star was beginning to herald the light which
saffron-mantled dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames fell
and the fire began to die. the winds then went home beyond the thracian
sea, which roared and boiled as they swept over it. the son of peleus
now turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with toil, till he
fell into a sweet slumber. presently they who were about the son of
atreus drew near in a body, and roused him with the noise and tramp of
their coming. he sat upright and said, "son of atreus, an
 
 ___________________________
 
poke to her
in words of comfort, whereon thetis drank and gave her back the cup;
and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.

"so, goddess," said he, "for all your sorrow, and the grief that i well
know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to olympus, and i
will tell you why i have sent for you. this nine days past the
immortals have been quarrelling about achilles waster of cities and the
body of hector. the gods would have mercury slayer of argus steal the
body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, i will
concede such honour to your son as i will now tell you. go, then, to
the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry
with him, and that i am myself more angry than them all, in that he
keeps hector at the ships and will not give him up. he may thus fear me
and let the body go. at the same time i will send iris to great priam
to bid him go to the ships of the achaeans, and ransom his son, taking
with him such gifts for achilles
 
 ___________________________
 
seen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus
easily; therefore, provoke me no further, lest i sin against the word
of jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within my tents."

the old man feared him and obeyed. then the son of peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his
two squires automedon and alcimus who were closer to him than any
others of his comrades now that patroclus was no more. these unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. they lifted the ransom for hector's body from the
waggon, but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. then he
called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint it,
but he first took it to a place where priam should not see it, lest if
he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of his grief, and
enrage achilles, who might then kill him and sin against 
 
 ___________________________
 
st so that no man perceived them. when they came to the
ford of eddying xanthus, begotten of immortal jove, mercury went back
to high olympus, and dawn in robe of saffron began to break over all
the land. priam and idaeus then drove on toward the city lamenting and
making moan, and the mules drew the body of hector. no one neither man
nor woman saw them, till cassandra, fair as golden venus standing on
pergamus, caught sight of her dear father in his chariot, and his
servant that was the city's herald with him. then she saw him that was
lying upon the bier, drawn by the mules, and with a loud cry she went
about the city saying, "come hither trojans, men and women, and look on
hector; if ever you rejoiced to see him coming from battle when he was
alive, look now on him that was the glory of our city and all our
people."

at this there was not man nor woman left in the city, so great a sorrow
had possessed them. hard by the gates they met priam as he was bringing
in the body. hector's wife a