not of mortal mould. as the
juice of the fig-tree curdles milk, and thickens it in a moment though
it is liquid, even so instantly did paeeon cure fierce mars. then hebe
washed him, and clothed him in goodly raiment, and he took his seat by
his father jove all glorious to behold.

but juno of argos and minerva of alalcomene, now that they had put a
stop to the murderous doings of mars, went back again to the house of
jove.



book vi

  glaucus and diomed--the story of bellerophon--hector
  and andromache.

the fight between trojans and achaeans was now left to rage as it
would, and the tide of war surged hither and thither over the plain as
they aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another between the streams
of simois and xanthus.

first, ajax son of telamon, tower of strength to the achaeans, broke a
phalanx of the trojans, and came to the assistance of his comrades by
killing acamas son of eussorus, the best man among the thracians, being
both brave and of great stature. the spear struck th
 
 ___________________________
 
e goodwill
you bear me. i cannot stay. i am in haste to help the trojans, who miss
me greatly when i am not among them; but urge your husband, and of his
own self also let him make haste to overtake me before i am out of the
city. i must go home to see my household, my wife and my little son,
for i know not whether i shall ever again return to them, or whether
the gods will cause me to fill by the hands of the achaeans."

then hector left her, and forthwith was at his own house. he did not
find andromache, for she was on the wall with her child and one of her
maids, weeping bitterly. seeing, then, that she was not within, he
stood on the threshold of the women's rooms and said, "women, tell me,
and tell me true, where did andromache go when she left the house? was
it to my sisters, or to my brothers' wives? or is she at the temple of
minerva where the other women are propitiating the awful goddess?"

his good housekeeper answered, "hector, since you bid me tell you
truly, she did not go to your 
 
 ___________________________
 
ddess, but she is on the high wall of ilius, for she had
heard the trojans were being hard pressed, and that the achaeans were
in great force: she went to the wall in frenzied haste, and the nurse
went with her carrying the child."

hector hurried from the house when she had done speaking, and went down
the streets by the same way that he had come. when he had gone through
the city and had reached the scaean gates through which he would go out
on to the plain, his wife came running towards him, andromache,
daughter of great eetion who ruled in thebe under the wooded slopes of
mt. placus, and was king of the cilicians. his daughter had married
hector, and now came to meet him with a nurse who carried his little
child in her bosom--a mere babe. hector's darling son, and lovely as a
star. hector had named him scamandrius, but the people called him
astyanax, for his father stood alone as chief guardian of ilius. hector
smiled as he looked upon the boy, but he did not speak, and andromache
stood by h
 
 ___________________________
 
ill deal
destruction upon the danaans. fools, for having thought of building
this weak and worthless wall. it shall not stay my fury; my horses will
spring lightly over their trench, and when i am at their ships forget
not to bring me fire that i may burn them, while i slaughter the
argives who will be all dazed and bewildered by the smoke."

then he cried to his horses, "xanthus and podargus, and you aethon and
goodly lampus, pay me for your keep now and for all the honey-sweet
corn with which andromache daughter of great eetion has fed you, and
for she has mixed wine and water for you to drink whenever you would,
before doing so even for me who am her own husband. haste in pursuit,
that we may take the shield of nestor, the fame of which ascends to
heaven, for it is of solid gold, arm-rods and all, and that we may
strip from the shoulders of diomed the cuirass which vulcan made him.
could we take these two things, the achaeans would set sail in their
ships this self-same night."

thus did he v
 
 ___________________________
 
ur of the son of peleus, he wagged his head
and muttered to himself saying, "a! poor wretch, you arm in the armour
of a hero, before whom many another trembles, and you reck nothing of
the doom that is already close upon you. you have killed his comrade so
brave and strong, but it was not well that you should strip the armour
from his head and shoulders. i do indeed endow you with great might
now, but as against this you shall not return from battle to lay the
armour of the son of peleus before andromache."

the son of saturn bowed his portentous brows, and hector fitted the
armour to his body, while terrible mars entered into him, and filled
his whole body with might and valour. with a shout he strode in among
the allies, and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to all
of them like the great son of peleus himself. he went about among them
and cheered them on--mesthles, glaucus, medon, thersilochus,
asteropaeus, deisenor and hippothous, phorcys, chromius and ennomus the
augur. all thes
 
 ___________________________
 
 lamenting the livelong day to the going down of the
sun, had not priam spoken to them from the chariot and said, "make way
for the mules to pass you. afterwards when i have taken the body home
you shall have your fill of weeping."

on this the people stood asunder, and made a way for the waggon. when
they had borne the body within the house they laid it upon a bed and
seated minstrels round it to lead the dirge, whereon the women joined
in the sad music of their lament. foremost among them all andromache
led their wailing as she clasped the head of mighty hector in her
embrace. "husband," she cried, "you have died young, and leave me in
your house a widow; he of whom we are the ill-starred parents is still
a mere child, and i fear he may not reach manhood. ere he can do so our
city will be razed and overthrown, for you who watched over it are no
more--you who were its saviour, the guardian of our wives and children.
our women will be carried away captives to the ships, and i among them;
while y