e honour, and above all
jove, the lord of counsel. there is no king here so hateful to me as
you are, for you are ever quarrelsome and ill-affected. what though you
be brave? was it not heaven that made you so? go home, then, with your
ships and comrades to lord it over the myrmidons. i care neither for
you nor for your anger; and thus will i do: since phoebus apollo is
taking chryseis from me, i shall send her with my ship and my
followers, but i shall come to your tent and take your own prize
briseis, that you may learn how much stronger i am than you are, and
that another may fear to set himself up as equal or comparable with me."

the son of peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast
was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill
the son of atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger. while he
was thus in two minds, and was drawing his mighty sword from its
scabbard, minerva came down from heaven (for juno had sent her in the
love she bore to
 
 ___________________________
 
ople purify themselves; so they purified
themselves and cast their filth into the sea. then they offered
hecatombs of bulls and goats without blemish on the sea-shore, and the
smoke with the savour of their sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven.

thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. but agamemnon did
not forget the threat that he had made achilles, and called his trusty
messengers and squires talthybius and eurybates. "go," said he, "to the
tent of achilles, son of peleus; take briseis by the hand and bring her
hither; if he will not give her i shall come with others and take
her--which will press him harder."

he charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the myrmidons. they found achilles sitting by his tent and
his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. they stood
fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak,
but he knew them and sai
 
 ___________________________
 
d, "welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and
men; draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with agamemnon who has
sent you for the girl briseis. therefore, patroclus, bring her and give
her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by mortal
men, and by the fierceness of agamemnon's anger, that if ever again
there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they shall seek and
they shall not find. agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to
look before and after that the achaeans may fight by their ships in
safety."

patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. he brought briseis
from the tent and gave her over t
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by
pheidippus and antiphus, two sons of king thessalus the son of
hercules. and with them there came thirty ships.

those again who held pelasgic argos, alos, alope, and trachis; and
those of phthia and hellas the land of fair women, who were called
myrmidons, hellenes, and achaeans; these had fifty ships, over which
achilles was in command. but they now took no part in the war, inasmuch
as there was no one to marshal them; for achilles stayed by his ships,
furious about the loss of the girl briseis, whom he had taken from
lyrnessus at his own great peril, when he had sacked lyrnessus and
thebe, and had overthrown mynes and epistrophus, sons of king evenor,
son of selepus. for her sake achilles was still grieving, but ere long
he was again to join them.

and those that held phylace and the flowery meadows of pyrasus,
sanctuary of ceres; iton, the mother of sheep; antrum upon the sea, and
pteleum that lies upon the grass lands. of these brave protesilaus had
been captain while he was yet al
 
 ___________________________
 
e, moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the sceptre and to uphold
righteousness, that you may take thought for your people under you;
therefore it behooves you above all others both to speak and to give
ear, and to out the counsel of another who shall have been minded to
speak wisely. all turns on you and on your commands, therefore i will
say what i think will be best. no man will be of a truer mind than that
which has been mine from the hour when you, sir, angered achilles by
taking the girl briseis from his tent against my judgment. i urged you
not to do so, but you yielded to your own pride, and dishonoured a hero
whom heaven itself had honoured--for you still hold the prize that had
been awarded to him. now, however, let us think how we may appease him,
both with presents and fair speeches that may conciliate him."

and king agamemnon answered, "sir, you have reproved my folly justly. i
was wrong. i own it. one whom heaven befriends is in himself a host,
and jove has shown that he befri
 
 ___________________________
 
so
long from fighting. two sons of mars, ulysses and the son of tydeus,
came limping, for their wounds still pained them; nevertheless they
came, and took their seats in the front row of the assembly. last of
all came agamemnon, king of men, he too wounded, for coon son of
antenor had struck him with a spear in battle.

when the achaeans were got together achilles rose and said, "son of
atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you and me,
when we two were in such high anger about briseis, surely it would have
been better, had diana's arrow slain her at the ships on the day when i
took her after having sacked lyrnessus. for so, many an achaean the
less would have bitten dust before the foe in the days of my anger. it
has been well for hector and the trojans, but the achaeans will long
indeed remember our quarrel. now, however, let it be, for it is over.
if we have been angry, necessity has schooled our anger. i put it from
me: i dare not nurse it for ever; therefore, bid the ach
 
 ___________________________
 
nger and thirst will find him out, and his limbs will grow
weary under him. but a man can fight all day if he is full fed with
meat and wine; his heart beats high, and his strength will stay till he
has routed all his foes; therefore, send the people away and bid them
prepare their meal; king agamemnon will bring out the gifts in presence
of the assembly, that all may see them and you may be satisfied.
moreover let him swear an oath before the argives that he has never
gone up into the couch of briseis, nor been with her after the manner
of men and women; and do you, too, show yourself of a gracious mind;
let agamemnon entertain you in his tents with a feast of
reconciliation, that so you may have had your dues in full. as for you,
son of atreus, treat people more righteously in future; it is no
disgrace even to a king that he should make amends if he was wrong in
the first instance."

and king agamemnon answered, "son of laertes, your words please me
well, for throughout you have spoken wise
 
 ___________________________
 
s one man and loose
the fury of war upon the trojans."

when he had thus spoken he took with him the sons of nestor, with meges
son of phyleus, thoas, meriones, lycomedes son of creontes, and
melanippus, and went to the tent of agamemnon son of atreus. the word
was not sooner said than the deed was done: they brought out the seven
tripods which agamemnon had promised, with the twenty metal cauldrons
and the twelve horses; they also brought the women skilled in useful
arts, seven in number, with briseis, which made eight. ulysses weighed
out the ten talents of gold and then led the way back, while the young
achaeans brought the rest of the gifts, and laid them in the middle of
the assembly.

agamemnon then rose, and talthybius whose voice was like that of a god
came to him with the boar. the son of atreus drew the knife which he
wore by the scabbard of his mighty sword, and began by cutting off some
bristles from the boar, lifting up his hands in prayer as he did so.
the other achaeans sat whe
 
 ___________________________
 
re they were all silent and orderly to hear
the king, and agamemnon looked into the vault of heaven and prayed
saying, "i call jove the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, i
call also earth and sun and the erinyes who dwell below and take
vengeance on him who shall swear falsely, that i have laid no hand upon
the girl briseis, neither to take her to my bed nor otherwise, but that
she has remained in my tents inviolate. if i swear falsely may heaven
visit me with all the penalties which it metes out to those who perjure
themselves."

he cut the boar's throat as he spoke, whereon talthybius whirled it
round his head, and flung it into the wide sea to feed the fishes. then
achilles also rose and said to the argives, "father jove, of a truth
you blind men's eyes and bane them. the son of atreus had not else
stirred me t
 
 ___________________________
 
o so fierce an anger, nor so stubbornly taken briseis from
me against my will. surely jove must have counselled the destruction of
many an argive. go, now, and take your food that we may begin fighting."

on this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
ship. the myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to the
ship of achilles. they placed them in his tents, while the stable-men
drove the horses in among the others.

briseis, fair as venus, when she saw the mangled body of patroclus,
flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck,
and her lovely face with both her hands. beautiful as a goddess she
wept and said, "patroclus, dearest friend, when i went hence i left you
living; i return, o prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows
multiply upon me one after the other. i saw him to whom my father and
mother married me, cut down before our city, and my three own dear
brothers perished with hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 in his honour; on the eleventh we will
build a mound over his ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be need, we
will fight."

and achilles answered, "all, king priam, shall be as you have said. i
will stay our fighting for as long a time as you have named."

as he spoke he laid his hand on the old man's right wrist, in token
that he should have no fear; thus then did priam and his attendant
sleep there in the forecourt, full of thought, while achilles lay in an
inner room of the house, with fair briseis by his side.

and now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the livelong
night, but upon mercury alone, the bringer of good luck, sleep could
take no hold for he was thinking all the time how to get king priam
away from the ships without his being seen by the strong force of
sentinels. he hovered therefore over priam's head and said, "sir, now
that achilles has spared your life, you seem to have no fear about
sleeping in the thick of your foes. you have paid a great ransom, and
have re