 should now turn roving home
if we would escape destruction, for we are being cut down by war and
pestilence at once. let us ask some priest or prophet, or some reader
of dreams (for dreams, too, are of jove) who can tell us why phoebus
apollo is so angry, and say whether it is for some vow that we have
broken, or hecatomb that we have not offered, and whether he will
accept the savour of lambs and goats without blemish, so as to take
away the plague from us."

with these words he sat down, and calchas son of thestor, wisest of
augurs, who knew things past present and to come, rose to speak. he it
was who had guided the achaeans with their fleet to ilius, through the
prophesyings with which phoebus apollo had inspired him. with all
sincerity and goodwill he addressed them thus:--

"achilles, loved of heaven, you bid me tell you about the anger of king
apollo, i will therefore do so; but consider first and swear that you
will stand by me heartily in word and deed, for i know that i shall
offen
 
 ___________________________
 
d one who rules the argives with might, to whom all the achaeans
are in subjection. a plain man cannot stand against the anger of a
king, who if he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge
till he has wreaked it. consider, therefore, whether or no you will
protect me."

and achilles answered, "fear not, but speak as it is borne in upon you
from heaven, for by apollo, calchas, to whom you pray, and whose
oracles you reveal to us, not a danaan at our ships shall lay his hand
upon you, while i yet live to look upon the face of the earth--no, not
though you name agamemnon himself, who is by far the foremost of the
achaeans."

thereon the seer spoke boldly. "the god," he said, "is angry neither
about vow nor hecatomb, but for his priest's sake, whom agamemnon has
dishonoured, in that he would not free his daughter nor take a ransom
for her; therefore has he sent these e
 
 ___________________________
 
vils upon us, and will yet send
others. he will not deliver the danaans from this pestilence till
agamemnon has restored the girl without fee or ransom to her father,
and has sent a holy hecatomb to chryse. thus we may perhaps appease
him."

with these words he sat down, and agamemnon rose in anger. his heart
was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he scowled on calchas
and said, "seer of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth things
concerning me, but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. you
have brought me neither comfort nor performance; and now you come
seeing among danaans, and saying that apollo has plagued us because i
would not take a ransom for this girl, the daughter of chryses. i have
set my heart on keeping her in my own house, for i love her better even
than my own wife clytemnestra, whose peer she is alike in form and
feature, in under
 
 ___________________________
 
d set off
homeward. true it is that they have had toil enough to be disheartened.
a man chafes at having to stay away from his wife even for a single
month, when he is on shipboard, at the mercy of wind and sea, but it is
now nine long years that we have been kept here; i cannot, therefore,
blame the achaeans if they turn restive; still we shall be shamed if we
go home empty after so long a stay--therefore, my friends, be patient
yet a little longer that we may learn whether the prophesyings of
calchas were false or true.

"all who have not since perished must remember as though it were
yesterday or the day before, how the ships of the achaeans were
detained in aulis when we were on our way hither to make war on priam
and the trojans. we were ranged round about a fountain offering
hecatombs to the gods upon their holy altars, and there was a fine
plane-tree from beneath which there welled a stream of pure water. then
we saw a prodigy; for jove sent a fearful serpent out of the ground,
with bl
 
 ___________________________
 
em made nine. the serpent ate
the poor cheeping things, while the old bird flew about lamenting her
little ones; but the serpent threw his coils about her and caught her
by the wing as she was screaming. then, when he had eaten both the
sparrow and her young, the god who had sent him made him become a sign;
for the son of scheming saturn turned him into stone, and we stood
there wondering at that which had come to pass. seeing, then, that such
a fearful portent had broken in upon our hecatombs, calchas forthwith
declared to us the oracles of heaven. 'why, achaeans,' said he, 'are
you thus speechless? jove has sent us this sign, long in coming, and
long ere it be fulfilled, though its fame shall last for ever. as the
serpent ate the eight fledglings and the sparrow that hatched them,
which makes nine, so shall we fight nine years at troy, but in the
tenth shall take the town.' this was what he said, and now it is all
coming true. stay here, therefore, all of you, till we take the city of
priam
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord should return. this done he went his way to the host
of the achaeans.

now the trojans followed hector son of priam in close array like a
storm-cloud or flame of fire, fighting with might and main and raising
the cry battle; for they deemed that they should take the ships of the
achaeans and kill all their chiefest heroes then and there. meanwhile
earth-encircling neptune lord of the earthquake cheered on the argives,
for he had come up out of the sea and had assumed the form and voice of
calchas.

first he spoke to the two ajaxes, who were doing their best already,
and said, "ajaxes, you two can be the saving of the achaeans if you
will put out all your strength and not let yourselves be daunted. i am
not afraid that the trojans, who have got over the wall in force, will
be victorious in any other part, for the achaeans can hold all of them
in check, but i much fear that some evil will befall us here where
furious hector, who boasts himself the son of great jove himself, is
leading the
 
 ___________________________
 
then,
as the soaring falcon poises on the wing high above some sheer rock,
and presently swoops down to chase some bird over the plain, even so
did neptune lord of the earthquake wing his flight into the air and
leave them. of the two, swift ajax son of oileus was the first to know
who it was that had been speaking with them, and said to ajax son of
telamon, "ajax, this is one of the gods that dwell on olympus, who in
the likeness of the prophet is bidding us fight hard by our ships. it
was not calchas the seer and diviner of omens; i knew him at once by
his feet and knees as he turned away, for the gods are soon recognised.
moreover i feel the lust of battle burn more fiercely within me, while
my hands and my feet under me are more eager for the fray."

and ajax son of telamon answered, "i too feel my hands grasp my spear
more firmly; my strength is greater, and my feet more nimble; i long,
moreover, to meet furious hector son of priam, even in single combat."

thus did they converse, exulti