leus by his yellow
hair, visible to him alone, for of the others no man could see her.
achilles turned in amaze, and by the fire that flashed from her eyes at
once knew that she was minerva. "why are you here," said he, "daughter
of aegis-bearing jove? to see the pride of agamemnon, son of atreus?
let me tell you--and it shall surely be--he shall pay for this
insolence with his life."

and minerva said, "i come from heaven, if you will hear me, to bid you
stay your anger. juno has sent me, who cares for both of you alike.
cease, then, this brawling, and do not draw your sword; rail at him if
you will, and your railing will not be vain, for i tell you--and it
shall surely be--that you shall hereafter receive gifts three times as
splendid by reason of this present insult. hold, therefore, and obey."

"goddess," answered achilles, "however angry a man may be, he must do
as you two command him. this will be best, for the gods ever hear the
prayers of him who has obeyed them."

he stayed his ha
 
 ___________________________
 
al mother, "mother," he cried, "you bore me doomed
to live but for a little season; surely jove, who thunders from
olympus, might have made that little glorious. it is not so. agamemnon,
son of atreus, has done me dishonour, and has robbed me of my prize by
force."

as he spoke he wept aloud, and his mother heard him where she was
sitting in the depths of the sea hard by the old man her father.
forthwith she rose as it were a grey mist out of the waves, sat down
before him as he stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said,
"my son, why are you weeping? what is it that grieves you? keep it not
from me, but tell me, that we may know it together."

achilles drew a deep sigh and said, "you know it; why tell you what you
know well already? we went to thebe the strong city of eetion, sacked
it, and brought hither the spoil. the sons of the achaeans shared it
duly among themselves, and chose lovely chryseis as the meed of
agamemnon; but chryses, priest of apollo, came to the ships of the

 
 ___________________________
 
ameia bore him to
pirithous on the day when he took his revenge on the shaggy mountain
savages and drove them from mt. pelion to the aithices. but polypoetes
was not sole in command, for with him was leonteus, of the race of
mars, who was son of coronus, the son of caeneus. and with these there
came forty ships.

guneus brought two and twenty ships from cyphus, and he was followed by
the enienes and the valiant peraebi, who dwelt about wintry dodona, and
held the lands round the lovely river titaresius, which sends its
waters into the peneus. they do not mingle with the silver eddies of
the peneus, but flow on the top of them like oil; for the titaresius is
a branch of dread orcus and of the river styx.

of the magnetes, prothous son of tenthredon was commander. they were
they that dwelt about the river peneus and mt. pelion. prothous, fleet
of foot, was their leader, and with him there came forty ships.

such were the chiefs and princes of the danaans. who, then, o muse, was
the foremost,
 
 ___________________________
 
 whether man or horse, among those that followed after the
sons of atreus?

of the horses, those of the son of pheres were by far the finest. they
were driven by eumelus, and were as fleet as birds. they were of the
same age and colour, and perfectly matched in height. apollo, of the
silver bow, had bred them in perea--both of them mares, and terrible as
mars in battle. of the men, ajax, son of telamon, was much the foremost
so long as achilles' anger lasted, for achilles excelled him greatly
and he had also better horses; but achilles was now holding aloof at
his ships by reason of his quarrel with agamemnon, and his people
passed their time upon the sea shore, throwing discs or aiming with
spears at a mark, and in archery. their horses stood each by his own
chariot, champing lotus and wild celery. the chariots were housed und
 
 ___________________________
 
ulysses, in the groin, as he was dragging
the body of simoeisius over to the other side; so he fell upon the body
and loosed his hold upon it. ulysses was furious when he saw leucus
slain, and strode in full armour through the front ranks till he was
quite close; then he glared round about him and took aim, and the
trojans fell back as he did so. his dart was not sped in vain, for it
struck democoon, the bastard son of priam, who had come to him from
abydos, where he had charge of his father's mares. ulysses, infuriated
by the death of his comrade, hit him with his spear on one temple, and
the bronze point came through on the other side of his forehead.
thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. hector, and they that were in
front, then gave round while the argives raised a shout and drew off
the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. but apollo looked
down from pergamus and called aloud to the trojans, for he was
disp
 
 ___________________________
 
ur into the heart of diomed, son of tydeus,
that he might excel all the other argives, and cover himself with
glory. she made a stream of fire flare from his shield and helmet like
the star that shines most brilliantly in summer after its bath in the
waters of oceanus--even such a fire did she kindle upon his head and
shoulders as she bade him speed into the thickest hurly-burly of the
fight.

now there was a certain rich and honourable man among the trojans,
priest of vulcan, and his name was dares. he had two sons, phegeus and
idaeus, both of them skilled in all the arts of war. these two came
forward from the main body of trojans, and set upon diomed, he being on
foot, while they fought from their chariot. when they were close up to
one another, phegeus took aim first, but his spear went over diomed's
left shoulder without hitting him. diomed then threw, and his spear
sped not in vain, for it hit phegeus on the breast near the nipple, and
he fell from his chariot. idaeus did not dare to
 
 ___________________________
 
 bestride his brother's
body, but sprang from the chariot and took to flight, or he would have
shared his brother's fate; whereon vulcan saved him by wrapping him in
a cloud of darkness, that his old father might not be utterly
overwhelmed with grief; but the son of tydeus drove off with the
horses, and bade his followers take them to the ships. the trojans were
scared when they saw the two sons of dares, one of them in fright and
the other lying dead by his chariot. minerva, therefore, took mars by
the hand and said, "mars, mars, bane of men, bloodstained stormer of
cities, may we not now leave the trojans and achaeans to fight it out,
and see to which of the two jove will vouchsafe the victory? let us go
away, and thus avoid his anger."

so saying, she drew mars out of the battle, and set him down upon the
steep banks of the scamander. upon this the danaans drove the trojans
back, and each on
 
 ___________________________
 
r steeds shall not take
both back again. i say further, and lay my saying to your heart--if
minerva sees fit to vouchsafe me the glory of killing both, stay your
horses here and make the reins fast to the rim of the chariot; then be
sure you spring aeneas' horses and drive them from the trojan to the
achaean ranks. they are of the stock that great jove gave to tros in
payment for his son ganymede, and are the finest that live and move
under the sun. king anchises stole the blood by putting his mares to
them without laomedon's knowledge, and they bore him six foals. four
are still in his stables, but he gave the other two to aeneas. we shall
win great glory if we can take them."

thus did they converse, but the other two had now driven close up to
them, and the son of lycaon spoke first. "great and mighty son," said
he, "of noble tydeus, my arrow failed to lay you low, so i will now try
with my spear."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it from him. it struck the
shield of the son 
 
 ___________________________
 
ve."

thus she spoke, and mars gave her his gold-bedizened steeds. she
mounted the chariot sick and sorry at heart, while iris sat beside her
and took the reins in her hand. she lashed her horses on and they flew
forward nothing loth, till in a trice they were at high olympus, where
the gods have their dwelling. there she stayed them, unloosed them from
the chariot, and gave them their ambrosial forage; but venus flung
herself on to the lap of her mother dione, who threw her arms about her
and caressed her, saying, "which of the heavenly beings has been
treating you in this way, as though you had been doing something wrong
in the face of day?"

and laughter-loving venus answered, "proud diomed, the son of tydeus,
wounded me because i was bearing my dear son aeneas, whom i love best
of all mankind, out of the fight. the war is no longer one between
trojans and achaeans, for the danaans have now taken to fighting with
the immortals."

"bear it, my child," replied dione, "and make the best of
 
 ___________________________
 
her wedded lord, diomed the bravest of the achaeans."

so saying, she wiped the ichor from the wrist of her daughter with both
hands, whereon the pain left her, and her hand was healed. but minerva
and juno, who were looking on, began to taunt jove with their mocking
talk, and minerva was first to speak. "father jove," said she, "do not
be angry with me, but i think the cyprian must have been persuading
some one of the achaean women to go with the trojans of whom she is so
very fond, and while caressing one or other of them she must have torn
her delicate hand with the gold pin of the woman's brooch."

the sire of gods and men smiled, and called golden venus to his side.
"my child," said he, "it has not been given you to be a warrior.
attend, henceforth, to your own delightful matrimonial duties, and
leave all this fighting to mars and to minerva."

thus did they converse. but diomed sprang upon aeneas, though he knew
him to be in the very arms of apollo. not one whit did he fear the
might
 
 ___________________________
 
self, chief among the trojans; let
him be not less excellent in strength, and let him rule ilius with his
might. then may one say of him as he comes from battle, 'the son is far
better than the father.' may he bring back the blood-stained spoils of
him whom he has laid low, and let his mother's heart be glad."

with this he laid the child again in the arms of his wife, who took him
to her own soft bosom, smiling through her tears. as her husband
watched her his heart yearned towards her and he caressed her fondly,
saying, "my own wife, do not take these things too bitterly to heart.
no one can hurry me down to hades before my time, but if a man's hour
is come, be he brave or be he coward, there is no escape for him when
he has once been born. go, then, within the house, and busy yourself
with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of
your servants; for war is man's matter, and mine above all others of
them that have been born in ilius."

he took his plumed helmet from
 
 ___________________________
 
 from the furious hands of the achaeans.

paris did not remain long in his house. he donned his goodly armour
overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast as his feet
could take him. as a horse, stabled and fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to bathe in the
fair-flowing river--he holds his head high, and his mane streams upon
his shoulders as he exults in his strength and flies like the wind to
the haunts and feeding ground of the mares--even so went forth paris
from high pergamus, gleaming like sunlight in his armour, and he
laughed aloud as he sped swiftly on his way. forthwith he came upon his
brother hector, who was then turning away from the place where he had
held converse with his wife, and he was himself the first to speak.
"sir," said he, "i fear that i have kept you waiting when you are in
haste, and have not come as quickly as you bade me."

"my good brother," answered hector, "you fight bravely, and no man with
any
 
 ___________________________
 
welcome
was the sight of these two heroes to the trojans.

thereon alexandrus killed menesthius the son of areithous; he lived in
arne, and was son of areithous the mace-man, and of phylomedusa. hector
threw a spear at eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in the neck
under the bronze rim of his helmet. glaucus, moreover, son of
hippolochus, captain of the lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight smote
iphinous son of dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing on to his
chariot behind his fleet mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and
there was no life left in him.

when, therefore, minerva saw these men making havoc of the argives, she
darted down to ilius from the summits of olympus, and apollo, who was
looking on from pergamus, went out to meet her; for he wanted the
trojans to be victorious. the pair met by the oak tree, and king apollo
son of jove was first to speak. "what would you have," said he,
"daughter of great jove, that your proud spirit has sent you hither
from olympus? ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 now diverting himself with it and singing the feats
of heroes. he was alone with patroclus, who sat opposite to him and
said nothing, waiting till he should cease singing. ulysses and ajax
now came in--ulysses leading the way--and stood before him. achilles
sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his hand, and patroclus,
when he saw the strangers, rose also. achilles then greeted them
saying, "all hail and welcome--you must come upon some great matter,
you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the achaeans."

with this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats covered with
purple rugs; then he said to patroclus who was close by him, "son of
menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water with the
wine, and give every man his cup, for these are very dear friends, who
are now under my roof."

patroclus did as his comrade bade him; he set the chopping-block in
front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the loin also
of a goat, and the chine of 
 
 ___________________________
 

are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though
were a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. all this
will he do if you will now forgo your anger. moreover, though you hate
both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the rest of the
achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they will honour you
as a god, and you will earn great glory at their hands. you might even
kill hector; he will come within your reach, for he is infatuated, and
declares that not a danaan whom the ships have brought can hold his own
against him."

achilles answered, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, i should give you
formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no
more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. him do i
hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides
another in his heart; therefore i will say what i mean. i will be
appeased neither by agamemnon son of atreus nor by any other of the
danaans, for i s
 
 ___________________________
 
ee that i have no thanks for all my fighting. he that
fights fares no better than he that does not; coward and hero are held
in equal honour, and death deals like measure to him who works and him
who is idle. i have taken nothing by all my hardships--with my life
ever in my hand; as a bird when she has found a morsel takes it to her
nestlings, and herself fares hardly, even so many a long night have i
been wakeful, and many a bloody battle have i waged by day against
those who were fighting for their women. with my ships i have taken
twelve cities, and eleven round about troy have i stormed with my men
by land; i took great store of wealth from every one of them, but i
gave all up to agamemnon son of atreus. he stayed where he was by his
ships, yet of what came to him he gave little, and kept much himself.

"nevertheless he did distribute some meeds o
 
 ___________________________
 
hall be in phthia. i have much there that i left
behind me when i came here to my sorrow, and i shall bring back still
further store of gold, of red copper, of fair women, and of iron, my
share of the spoils that we have taken; but one prize, he who gave has
insolently taken away. tell him all as i now bid you, and tell him in
public that the achaeans may hate him and beware of him should he think
that he can yet dupe others for his effrontery never fails him.

"as for me, hound that he is, he dares not look me in the face. i will
take no counsel with him, and will undertake nothing in common with
him. he has wronged me and deceived me enough, he shall not cozen me
further; let him go his own way, for jove has robbed him of his reason.
i loathe his presents, and for himself care not one straw. he may offer
me ten or even twenty times what he has now done, nay--not though it be
all that he has in the world, both now or ever shall have; he may
promise me the wealth of orchomenus or of egypti
 
 ___________________________
 
besought meleager; they sent the chiefest of their
priests, and begged him to come out and help them, promising him a
great reward. they bade him choose fifty plough-gates, the most fertile
in the plain of calydon, the one-half vineyard and the other open
plough-land. the old warrior oeneus implored him, standing at the
threshold of his room and beating the doors in supplication. his
sisters and his mother herself besought him sore, but he the more
refused them; those of his comrades who were nearest and dearest to him
also prayed him, but they could not move him till the foe was battering
at the very doors of his chamber, and the curetes had scaled the walls
and were setting fire to the city. then at last his sorrowing wife
detailed the horrors that befall those whose city is taken; she
reminded him how the men are slain, and the city is given over to the
flames, while the women and children are carried into captivity; when
he heard all this, his heart was touched, and he donned his armou
 
 ___________________________
 
self and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we
will consider whether to remain or go."

on this he nodded quietly to patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare
a bed for phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. ajax
son of telamon then said, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, let us be
gone, for i see that our journey is vain. we must now take our answer,
unwelcome though it be, to the danaans who are waiting to receive it.
achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for
the love his comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. he
is implacable--and yet if a man's brother or son has been slain he will
accept a fine by way of amends from him that killed him, and the
wrong-doer having paid in full remains in peace among his own people;
but as for you, achilles, the gods have put a wicked unforgiving spirit
in your heart, and this, all about one single girl, whereas we now
offer you the seven best we have, and much else into the bargain. be

 
 ___________________________
 
then of a more gracious mind, respect the hospitality of your own roof.
we are with you as messengers from the host of the danaans, and would
fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the achaeans."

"ajax," replied achilles, "noble son of telamon, you have spoken much
to my liking, but my blood boils when i think it all over, and remember
how the son of atreus treated me with contumely as though i were some
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the argives. go, then, and
deliver your message; say that i will have no concern with fighting
till hector, son of noble priam, reaches the tents of the myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upo
 
 ___________________________
 
 side towards thymbra; but why ask
about all this? if you want to find your way into the host of the
trojans, there are the thracians, who have lately come here and lie
apart from the others at the far end of the camp; and they have rhesus
son of eioneus for their king. his horses are the finest and strongest
that i have ever seen, they are whiter than snow and fleeter than any
wind that blows. his chariot is bedight with silver and gold, and he
has brought his marvellous golden armour, of the rarest
workmanship--too splendid for any mortal man to carry, and meet only
for the gods. now, therefore, take me to the ships or bind me securely
here, until you come back and have proved my words whether they be
false or true."

diomed looked sternly at him and answered, "think not, dolon, for all
the good information you have given us, that you shall escape now you
are in our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you will come
some second time to the ships of the achaeans either as a spy or a
 
 ___________________________
 
o the defence of ajax who is being overpowered, and
i doubt whether he will come out of the fight alive. hither, then, to
the rescue of great ajax son of telamon."

even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near,
and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their
shoulders so as to give him cover. ajax then made towards them, and
turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the mares
of neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing nestor out of the
fight, and with him machaon shepherd of his people. achilles saw and
took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the
hard stress and struggle of the fight. he called from the ship to his
comrade patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking like
mars himself--here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently
befell him. "why," said he, "achilles, do you call me? what do you want
with me?
 
 ___________________________
 
how ready to blame even where no
blame should lie."

and nestor answered, "why should achilles care to know how many of the
achaeans may be wounded? he recks not of the dismay that reigns in our
host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave diomed, son of
tydeus, is wounded; so are ulysses and agamemnon; eurypylus has been
hit with an arrow in the thigh, and i have just been bringing this man
from the field--he too wounded with an arrow. nevertheless, achilles,
so valiant though he be, cares not and knows no ruth. will he wait till
the ships, do what we may, are in a blaze, and we perish one upon the
other? as for me, i have no strength nor stay in me any longer; would
that i were still young and strong as in the days when there was a
fight between us and the men of elis about some cattle-raiding. i then
killed itymoneus, the valiant son of hypeirochus, a dweller in elis, as
i was driving in the spoil; he was hit by a dart thrown by my hand
while fighting in the front rank in defen
 
 ___________________________
 
ce of his cows, so he fell and
the country people around him were in great fear. we drove off a vast
quantity of booty from the plain, fifty herds of cattle and as many
flocks of sheep; fifty droves also of pigs, and as many wide-spreading
flocks of goats. of horses, moreover, we seized a hundred and fifty,
all of them mares, and many had foals running with them. all these did
we drive by night to pylus, the city of neleus, taking them within the
city; and the heart of neleus was glad in that i had taken so much,
though it was the first time i had ever been in the field. at daybreak
the heralds went round crying that all in elis to whom there was a debt
owing should come; and the leading pylians assembled to divide the
spoils. there were many to whom the epeans owed chattels, for we men of
pylus were few and had be
 
 ___________________________
 
nger, and so long as the city of priam remained untaken, the great
wall of the achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of the trojans
were no more, and many also of the argives, though some were yet left
alive--when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth year, and the
argives had gone back with their ships to their own country--then
neptune and apollo took counsel to destroy the wall, and they turned on
to it the streams of all the rivers from mount ida into the sea,
rhesus, heptaporus, caresus, rhodius, grenicus, aesopus, and goodly
scamander, with simois, where many a shield and helm had fallen, and
many a hero of the race of demigods had bitten the dust. phoebus apollo
turned the mouths of all these rivers together and made them flow for
nine days against the wall, while jove rained the whole time that he
might wash it sooner into the sea. neptune himself, trident in hand,
surveyed the work and threw into the sea all the foundations of beams
and stones which the achaeans had laid
 
 ___________________________
 
the immortals can hear the wicked designs which he
has avowed. many a one, mortal and immortal, will be angered by them,
however peaceably he may be feasting now."

on this juno sat down, and the gods were troubled throughout the house
of jove. laughter sat on her lips but her brow was furrowed with care,
and she spoke up in a rage. "fools that we are," she cried, "to be thus
madly angry with jove; we keep on wanting to go up to him and stay him
by force or by persuasion, but he sits aloof and cares for nobody, for
he knows that he is much stronger than any other of the immortals. make
the best, therefore, of whatever ills he may choose to send each one of
you; mars, i take it, has had a taste of them already, for his son
ascalaphus has fallen in battle--the man whom of all others he loved
most dearly and whose father he owns himself to be."

when he heard this mars smote his two sturdy thighs with the flat of
his hands, and said in anger, "do not blame me, you gods that dwell in
heaven, i
 
 ___________________________
 
 older person."

neptune answered, "goddess iris, your words have been spoken in season.
it is well when a messenger shows so much discretion. nevertheless it
cuts me to the very heart that any one should rebuke so angrily another
who is his own peer, and of like empire with himself. now, however, i
will give way in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let me tell you,
and i mean what i say--if contrary to the desire of myself, minerva
driver of the spoil, juno, mercury, and king vulcan, jove spares steep
ilius, and will not let the achaeans have the great triumph of sacking
it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable resentment."

neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely did the
achaeans miss him. then jove said to apollo, "go, dear phoebus, to
hector, for neptune who holds the earth in his embrace has now gone
down under the sea to avoid the severity of my displeasure. had he not
done so those gods who are below with saturn would have come to hear of
t
 
 ___________________________
 
iots to the ships in great multitudes. i will go
before your horses to smooth the way for them, and will turn the
achaeans in flight."

as he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his people.
and as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to take his
bath in the river--he tosses his head, and his mane streams over his
shoulders as in all the pride of his strength he flies full speed to
the pastures where the mares are feeding--even so hector, when he heard
what the god said, urged his horsemen on, and sped forward as fast as
his limbs could take him. as country peasants set their hounds on to a
homed stag or wild goat--he has taken shelter under rock or thicket,
and they cannot find him, but, lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts
have roused stands in their path, and they are in no further humour for
the chase--even so the achaeans were still charging on in a body, using
their swords and spears pointed at
 
 ___________________________
 
ped onward. he was intent on trying to get near hector, for he had set
his heart on spearing him, but hector's horses were now hurrying him
away. as the whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day
when jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving crooked judgement
in their courts, and driving justice therefrom without heed to the
decrees of heaven--all the rivers run full and the torrents tear many a
new channel as they roar headlong from the mountains to the dark sea,
and it fares ill with the works of men--even such was the stress and
strain of the trojan horses in their flight.

patroclus now cut off the battalions that were nearest to him and drove
them back to the ships. they were doing their best to reach the city,
but he would not let them, and bore down on them between the river and
the ships and wall. many a fallen comrade did he then avenge. first he
hit pronous with a spear on the chest where it was exposed near the rim
of his shield, and he fell heavily to the
 
 ___________________________
 
s under the wall of troy a long way off the
ships. he had no idea, therefore, that patroclus was dead, and deemed
that he would return alive as soon as he had gone close up to the
gates. he knew that he was not to sack the city neither with nor
without himself, for his mother had often told him this when he had sat
alone with her, and she had informed him of the counsels of great jove.
now, however, she had not told him how great a disaster had befallen
him in the death of the one who was far dearest to him of all his
comrades.

the others still kept on charging one another round the body with their
pointed spears and killing each other. then would one say, "my friends,
we can never again show our faces at the ships--better, and greatly
better, that earth should open and swallow us here in this place, than
that we should let the trojans have the triumph of bearing off
patroclus to their city."

the trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying, "friends,
though we fall to a man be
 
 ___________________________
 
d that hurls them,
jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without
effect. what, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and
our return to the joy of our friends who will be grieving as they look
hitherwards; for they will make sure that nothing can now check the
terrible hands of hector, and that he will fling himself upon our
ships. i wish that some one would go and tell the son of peleus at
once, for i do not think he can have yet heard the sad news that the
dearest of his friends has fallen. but i can see not a man among the
achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in
darkness. o father jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the
achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we
perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight."

father jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. forthwith he
chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and all
the fighting was revealed. ajax then said to menelau
 
 ___________________________
 
s, "look, menelaus,
and if antilochus son of nestor be still living, send him at once to
tell achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his comrades has
fallen."

menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a
stockyard--the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep
watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of
their herd. in his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain,
for darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt
him for all his hunger, so in the morning he slinks sulkily away--even
so did menelaus sorely against his will le
 
 ___________________________
 
egin fighting."

on this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
ship. the myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to the
ship of achilles. they placed them in his tents, while the stable-men
drove the horses in among the others.

briseis, fair as venus, when she saw the mangled body of patroclus,
flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck,
and her lovely face with both her hands. beautiful as a goddess she
wept and said, "patroclus, dearest friend, when i went hence i left you
living; i return, o prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows
multiply upon me one after the other. i saw him to whom my father and
mother married me, cut down before our city, and my three own dear
brothers perished with him on the self-same day; but you, patroclus,
even when achilles slew my husband and sacked the city of noble mynes,
told me that i was not to weep, for you said you would make achilles
marry me, and take me back with him to phthia, 
 
 ___________________________
 
bid me neither eat
nor drink, for i am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to
the going down of the sun."

on this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of
atreus and ulysses, nestor, idomeneus, and the knight phoenix, who
stayed behind and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow:
but he would not be comforted till he should have flung himself into
the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of
patroclus. then he said--

"hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner
ready for me at once and without delay when the achaeans were hasting
to fight the trojans; now, therefore, though i have meat and drink in
my tents, yet will i fast for sorrow. grief greater than this i could
not know, not even though i were to hear of the death of my father, who
is now in phthia weeping for the loss of me his son, who am here
fighting the trojans in a strange land for the accursed sake of helen,
nor yet though i should hear tha
 
 ___________________________
 
 forward in attack, his doughty helmet
tossing defiance as he came on. he held his strong shield before his
breast, and brandished his bronze spear. the son of peleus from the
other side sprang forth to meet him, like some fierce lion that the
whole country-side has met to hunt and kill--at first he bodes no ill,
but when some daring youth has struck him with a spear, he crouches
openmouthed, his jaws foam, he roars with fury, he lashes his tail from
side to side about his ribs and loins, and glares as he springs
straight before him, to find out whether he is to slay, or be slain
among the foremost of his foes--even with such fury did achilles burn
to spring upon aeneas.

when they were now close up with one another achilles was first to
speak. "aeneas," said he, "why do you stand thus out before the host to
fight me? is it that you hope to reign over the trojans in the seat of
priam? nay, though you kill me priam will not hand his kingdom over to
you. he is a man of sound judgement, and h
 
 ___________________________
 
arents of one or other of us shall this
day mourn a son, for it will be more than silly talk that shall part us
when the fight is over. learn, then, my lineage if you will--and it is
known to many.

"in the beginning dardanus was the son of jove, and founded dardania,
for ilius was not yet stablished on the plain for men to dwell in, and
her people still abode on the spurs of many-fountained ida. dardanus
had a son, king erichthonius, who was wealthiest of all men living; he
had three thousand mares that fed by the water-meadows, they and their
foals with them. boreas was enamoured of them as they were feeding, and
covered them in the semblance of a dark-maned stallion. twelve filly
foals did they conceive and bear him, and these, as they sped over the
rich plain, would go bounding on over the ripe ears of corn and not
break them; or again when they would disport themselves on the broad
back of ocean they could gallop on the crest of a breaker. erichthonius
begat tros, king of the trojans,
 
 ___________________________
 
em with the girdles of
their own shirts, and gave them over to his men to take back to the
ships. then he sprang into the river, thirsting for still further blood.

there he found lycaon, son of priam seed of dardanus, as he was
escaping out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken prisoner
when he was in his father's vineyard, having set upon him by night, as
he was cutting young shoots from a wild fig-tree to make the wicker
sides of a chariot. achilles then caught him to his sorrow unawares,
and sent him by sea to lemnos, where the son of jason bought him. but a
guest-friend, eetion of imbros, freed him with a great sum, and sent
him to arisbe, whence he had escaped and returned to his father's
house. he had spent eleven days happily with his friends after he had
come from lemnos, but on the twelfth heaven again delivered him into
the hands of achilles, who was to send him to the house of hades sorely
against his will. he was unarmed when achilles caught sight of him, and
had neit
 
 ___________________________
 
to lay down my shield and
helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight up to noble
achilles? what if i were to promise to give up helen, who was the
fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure that alexandrus
brought with him in his ships to troy, aye, and to let the achaeans
divide the half of everything that the city contains among themselves?
i might make the trojans, by the mouths of their princes, take a solemn
oath that they would hide nothing, but would divide into two shares all
that is within the city--but why argue with myself in this way? were i
to go up to him he would show me no kind of mercy; he would kill me
then and there as easily as though i were a woman, when i had off my
armour. there is no parleying with him from some rock or oak tree as
young men and maidens prattle with one another. better fight him at
once, and learn to which of us jove will vouchsafe victory."

thus did he stand and ponder, but achilles came up to him as it were
mars himself, plume
 
 ___________________________
 
d persuade him to make a stand
and fight you."

thus spoke minerva. achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while minerva left him and
went after hector in the form and with the voice of deiphobus. she came
close up to him and said, "dear brother, i see you are hard pressed by
achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of priam, let
us await his onset and stand on our defence."

and hector answered, "deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of
all my brothers, children of hecuba and priam, but henceforth i shall
rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the
wall for my sake when all the others remain inside."

then minerva said, "dear brother, my father and mother went down on
their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but i was in an agony of
grief when i beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there b
 
 ___________________________
 
 give this lock as a keepsake to the hero
patroclus."

as he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and
all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. the sun
would have gone down upon their mourning had not achilles presently
said to agamemnon, "son of atreus, for it is to you that the people
will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from
mourning; bid the people now leave the pyre and set about getting their
dinners: we, to whom the dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted
here, and let the other princes also stay by me."

when king agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their ships,
but those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built a pyre a
hundred feet this way and that; then they laid the dead all sorrowfully
upon the top of it. they flayed and dressed many fat sheep and oxen
before the pyre, and achilles took fat from all of them and wrapped the
body therein from head to foot, heaping the flayed carcases all roun
 
 ___________________________
 
ach could do. the horses of the descendant of pheres now
took the lead, and close behind them came the trojan stallions of
diomed. they seemed as if about to mount eumelus's chariot, and he
could feel their warm breath on his back and on his broad shoulders,
for their heads were close to him as they flew over the course. diomed
would have now passed him, or there would have been a dead heat, but
phoebus apollo to spite him made him drop his whip. tears of anger fell
from his eyes as he saw the mares going on faster than ever, while his
own horses lost ground through his having no whip. minerva saw the
trick which apollo had played the son of tydeus, so she brought him his
whip and put spirit into his horses; moreover she went after the son of
admetus in a rage and broke his yoke for him; the mares went one to one
side of the course, and the other to the other, and the pole was broken
against the ground. eumelus was thrown from his chariot close to the
wheel; his elbows, mouth, and nostrils
 
 ___________________________
 
him a little on one
side. the son of atreus was afraid and shouted out, "antilochus, you
are driving recklessly; rein in your horses; the road is too narrow
here, it will be wider soon, and you can pass me then; if you foul my
chariot you may bring both of us to a mischief."

but antilochus plied his whip, and drove faster, as though he had not
heard him. they went side by side for about as far as a young man can
hurl a disc from his shoulder when he is trying his strength, and then
menelaus's mares drew behind, for he left off driving for fear the
horses should foul one another and upset the chariots; thus, while
pressing on in quest of victory, they might both come headlong to the
ground. menelaus then upbraided antilochus and said, "there is no
greater trickster living than you are; go, and bad luck go with you;
the achaeans say not well that you have understanding, and come what
may you shall not bear away the prize without sworn protest on my part."

then he called on his horses and s
 
 ___________________________
 
unning as well as i can?
there seems to be another pair in front now, and another driver; those
that led off at the start must have been disabled out on the plain. i
saw them at first making their way round the doubling-post, but now,
though i search the plain of troy, i cannot find them. perhaps the
reins fell from the driver's hand so that he lost command of his horses
at the doubling-post, and could not turn it. i suppose he must have
been thrown out there, and broken his chariot, while his mares have
left the course and gone off wildly in a panic. come up and see for
yourselves, i cannot make out for certain, but the driver seems an
aetolian by descent, ruler over the argives, brave diomed the son of
tydeus."

ajax the son of oileus took him up rudely and said, "idomeneus, why
should you be in such a hurry to tell us all about it, when the mares
are still so far out upon the plain? you are none of the youngest, nor
your eyes none of the sharpest, but you are always laying down the law.
 
 ___________________________
 
mmortals; he would not have come in last if he had done so. if you are
sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents, with
bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. take something from this store if you
would have the achaeans speak well of you, and give him a better prize
even than that which you have now offered; but i will not give up the
mare, and he that will fight me for her, let him come on."

achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with antilochus, who
was one of his dearest comrades. so he said--

"antilochus, if you would have me find eumelus another prize, i will
give him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running all round it
which i took from asteropaeus. it will be worth much money to him."

he bade his comrade automedon bring the breastplate from his tent, and
he did so. achilles then gave it over to eumelus, who received it
gladly.

but menelaus got up in a rage, furiously angry with antilochus. an
attendant placed his staff in his hands and bade the
 
 ___________________________
 
to achilles;
but hector was mortal and suckled at a woman's breast, whereas achilles
is the offspring of a goddess whom i myself reared and brought up. i
married her to peleus, who is above measure dear to the immortals; you
gods came all of you to her wedding; you feasted along with them
yourself and brought your lyre--false, and fond of low company, that
you have ever been."

then said jove, "juno, be not so bitter. their honour shall not be
equal, but of all that dwell in ilius, hector was dearest to the gods,
as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. never was my
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we claim of right. i shall therefore permit the body of
mighty hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without achilles
coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside him. let
some one of you, therefore, send thetis to me, and i will impart my
counsel to her, namely that achilles is to accept a ransom from pria
 
 ___________________________
 
iris to great priam
to bid him go to the ships of the achaeans, and ransom his son, taking
with him such gifts for achilles as may give him satisfaction."

silver-footed thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down
she darted from the topmost summits of olympus. she went to her son's
tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades
round him were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had
killed a great woolly sheep. his mother sat down beside him and
caressed him with her hand saying, "my son, how long will you keep on
thus grieving and making moan? you are gnawing at your own heart, and
think neither of food nor of woman's embraces; and yet these too were
well, for you have no long time to live, and death with the strong hand
of fate are already close beside you. now, therefore, heed what i say,
for i come as a messenger from jove; he says that the gods are angry
with you, and himself more angry than them all, in that you keep hector
at the ship
 
 ___________________________
 
hands, for your father's hand in battle was no light one. therefore
do the people mourn him. you have left, o hector, sorrow unutterable to
your parents, and my own grief is greatest of all, for you did not
stretch forth your arms and embrace me as you lay dying, nor say to me
any words that might have lived with me in my tears night and day for
evermore."

bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her lament.
hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. "hector," she cried,
"dearest to me of all my children. so long as you were alive the gods
loved you well, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful
of you; for when achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him
beyond the seas, to samos imbrus or rugged lemnos; and when he had
slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the
sepulchre of his comrade--though this could not give him life--yet here
you lie all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom apollo has slain with
his painless shaf
 
 ___________________________
 
ts."

thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then
helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "hector,"
said she, "dearest of all my brothers-in-law--for i am wife to
alexandrus who brought me hither to troy--would that i had died ere he
did so--twenty years are come and gone since i left my home and came
from over the sea, but i have never heard one word of insult or
unkindness from you. when another would chide with me, as it might be
one of your brothers or sisters or of your brothers' wives, or my
mother-in-law--for priam was as kind to me as though he were my own
father--you would rebuke and check them with w