e day on
which the son of atreus, king of men, and great achilles, first fell
out with one another.

and which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? it was the
son of jove and leto; for he was angry with the king and sent a
pestilence upon the host to plague the people, because the son of
atreus had dishonoured chryses his priest. now chryses had come to the
ships of the achaeans to free his daughter, and had brought with him a
great ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of apollo
wreathed with a suppliant's wreath, and he besought the achaeans, but
most of all the two sons of atreus, who were their chiefs.

"sons of atreus," he cried, "and all other achaeans, may the gods who
dwell in olympus grant you to sack the city of priam, and to reach your
homes in safety; but free my daughter, and accept a ransom for her, in
reverence to apollo, son of jove."

on this the rest of the achaeans with one voice were for respecting the
priest and taking the ransom that he offered; bu
 
 ___________________________
 
m roughly away. "old man," said he,
"let me not find you tarrying about our ships, nor yet coming
hereafter. your sceptre of the god and your wreath shall profit you
nothing. i will not free her. she shall grow old in my house at argos
far from her own home, busying herself with her loom and visiting my
couch; so go, and do not provoke me or it shall be the worse for you."

the old man feared him and obeyed. not a word he spoke, but went by the
shore of the sounding sea and prayed apart to king apollo whom lovely
leto had borne. "hear me," he cried, "o god of the silver bow, that
protectest chryse and holy cilla and rulest tenedos with thy might,
hear me oh thou of sminthe. if i have ever decked your temple with
garlands, or burned your thigh-bones in fat of bulls or goats, grant my
prayer, and let your arrows avenge these my tears upon the danaans."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he came down furious
from the summits of olympus, with his bow and his quiver upon his
shoulder
 
 ___________________________
 
e, but upon the
tenth day achilles called them in assembly--moved thereto by juno, who
saw the achaeans in their death-throes and had compassion upon them.
then, when they were got together, he rose and spoke among them.

"son of atreus," said he, "i deem that we should now turn roving home
if we would escape destruction, for we are being cut down by war and
pestilence at once. let us ask some priest or prophet, or some reader
of dreams (for dreams, too, are of jove) who can tell us why phoebus
apollo is so angry, and say whether it is for some vow that we have
broken, or hecatomb that we have not offered, and whether he will
accept the savour of lambs and goats without blemish, so as to take
away the plague from us."

with these words he sat down, and calchas son of thestor, wisest of
augurs, who knew things past present and to come, rose to speak. he it
was who had guided the achaeans with their fleet to ilius, through the
prophesyings with which phoebus apollo had inspired him. with all
s
 
 ___________________________
 
incerity and goodwill he addressed them thus:--

"achilles, loved of heaven, you bid me tell you about the anger of king
apollo, i will therefore do so; but consider first and swear that you
will stand by me heartily in word and deed, for i know that i shall
offend one who rules the argives with might, to whom all the achaeans
are in subjection. a plain man cannot stand against the anger of a
king, who if he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge
till he has wreaked it. consider, therefore, whether or no you will
protect me."

and achilles answered, "fear not, but speak as it is borne in upon you
from heave
 
 ___________________________
 
n, for by apollo, calchas, to whom you pray, and whose
oracles you reveal to us, not a danaan at our ships shall lay his hand
upon you, while i yet live to look upon the face of the earth--no, not
though you name agamemnon himself, who is by far the foremost of the
achaeans."

thereon the seer spoke boldly. "the god," he said, "is angry neither
about vow nor hecatomb, but for his priest's sake, whom agamemnon has
dishonoured, in that he would not free his daughter nor take a ransom
for her; therefore has he sen
 
 ___________________________
 
e girl without fee or ransom to her father,
and has sent a holy hecatomb to chryse. thus we may perhaps appease
him."

with these words he sat down, and agamemnon rose in anger. his heart
was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he scowled on calchas
and said, "seer of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth things
concerning me, but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. you
have brought me neither comfort nor performance; and now you come
seeing among danaans, and saying that apollo has plagued us because i
would not take a ransom for this girl, the daughter of chryses. i have
set my heart on keeping her in my own house, for i love her better even
than my own wife clytemnestra, whose peer she is alike in form and
feature, in understanding and accomplishments. still i will give her up
if i must, for i would have the people live, not die; but you must find
me a prize instead, or i alone among the argives shall be without one.
this is not well; for you behold, all of you, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
 substance for you."

and agamemnon answered, "fly if you will, i shall make you no prayers
to stay you. i have others here who will do me honour, and above all
jove, the lord of counsel. there is no king here so hateful to me as
you are, for you are ever quarrelsome and ill-affected. what though you
be brave? was it not heaven that made you so? go home, then, with your
ships and comrades to lord it over the myrmidons. i care neither for
you nor for your anger; and thus will i do: since phoebus apollo is
taking chryseis from me, i shall send her with my ship and my
followers, but i shall come to your tent and take your own prize
briseis, that you may learn how much stronger i am than you are, and
that another may fear to set himself up as equal or comparable with me."

the son of peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast
was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill
the son of atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger. while he
was thus in t
 
 ___________________________
 
re him as he stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said,
"my son, why are you weeping? what is it that grieves you? keep it not
from me, but tell me, that we may know it together."

achilles drew a deep sigh and said, "you know it; why tell you what you
know well already? we went to thebe the strong city of eetion, sacked
it, and brought hither the spoil. the sons of the achaeans shared it
duly among themselves, and chose lovely chryseis as the meed of
agamemnon; but chryses, priest of apollo, came to the ships of the
achaeans to free his daughter, and brought with him a great ransom:
moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of apollo, wreathed with a
suppliant's wreath, and he besought the achaeans, but most of all the
two sons of atreus who were their chiefs.

"on this the rest of the achaeans with one voice were for respecting
the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so agamemnon,
who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. so he went back in
anger, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
apollo, who loved him dearly, heard his prayer. then the god
sent a deadly dart upon the argives, and the people died thick on one
another, for the arrows went everywhither among the wide host of the
achaeans. at last a seer in the fulness of his knowledge declared to us
the oracles of apollo, and i was myself first to say that we should
appease him. whereon the son of atreus rose in anger, and threatened
that which he has since done. the achaeans are now taking the girl in a
ship to chryse, and sending gifts of sacrifice to the god; but the
heralds have just taken from my tent the daughter of briseus, whom the
achaeans had awarded to myself.

"help your brave son, therefore, if you are able. go to olympus, and if
you have ever done him service in word or deed, implore the aid of
jo
 
 ___________________________
 
de him."

on this she left him, still furious at the loss of her that had been
taken from him. meanwhile ulysses reached chryse with the hecatomb.
when they had come inside the harbour they furled the sails and laid
them in the ship's hold; they slackened the forestays, lowered the mast
into its place, and rowed the ship to the place where they would have
her lie; there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast the
hawsers. they then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb
for apollo; chryseis also left the ship, and ulysses led her to the
altar to deliver her into the hands of her father. "chryses," said he,
"king agamemnon has sent me to bring you back your child, and to offer
sacrifice to apollo on behalf of the danaans, that we may propitiate
the god, who has now brought sorrow upon the argives."

so saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly,
and they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the
god. they washed their hands and t
 
 ___________________________
 
ook up the barley-meal to sprinkle
over the victims, while chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud on
their behalf. "hear me," he cried, "o god of the silver bow, that
protectest chryse and holy cilla, and rulest tenedos with thy might.
even as thou didst hear me aforetime when i prayed, and didst press
hardly upon the achaeans, so hear me yet again, and stay this fearful
pestilence from the danaans."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. when they had done
praying and sprinkling the barley-meal, they drew back the heads of the
victims and killed and flayed them. they cut out the thigh-bones,
wrapped them round in two layers of fat, set some pieces of raw meat on
the top of them, and then chryses laid them on the wood fire and poured
wine over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged
spits in their hands. when the thigh-bones were burned and they had
tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd drink, pages filled the
mixing-bowl with wine and water and handed it round, after giving every
man his drink-offering.

thus all day long the young men worshipped the god with song, hymning
him and chaunting the joyous paean, and the god took pleasure in their
voices; but when the sun went down, and it came on dark, they laid
themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship, and when the
child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared they again set sail for
the host of the achaeans. apollo sent them a fair wind, so they raised
their mast and hoisted their white sails aloft. as the sail bellied
with the wind the ship flew through the deep blue water, and the foam
hissed against her bows as she sped onward. when they reached the
wide-stretching host of the achaeans, they drew the vessel ashore, high
and dry upon the sands, set her strong props beneath her, and went
their ways to their own tents and ships.

but achilles abode at his ships and nursed his anger. he went not to
the hon
 
 ___________________________
 
 very little life left in
me, till the sintians came and tended me."

juno smiled at this, and as she smiled she took the cup from her son's
hands. then vulcan drew sweet nectar from the mixing-bowl, and served
it round among the gods, going from left to right; and the blessed gods
laughed out a loud applause as they saw him bustling about the heavenly
mansion.

thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they
feasted, and every one had his full share, so that all were satisfied.
apollo struck his lyre, and the muses lifted up their sweet voices,
calling and answering one another. but when the sun's glorious light
had faded, they went home to bed, each in his own abode, which lame
vulcan with his consummate skill had fashioned for them. so jove, the
olympian lord of thunder, hied him to the bed in which he always slept;
and when he had got on to it he went to sleep, with juno of the golden
throne by his side.



book ii

  jove sends a lying dream to agamemnon, who thereon cal
 
 ___________________________
 
ribes and clans, that
clans and tribes may stand by and help one another. if you do this, and
if the achaeans obey you, you will find out who, both chiefs and
peoples, are brave, and who are cowards; for they will vie against the
other. thus you shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of
heaven or the cowardice of man that you shall fail to take the town."

and agamemnon answered, "nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the
achaeans in counsel. would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that i
had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of king priam
would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. but the
son of saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife. achilles
and i are quarrelling about this girl, in which matter i was the first
to offend; if we can be of one mind again, the trojans will not stave
off destruction for a day. now, therefore, get your morning meal, that
our hosts join in fight. whet well your spears; see well to the
ord
 
 ___________________________
 
hey were
they that dwelt about the river peneus and mt. pelion. prothous, fleet
of foot, was their leader, and with him there came forty ships.

such were the chiefs and princes of the danaans. who, then, o muse, was
the foremost, whether man or horse, among those that followed after the
sons of atreus?

of the horses, those of the son of pheres were by far the finest. they
were driven by eumelus, and were as fleet as birds. they were of the
same age and colour, and perfectly matched in height. apollo, of the
silver bow, had bred them in perea--both of them mares, and terrible as
mars in battle. of the men, ajax, son of telamon, was much the foremost
so long as achilles' anger lasted, for achilles excelled him greatly
and he had also better horses; but achilles was now holding aloof at
his ships by reason of his quarrel with agamemnon, and his people
passed their time upon the sea shore, throwing discs or aiming with
spears at a mark, and in archery. their horses stood each by his own
chario
 
 ___________________________
 
were longing for the fray.

the dardanians were led by brave aeneas, whom venus bore to anchises,
when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain
slopes of ida. he was not alone, for with him were the two sons of
antenor, archilochus and acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.

they that dwelt in telea under the lowest spurs of mt. ida, men of
substance, who drink the limpid waters of the aesepus, and are of
trojan blood--these were led by pandarus son of lycaon, whom apollo had
taught to use the bow.

they that held adresteia and the land of apaesus, with pityeia, and the
high mountain of tereia--these were led by adrestus and amphius, whose
breastplate was of linen. these were the sons of merops of percote, who
excelled in all kinds of divination. he told them not to take part in
the war, but they gave him no heed, for fate lured them to destruction.

they that dwelt about percote and practius, with sestos, abydos, and
arisbe--these were led by asius, son of hyrt
 
 ___________________________
 
. she found him standing among the
stalwart heroes who had followed him from the banks of the aesopus, so
she went close up to him and said, "brave son of lycaon, will you do as
i tell you? if you dare send an arrow at menelaus you will win honour
and thanks from all the trojans, and especially from prince
alexandrus--he would be the first to requite you very handsomely if he
could see menelaus mount his funeral pyre, slain by an arrow from your
hand. take your home aim then, and pray to lycian apollo, the famous
archer; vow that when you get home to your strong city of zelea you
will offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour."

his fool's heart was persuaded, and he took his bow from its case. this
bow was made from the horns of a wild ibex which he had killed as it
was bounding from a rock; he had stalked it, and it had fallen as the
arrow struck it to the heart. its horns were sixteen palms long, and a
worker in horn had made them into a bow, smoothing them well down, and
giving t
 
 ___________________________
 
hem tips of gold. when pandarus had strung his bow he laid it
carefully on the ground, and his brave followers held their shields
before him lest the achaeans should set upon him before he had shot
menelaus. then he opened the lid of his quiver and took out a winged
arrow that had not yet been shot, fraught with the pangs of death. he
laid the arrow on the string and prayed to lycian apollo, the famous
archer, vowing that when he got home to his strong city of zelea he
would offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour. he laid the
notch of the arrow on the oxhide bowstring, and drew both notch and
string to his breast till the arrow-head was near the bow; then when
the bow was arched into a half-circle he let fly, and the bow twanged,
and the string sang as the arrow flew gladly on over the heads of the
throng.

but the blessed gods did not forget thee, o menelaus, and jove'
 
 ___________________________
 
efore the west wind--black as pitch is the offing and a mighty
whirlwind draws towards him, so that he is afraid and drives his flock
into a cave--even thus did the ranks of stalwart youths move in a dark
mass to battle under the ajaxes, horrid with shield and spear. glad was
king agamemnon when he saw them. "no need," he cried, "to give orders
to such leaders of the argives as you are, for of your own selves you
spur your men on to fight with might and main. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo that all were so minded as you are, for the city of
priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it."

with this he left them and went onward to nestor, the facile speaker of
the pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in company
with pelagon, alastor, chromius, haemon, and bias shepherd of his
people. he placed his knights with their chariots and horses in the
front rank, while the foot-soldiers, brave men and many, whom he could
trust, were in the rear. th
 
 ___________________________
 
priam, who had come to him from
abydos, where he had charge of his father's mares. ulysses, infuriated
by the death of his comrade, hit him with his spear on one temple, and
the bronze point came through on the other side of his forehead.
thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. hector, and they that were in
front, then gave round while the argives raised a shout and drew off
the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. but apollo looked
down from pergamus and called aloud to the trojans, for he was
displeased. "trojans," he cried, "rush on the foe, and do not let
yourselves be thus beaten by the argives. their skins are not stone nor
iron that when hit them you do them no harm. moreover, achilles, the
son of lovely thetis, is not fighting, but is nursing his anger at the
ships."

thus spoke the mighty god, crying to them from the city, while jove's
redoubtable daughter, the trito-born, went about among the host of the
a
 
 ___________________________
 
have made light of the fighting if he could have
gone about among it scatheless and unwounded, with minerva leading him
by the hand, and protecting him from the storm of spears and arrows.
for many trojans and achaeans on that day lay stretched side by side
face downwards upon the earth.



book v

  the exploits of diomed, who, though wounded by pandarus,
  continues fighting--he kills pandarus and wounds aeneas--venus
  rescues aeneas, but being wounded by diomed, commits him
  to the care of apollo and goes to olympus, where she is tended
  by her mother dione--mars encourages the trojans, and
  aeneas returns to the fight cured of his wound--minerva and
  juno help the achaeans, and by the advice of the former
  diomed wounds mars, who returns to olympus to get cured.

then pallas minerva put valour into the heart of diomed, son of tydeus,
that he might excel all the other argives, and cover himself with
glory. she made a stream of fire flare from his shield and helmet like
the star that
 
 ___________________________
 
 many
though they were, they dared not abide his onslaught.

now when the son of lycaon saw him scouring the plain and driving the
trojans pell-mell before him, he aimed an arrow and hit the front part
of his cuirass near the shoulder: the arrow went right through the
metal and pierced the flesh, so that the cuirass was covered with
blood. on this the son of lycaon shouted in triumph, "knights trojans,
come on; the bravest of the achaeans is wounded, and he will not hold
out much longer if king apollo was indeed with me when i sped from
lycia hither."

thus did he vaunt; but his arrow had not killed diomed, who withdrew
and made for the chariot and horses of sthenelus, the son of capaneus.
"dear son of capaneus," said he, "come down from your chariot, and draw
the arrow out of my shoulder."

sthenelus sprang from his chariot, and drew the arrow from the wound,
whereon the blood came spouting out through the hole that had been made
in his shirt. then diomed prayed, saying, "hear me, daughter 
 
 ___________________________
 
ught her up, he flew
at her and thrust his spear into the flesh of her delicate hand. the
point tore through the ambrosial robe which the graces had woven for
her, and pierced the skin between her wrist and the palm of her hand,
so that the immortal blood, or ichor, that flows in the veins of the
blessed gods, came pouring from the wound; for the gods do not eat
bread nor drink wine, hence they have no blood such as ours, and are
immortal. venus screamed aloud, and let her son fall, but phoebus
apollo caught him in his arms, and hid him in a cloud of darkness, lest
some danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him; and
diomed shouted out as he left her, "daughter of jove, leave war and
battle alone, can you not be contented with beguiling silly women? if
you meddle with fighting you will get what will make you shudder at the
very name of war."

the goddess went dazed and discomfited away, and iris, fleet as the
wind, drew her from the throng, in pain and with her fair skin all
be
 
 ___________________________
 
 whom she is so
very fond, and while caressing one or other of them she must have torn
her delicate hand with the gold pin of the woman's brooch."

the sire of gods and men smiled, and called golden venus to his side.
"my child," said he, "it has not been given you to be a warrior.
attend, henceforth, to your own delightful matrimonial duties, and
leave all this fighting to mars and to minerva."

thus did they converse. but diomed sprang upon aeneas, though he knew
him to be in the very arms of apollo. not one whit did he fear the
mighty god, so set was he on killing aeneas and stripping him of his
armour. thrice did he spring forward with might and main to slay him,
and thrice did apollo beat back his gleaming shield. when he was coming
on for the fourth time, as though he were a god, apollo shouted to him
with an awful voice and said, "take heed, son of tydeus, and draw off;
think not to match yourself against gods, for men that walk the earth
cannot hold their own with the immortals."

th
 
 ___________________________
 
e son of tydeus then gave way for a little space, to avoid the anger
of the god, while apollo took aeneas out of the crowd and set him in
sacred pergamus, where his temple stood. there, within the mighty
sanctuary, latona and diana healed him and made him glorious to behold,
while apollo of the silver bow fashioned a wraith in the likeness of
aeneas, and armed as he was. round this the trojans and achaeans hacked
at the bucklers about one another's breasts, hewing each other's round
shields and light hide-covered targets. then phoebus apollo said to
mars, "mars, mars, bane of men, blood-stained stormer of cities, can
you not go to this man, the son of tydeus, who would now fight even
with father jove, and draw him out of the battle? he first went up to
the cyprian and wounded h
 
 ___________________________
 
haff upon some goodly threshing-floor, when
men are winnowing--while yellow ceres blows with the wind to sift the
chaff from the grain, and the chaff-heaps grow whiter and whiter--even
so did the achaeans whiten in the dust which the horses' hoofs raised
to the firmament of heaven, as their drivers turned them back to
battle, and they bore down with might upon the foe. fierce mars, to
help the trojans, covered them in a veil of darkness, and went about
everywhere among them, inasmuch as phoebus apollo had told him that
when he saw pallas minerva leave the fray he was to put courage into
the hearts of the trojans--for it was she who was helping the danaans.
then apollo sent aeneas forth from his rich sanctuary, and filled his
heart with valour, whereon he took his place among his comrades, who
were overjoyed at seeing him alive, sound, and of a good courage; but
they could not ask him how it had all happened, for they were too busy
with the turmoil raised by mars and by strife, who raged insa
 
 ___________________________
 
us, either to open the dense cloud that hides
them, or to close it. through these the goddesses drove their obedient
steeds, and found the son of saturn sitting all alone on the topmost
ridges of olympus. there juno stayed her horses, and spoke to jove the
son of saturn, lord of all. "father jove," said she, "are you not angry
with mars for these high doings? how great and goodly a host of the
achaeans he has destroyed to my great grief, and without either right
or reason, while the cyprian and apollo are enjoying it all at their
ease and setting this unrighteous madman on to do further mischief. i
hope, father jove, that you will not be angry if i hit mars hard, and
chase him out of the battle."

and jove answered, "set minerva on to him, for she punishes him more
often than any one else does."

juno did as he had said. she lashed her horses, and they flew forward
nothing loth midway betwixt earth and sky. as far as a man can see when
he looks out upon the sea from some high beacon, so far 
 
 ___________________________
 
threw a spear at eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in the neck
under the bronze rim of his helmet. glaucus, moreover, son of
hippolochus, captain of the lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight smote
iphinous son of dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing on to his
chariot behind his fleet mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and
there was no life left in him.

when, therefore, minerva saw these men making havoc of the argives, she
darted down to ilius from the summits of olympus, and apollo, who was
looking on from pergamus, went out to meet her; for he wanted the
trojans to be victorious. the pair met by the oak tree, and king apollo
son of jove was first to speak. "what would you have," said he,
"daughter of great jove, that your proud spirit has sent you hither
from olympus? have you no pity upon the trojans, and would you incline
the scales of victory in favour of the danaans? let me persuade
you--for it will be better thus--stay the combat for to-day, but let
them renew the f
 
 ___________________________
 
ight hereafter till they compass the doom of ilius,
since you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city."

and minerva answered, "so be it, far-darter; it was in this mind that i
came down from olympus to the trojans and achaeans. tell me, then, how
do you propose to end this present fighting?"

apollo, son of jove, replied, "let us incite great hector to challenge
some one of the danaans in single combat; on this the achaeans will be
shamed into finding a man who will fight him."

minerva assented, and helenus son of priam divined the counsel of the
gods; he therefore went up to hector and said, "hector son of priam,
peer of gods in counsel, i am your brother, let me then persuade you.
bid the other trojans and achaeans all of them take their seats, and
challenge the best man among the achae
 
 ___________________________
 
ans to meet you in single combat.
i have heard the voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your
doom is not yet come."

hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the
trojans, grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and they
all sat down. agamemnon also bade the achaeans be seated. but minerva
and apollo, in the likeness of vultures, perched on father jove's high
oak tree, proud of their men; and the ranks sat close ranged together,
bristling with shield and helmet and spear. as when the rising west
wind furs the face of the sea and the waters grow dark beneath it, so
sat the companies of trojans and achaeans upon the plain. and hector
spoke thus:--

"hear me, trojans and achaeans, that i may speak even as i am minded;
jove on his high throne has brought our oaths and covenants to nothing,
and 
 
 ___________________________
 
oth of us, till you either take the towers of
troy, or are yourselves vanquished at your ships. the princes of the
achaeans are here present in the midst of you; let him, then, that will
fight me stand forward as your champion against hector. thus i say, and
may jove be witness between us. if your champion slay me, let him strip
me of my armour and take it to your ships, but let him send my body
home that the trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when
i am dead. in like manner, if apollo vouchsafe me glory and i slay your
champion, i will strip him of his armour and take it to the city of
ilius, where i will hang it in the temple of apollo, but i will give up
his body, that the achaeans may bury him at their ships, and the build
him a mound by the wide waters of the hellespont. then will one say
hereafter as he sails his ship over the sea, 'this is the monument of
one who died long since a champion who was slain by mighty hector.'
thus will one say, and my fame shall not be los
 
 ___________________________
 
rs.
then nestor rose and spoke, "of a truth," said he, "the achaean land is
fallen upon evil times. the old knight peleus, counsellor and orator
among the myrmidons, loved when i was in his house to question me
concerning the race and lineage of all the argives. how would it not
grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before hector? many a
time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave his
body and go down within the house of hades. would, by father jove,
minerva, and apollo, that i were still young and strong as when the
pylians and arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river celadon
under the walls of pheia, and round about the waters of the river
iardanus. the godlike hero ereuthalion stood forward as their champion,
with the armour of king areithous upon his shoulders--areithous whom
men and women had surnamed 'the mace-man,' because he fought neither
with bow nor spear, but broke the battalions of the foe with his iron
mace. lycurgus killed him, not in
 
 ___________________________
 
 from the wound, but even so hector
did not cease fighting; he gave ground, and with his brawny hand seized
a stone, rugged and huge, that was lying upon the plain; with this he
struck the shield of ajax on the boss that was in its middle, so that
the bronze rang again. but ajax in turn caught up a far larger stone,
swung it aloft, and hurled it with prodigious force. this millstone of
a rock broke hector's shield inwards and threw him down on his back
with the shield crushing him under it, but apollo raised him at once.
thereon they would have hacked at one another in close combat with
their swords, had not heralds, messengers of gods and men, come
forward, one from the trojans and the other from the
achaeans--talthybius and idaeus both of them honourable men; these
parted them with their staves, and the good herald idaeus said, "my
sons, fight no longer, you are both of you valiant, and both are dear
to jove; we know this; but night is now falling, and the behests of
night may not be well 
 
 ___________________________
 
 toil, and the gods, seated by the side of jove
the lord of lightning, marvelled at their great work; but neptune, lord
of the earthquake, spoke, saying, "father jove, what mortal in the
whole world will again take the gods into his counsel? see you not how
the achaeans have built a wall about their ships and driven a trench
all round it, without offering hecatombs to the gods? the fame of this
wall will reach as far as dawn itself, and men will no longer think
anything of the one which phoebus apollo and myself built with so much
labour for laomedon."

jove was displeased and answered, "what, o shaker of the earth, are you
talking about? a god less powerful than yourself might be alarmed at
what they are doing, but your fame reaches as far as dawn itself.
surely when the achaeans have gone home with their ships, you can
shatter their wall and fling it into the sea; you can cover the beach
with sand again, and the great wall of the achaeans will then be
utterly effaced."

thus did they conve
 
 ___________________________
 
med another arrow straight at hector, for he was bent
on hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow hit priam's
brave son gorgythion in the breast. his mother, fair castianeira,
lovely as a goddess, had been married from aesyme, and now he bowed his
head as a garden poppy in full bloom when it is weighed down by showers
in spring--even thus heavy bowed his head beneath the weight of his
helmet.

again he aimed at hector, for he was longing to hit him, and again his
arrow missed, for apollo turned it aside; but he hit hector's brave
charioteer archeptolemus in the breast, by the nipple, as he was
driving furiously into the fight. the horses swerved aside as he fell
headlong from the chariot, and there was no life left in him. hector
was greatly grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but for all his
sorrow he let him lie where he fell, and bade his brother cebriones,
who was hard by, take the reins. cebriones did as he had said. hector
thereon with a loud cry sprang from his chario
 
 ___________________________
 
e fierce war at the ships of the achaeans; i shall then
know whether brave diomed the son of tydeus will drive me back from the
ships to the wall, or whether i shall myself slay him and carry off his
bloodstained spoils. to-morrow let him show his mettle, abide my spear
if he dare. i ween that at break of day, he shall be among the first to
fall and many another of his comrades round him. would that i were as
sure of being immortal and never growing old, and of being worshipped
like minerva and apollo, as i am that this day will bring evil to the
argives."

thus spoke hector and the trojans shouted applause. they took their
sweating steeds from under the yoke, and made them fast each by his own
chariot. they made haste to bring sheep and cattle from the city, they
brought wine also and corn from their houses and gathered much wood.
they then offered unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, and the wind
carried the sweet savour of sacrifice to heaven--but the blessed gods
partook not thereof, 
 
 ___________________________
 
urn home, peleus will find me a wife; there are achaean women in
hellas and phthia, daughters of kings that have cities under them; of
these i can take whom i will and marry her. many a time was i minded
when at home in phthia to woo and wed a woman who would make me a
suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old father peleus. my life
is more to me than all the wealth of ilius while it was yet at peace
before the achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies on
the stone floor of apollo's temple beneath the cliffs of pytho. cattle
and sheep are to be had for harrying, and a man buy both tripods and
horses if he wants them, but when his life has once left him it can
neither be bought nor harried back again.

"my mother thetis tells me that there are two ways in which i may meet
my end. if i stay here and fight, i shall not return alive but my name
will live for ever: whereas if i go home my name will die, but it will
be long ere death shall take me. to the rest of you, then, i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 head and skin of
the boar.

"so long as meleager was in the field things went badly with the
curetes, and for all their numbers they could not hold their ground
under the city walls; but in the course of time meleager was angered as
even a wise man will sometimes be. he was incensed with his mother
althaea, and therefore stayed at home with his wedded wife fair
cleopatra, who was daughter of marpessa daughter of euenus, and of ides
the man then living. he it was who took his bow and faced king apollo
himself for fair marpessa's sake; her father and mother then named her
alcyone, because her mother had mourned with the plaintive strains of
the halcyon-bird when phoebus apollo had carried her off. meleager,
then, stayed at home with cleopatra, nursing the anger which he felt by
reason of his mother's curses. his mother, grieving for the death of
her brother, prayed the gods, and beat the earth with her hands,
calling upon hades and on awful proserpine; she went down upon her
knees and her bos
 
 ___________________________
 
iot in which
the king's armour was lying, and draw it out by the pole, or to lift
the armour out and carry it off; or whether again, he should not kill
some more thracians. while he was thus hesitating minerva came up to
him and said, "get back, diomed, to the ships or you may be driven
thither, should some other god rouse the trojans."

diomed knew that it was the goddess, and at once sprang upon the
horses. ulysses beat them with his bow and they flew onward to the
ships of the achaeans.

but apollo kept no blind look-out when he saw minerva with the son of
tydeus. he was angry with her, and coming to the host of the trojans he
roused hippocoon, a counsellor of the thracians and a noble kinsman of
rhesus. he started up out of his sleep and saw that the horses were no
longer in their place, and that the men were gasping in their
death-agony; on this he groaned aloud, and called upon his friend by
name. then the whole trojan camp was in an uproar as the people kept
hurrying together, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
, followed by the trojan
ranks; brave diomed was dismayed when he saw them, and said to ulysses
who was beside him, "great hector is bearing down upon us and we shall
be undone; let us stand firm and wait his onset."

he poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it, nor did he miss his
mark. he had aimed at hector's head near the top of his helmet, but
bronze was turned by bronze, and hector was untouched, for the spear
was stayed by the visored helm made with three plates of metal, which
phoebus apollo had given him. hector sprang back with a great bound
under cover of the ranks; he fell on his knees and propped himself with
his brawny hand leaning on the ground, for darkness had fallen on his
eyes. the son of tydeus having thrown his spear dashed in among the
foremost fighters, to the place where he had seen it strike the ground;
meanwhile hector recovered himself and springing back into his chariot
mingled with the crowd, by which means he saved his life. but diomed
made at him with his spe
 
 ___________________________
 
ar and said, "dog, you have again got away
though death was close on your heels. phoebus apollo, to whom i ween
you pray ere you go into battle, has again saved you, nevertheless i
will meet you and make an end of you hereafter, if there is any god who
will stand by me too and be my helper. for the present i must pursue
those i can lay hands on."

as he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of paeon, but
alexandrus husband of lovely helen aimed an arrow at him, leaning
against a pillar of the monument which men had raised to ilus son of
dardanus, a ruler in days of old. diomed 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
gods. it had been built without the consent of the immortals, and
therefore it did not last. so long as hector lived and achilles nursed
his anger, and so long as the city of priam remained untaken, the great
wall of the achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of the trojans
were no more, and many also of the argives, though some were yet left
alive--when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth year, and the
argives had gone back with their ships to their own country--then
neptune and apollo took counsel to destroy the wall, and they turned on
to it the streams of all the rivers from mount ida into the sea,
rhesus, heptaporus, caresus, rhodius, grenicus, aesopus, and goodly
scamander, with simois, where many a shield and helm had fallen, and
many a hero of the race of demigods had bitten the dust. phoebus apollo
turned the mouths of all these rivers together and made them flow for
nine days against the wall, while jove rained the whole time that he
might wash it sooner into the sea
 
 ___________________________
 
. neptune himself, trident in hand,
surveyed the work and threw into the sea all the foundations of beams
and stones which the achaeans had laid with so much toil; he made all
level by the mighty stream of the hellespont, and then when he had
swept the wall away he spread a great beach of sand over the place
where it had been. this done he turned the rivers back into their old
courses.

this was what neptune and apollo were to do in after time; but as yet
battle and turmoil were still raging round the wall till its timbers
rang under the blows that rained upon them. the argives, cowed by the
scourge of jove, were hemmed in at their ships in fear of hector the
mighty minister of rout, who as heretofore fought with the force and
fury of a whirlwind. as a lion or wild boar turns fiercely on the dogs
and men that attack him, while these form a solid wall and shower their
javelins as they face him--his courage is 
 
 ___________________________
 
ray jove and all the gods in your flight, that your steeds
may be swifter than hawks as they raise the dust on the plain and bear
you back to your city."

as he was thus speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand, and the
host of the achaeans shouted, for they took heart at the omen. but
hector answered, "ajax, braggart and false of tongue, would that i were
as sure of being son for evermore to aegis-bearing jove, with queen
juno for my mother, and of being held in like honour with minerva and
apollo, as i am that this day is big with the destruction of the
achaeans; and you shall fall among them if you dare abide my spear; it
shall rend your fair body and bid you glut our hounds and birds of prey
with your fat and your flesh, as you fall by the ships of the achaeans."

with these words he led the way and the others followed after with a
cry that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them. the argives
on their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their
prowess, but stood 
 
 ___________________________
 
tion, teucer also killed prothoon and periphetes. the son of
atreus then wounded hyperenor shepherd of his people, in the flank, and
the bronze point made his entrails gush out as it tore in among them;
on this his life came hurrying out of him at the place where he had
been wounded, and his eyes were closed in darkness. ajax son of oileus
killed more than any other, for there was no man so fleet as he to
pursue flying foes when jove had spread panic among them.



book xv

  jove awakes, tells apollo to heal hector, and the trojans
  again become victorious.

but when their flight had taken them past the trench and the set
stakes, and many had fallen by the hands of the danaans, the trojans
made a halt on reaching their chariots, routed and pale with fear. jove
now woke on the crests of ida, where he was lying with golden-throned
juno by his side, and starting to his feet he saw the trojans and
achaeans, the one thrown into confusion, and the others driving them
pell-mell before them with k
 
 ___________________________
 
ng of mine; it is
all of his own mere motion because he was sorry to see the achaeans
hard pressed at their ships: if i were advising him, i should tell him
to do as you bid him."

the sire of gods and men smiled and answered, "if you, juno, were
always to support me when we sit in council of the gods, neptune, like
it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of thinking. if,
then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the
rank and file of the gods, and tell iris and apollo lord of the bow,
that i want them--iris, that she may go to the achaean host and tell
neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and apollo, that he may send
hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of achilles son of peleus. achilles will
then send his comrade patroclus into battle, and hector will kill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warriors, and amon
 
 ___________________________
 
nd sorry to olympus,
after having caused infinite mischief to all us others? jove would
instantly leave the trojans and achaeans to themselves; he would come
to olympus to punish us, and would grip us up one after another, guilty
or not guilty. therefore lay aside your anger for the death of your
son; better men than he have either been killed already or will fall
hereafter, and one cannot protect every one's whole family."

with these words she took mars back to his seat. meanwhile juno called
apollo outside, with iris the messenger of the gods. "jove," she said
to them, "desires you to go to him at once on mt. ida; when you have
seen him you are to do as he may then bid you."

thereon juno left them and resumed her seat inside, while iris and
apollo made all haste on their way. when they reached many-fountained
ida, mother of wild beasts, they found jove seated on topmost gargarus
with a fragrant cloud encircling his head as with a diadem. they stood
before his presence, and he was pleased
 
 ___________________________
 
e empire with himself. now, however, i
will give way in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let me tell you,
and i mean what i say--if contrary to the desire of myself, minerva
driver of the spoil, juno, mercury, and king vulcan, jove spares steep
ilius, and will not let the achaeans have the great triumph of sacking
it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable resentment."

neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely did the
achaeans miss him. then jove said to apollo, "go, dear phoebus, to
hector, for neptune who holds the earth in his embrace has now gone
down under the sea to avoid the severity of my displeasure. had he not
done so those gods who are below with saturn would have come to hear of
the fight between us. it is better for both of us that he should have
curbed his anger and kept out of my reach, for i should have had much
trouble with him. take, then, your tasselled aegis, and shake it
furiously, so as to set the achaean heroes in a panic; take,
 
 ___________________________
 
 moreover,
brave hector, o far-darter, into your own care, and rouse him to deeds
of daring, till the achaeans are sent flying back to their ships and to
the hellespont. from that point i will think it well over, how the
achaeans may have a respite from their troubles."

apollo obeyed his father's saying, and left the crests of ida, flying
like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. he found hector
no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had just come
to himself again. he knew those who were about him, and the sweat and
hard breathing had left him from the moment when the will of
aegis-bearing jove had revived him. apollo stood beside him and said,
"hector son of priam, why are you so faint, and why are you here away
from the others? has an
 
 ___________________________
 
y mishap befallen you?"

hector in a weak voice answered, "and which, kind sir, of the gods are
you, who now ask me thus? do you not know that ajax struck me on the
chest with a stone as i was killing his comrades at the ships of the
achaeans, and compelled me to leave off fighting? i made sure that this
very day i should breathe my last and go down into the house of hades."

then king apollo said to him, "take heart; the son of saturn has sent
you a mighty helper from ida to stand by you and defend you, even me,
phoebus apollo of the golden sword, who have been guardian hitherto not
only of yourself but of your city. now, therefore, order your horsemen
to drive their chariots to the ships in great multitudes. i will go
before your horses to smooth the way for them, and will turn the
achaeans in flight."

as he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his people.
and as 
 
 ___________________________
 
better of it before he tries to charge into the press of the danaans."

thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. those who were
about ajax and king idomeneus, the followers moreover of teucer,
meriones, and meges peer of mars called all their best men about them
and sustained the fight against hector and the trojans, but the main
body fell back upon the ships of the achaeans.

the trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with hector striding on at
their head. before him went phoebus apollo shrouded in cloud about his
shoulders. he bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy fringe,
which vulcan the smith had given jove to strike terror into the hearts
of men. with this in his hand he led on the trojans.

the argives held together and stood their ground. the cry of battle
rose high from either side, and the arrows flew from the bowstrings.
many a spear sped from strong hands and fastened in the bodies of many
a valiant warrior, while others fell to earth midway, before they coul
 
 ___________________________
 
d
taste of man's fair flesh and glut themselves with blood. so long as
phoebus apollo held his aegis quietly and without shaking it, the
weapons on either side took effect and the people fell, but when he
shook it straight in the face of the danaans and raised his mighty
battle-cry their hearts fainted within them and they forgot their
former prowess. as when two wild beasts spring in the dead of night on
a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep when the herdsman is not
there--even so were the danaans struck helpless, for apollo filled them
with panic and gave victory to hecto
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the trojans, "forward
to the ships, and let the spoils be. if i see any man keeping back on
the other side the wall away from the ships i will have him killed: his
kinsmen and kinswomen shall not give him his dues of fire, but dogs
shall tear him in pieces in front of our city."

as he spoke he laid his whip about his horses' shoulders and called to
the trojans throughout their ranks; the trojans shouted with a cry that
rent the air, and kept their horses neck and neck with his own. phoebus
apollo went before, and kicked down the banks of the deep trench into
its middle so as to make a great broad bridge, as broad as the throw of
a spear when a man is trying his strength. the trojan battalions poured
over the bridge, and apollo with his redoubtable aegis led the way. he
kicked down the wall of the achaeans as easily as a child who playing
on the sea-shore has built a house of sand and then kicks it down again
and destroys it--even so did you, o apollo, shed toil and trouble upon
the argi
 
 ___________________________
 
ving with ajax
inasmuch as he had killed a man among the cythereans. hector's spear
struck him on the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the
ship's prow on to the ground with no life left in him. ajax shook with
rage and said to his brother, "teucer, my good fellow, our trusty
comrade the son of mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from
cythera and whom we honoured as much as our own parents. hector has
just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which
phoebus apollo gave you."

teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver in
his hands. forthwith he showered his arrows on the trojans, and hit
cleitus the son of pisenor, comrade of polydamas the noble son of
panthous, with the reins in his hands as he was attending to his
horses; he was in the middle of the very thickest part of the fight,
doing good service to hector and the trojans, but evil had now come
upon him, and not one of those who were fain to do so could avert it,
for the arro
 
 ___________________________
 
, life or death, once for all, than fight long and
without issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves."

with these words he put life and soul into them all. hector then killed
schedius son of perimedes, leader of the phoceans, and ajax killed
laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to antenor. polydamas killed
otus of cyllene a comrade of the son of phyleus and chief of the proud
epeans. when meges saw this he sprang upon him, but polydamas crouched
down, and he missed him, for apollo would not suffer the son of
panthous to fall in battle; but the spear hit croesmus in the middle of
his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and meges stripped
him of his armour. at that moment the valiant soldier dolops son of
lampus sprang upon lampus was son of laomedon and noted for his valour,
while his son dolops was versed in all the ways of war. he then struck
the middle of the son of phyleus' shield with his spear, setting on him
at close quarters, but his good corslet made wi
 
 ___________________________
 
all the danaans, and that they may restore
the girl to me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. when you
have driven the trojans from the ships, come back again. though juno's
thundering husband should put triumph within your reach, do not fight
the trojans further in my absence, or you will rob me of glory that
should be mine. and do not for lust of battle go on killing the trojans
nor lead the achaeans on to ilius, lest one of the ever-living gods
from olympus attack you--for phoebus apollo loves them well: return
when you have freed the ships from peril, and let others wage war upon
the plain. would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that not a
single man of all the trojans might be left alive, nor yet of the
argives, but that we two might be alone left to tear aside the mantle
that veils the brow of troy."

thus did they converse. but ajax could no longer hold his ground for
the shower of darts that rained upon him; the will of jove and the
javelins of the trojans were too mu
 
 ___________________________
 
ew out both spear-point and sarpedon's soul at
the same time. hard by the myrmidons held his snorting steeds, who were
wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.

glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what sarpedon said, for
he could not help him. he had to support his arm with his other hand,
being in great pain through the wound which teucer's arrow had given
him when teucer was defending the wall as he, glaucus, was assailing
it. therefore he prayed to far-darting apollo saying, "hear me o king
from your seat, may be in the rich land of lycia, or may be in troy,
for in all places you can hear the prayer of one who is in distress, as
i now am. i have a grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain, there
is no staunching the blood, and my whole arm drags by reason of my
hurt, so that i cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and fight
them, though our prince, jove's son sarpedon, is slain. jove defended
not his son, do you, therefore, o king, heal me of my woun
 
 ___________________________
 
d, ease my
pain and grant me strength both to cheer on the lycians and to fight
along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the lycian
captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forg
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, bidding the
other trojans fly also, for he saw that the scales of jove had turned
against him. neither would the brave lycians stand firm; they were
dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap
of corpses--for when the son of saturn made the fight wax hot many had
fallen above him. the achaeans, therefore stripped the gleaming armour
from his shoulders and the brave son of menoetius gave it to his men to
take to the ships. then jove lord of the storm-cloud said to apollo,
"dear phoebus, go, i pray you, and take sarpedon out of range of the
weapons; cleanse the black blood from off him, and then bear him a long
way off where you may wash him in the river, anoint him with ambrosia,
and clothe him in immortal raiment; this done, commit him to the arms
of the two fleet messengers, death, and sleep, who will carry him
straightway to the rich land of lycia, where his brothers and kinsmen
will inter him, and will raise both mound and pillar to his memory, in
due honou
 
 ___________________________
 
r to the dead."

thus he spoke. apollo obeyed his father's saying, and came down from
the heights of ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he took
sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way off,
where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and
clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to the
arms of the two fleet messengers, death, and sleep, who presently set
him down in the rich land of lycia.

meanwhile patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to automedon,
pur
 
 ___________________________
 
did when he put a high spirit into the heart of patroclus.

who then first, and who last, was slain by you, o patroclus, when the
gods had now called you to meet your doom? first adrestus, autonous,
echeclus, perimus the son of megas, epistor and melanippus; after these
he killed elasus, mulius, and pylartes. these he slew, but the rest
saved themselves by flight.

the sons of the achaeans would now have taken troy by the hands of
patroclus, for his spear flew in all directions, had not phoebus apollo
taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the
trojans. thrice did patroclus charge at an angle of the high wall, and
thrice did apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his own
immortal hands. when patroclus was coming on like a god for yet a
fourth time, apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "draw
back, noble patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of the
trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of achilles who is a far
better man than you are.
 
 ___________________________
 
" on hearing this, patroclus withdrew to some
distance and avoided the anger of apollo.

meanwhile hector was waiting with his horses inside the scaean gates,
in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call the
army inside the gates. as he was thus doubting phoebus apollo drew near
him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior asius, who was
hector's uncle, being own brother to hecuba, and son of dymas who lived
in phrygia by the waters of the river sangarius; in his likeness jove's
son apollo now spoke to hector saying, "hector, why have you left off
fighting? it is ill done of you. if i were as much better a man than
you, as i am worse, you should soon rue your slackness. drive straight
towards patroclus, if so be that apollo may grant you a triumph over
hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m, and you may rule him."

with this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and hector bade
cebriones drive again into the fight. apollo passed in among them, and
struck panic into the argives, while he gave triumph to hector and the
trojans. hector let the other danaans alone and killed no man, but
drove straight at patroclus. patroclus then sprang from his chariot to
the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right a jagged
stone as large as his hand could hold. he stood still and threw it, nor
did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for
the stone struck cebriones, hector's charioteer, a ba
 
 ___________________________
 
n patroclus sprang like mars with fierce intent and a
terrific shout upon the trojans, and thrice did he kill nine men; but
as he was coming on like a god for a time, then, o patroclus, was the
hour of your end approaching, for phoebus fought you in fell earnest.
patroclus did not see him as he moved about in the crush, for he was
enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his
back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his
eyes turned dizzy. phoebus apollo beat the helmet from off his head,
and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where its horse-hair
plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. never indeed had that
helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect the head and
comely forehead of the godlike hero achilles. now, however, zeus
delivered it over to be worn by hector. nevertheless the end of hector
also was near. the bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was
broken in the hand of patroclus, while his shield that c
 
 ___________________________
 
overed him from
head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and
apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.

on this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as
one dazed; whereon euphorbus son of panthous a dardanian, the best
spearman of his time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner,
came behind him and struck him in the back with a spear, midway between
the shoulders. this man as soon as ever he had come up with his chariot
had dismounted twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of
war--he it was, o knight patroclus, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
ltures shall
devour you here. poor wretch, achilles with all his bravery availed you
nothing; and yet i ween when you left him he charged you straitly
saying, 'come not back to the ships, knight patroclus, till you have
rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous hector about his body.' thus i
ween did he charge you, and your fool's heart answered him 'yea' within
you."

then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, o knight patroclus:
"hector, vaunt as you will, for jove the son of saturn and apollo have
vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have vanquished me so easily,
and they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had twenty
such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my
spear. fate and the son of leto have overpowered me, and among mortal
men euphorbus; you are yourself third only in the killing of me. i say
further, and lay my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a
little season; death and the day of your doom are close upon you, and
they w
 
 ___________________________
 
e lion upon the mountains in the pride of his strength
fastens on the finest heifer in a herd as it is feeding--first he
breaks her neck with his strong jaws, and then gorges on her blood and
entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue and cry against him, but they
stand aloof and will not come close to him, for they are pale with
fear--even so no one had the courage to face valiant menelaus. the son
of atreus would have then carried off the armour of the son of panthous
with ease, had not phoebus apollo been angry, and in the guise of
mentes chief of the cicons incited hector to attack him. "hector," said
he, "you are now going after the horses of the noble son of aeacus, but
you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven by
mortal man, save only by achilles, who is son to an immortal mother.
meanwhile menelaus son of atreus has bestridden the body of patroclus
and killed the noblest of the trojans, euphorbus son of panthous, so
that he can fight no more."

the god then went ba
 
 ___________________________
 
heir head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off--even so did menelaus son of atreus turn and leave the body
of patroclus. when among the body of his men, he looked around for
mighty ajax son of telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme left
of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep on
fighting, for phoebus apollo had spread a great panic among them. he
ran up to him and said, "ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to
dead patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to achilles--as for
his armour, hector already has it."

these words stirred the heart of ajax, and he made his way among the
front ranks, menelaus going with him. hector had stripped patroclus of
his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the
body to fling before the dogs of troy. but ajax came up with his shie
 
 ___________________________
 
utched the ground in his palm as he fell to earth.
hector and those who were in the front rank then gave ground, while the
argives raised a loud cry of triumph, and drew off the bodies of
phorcys and hippothous which they stripped presently of their armour.

the trojans would now have been worsted by the brave achaeans and
driven back to ilius through their own cowardice, while the argives, so
great was their courage and endurance, would have achieved a triumph
even against the will of jove, if apollo had not roused aeneas, in the
likeness of periphas son of epytus, an attendant who had grown old in
the service of aeneas' aged father, and was at all times devoted to
him. in his likeness, then, apollo said, "aeneas, can you not manage,
even though heaven be against us, to save high ilius? i have known men,
whose numbers, courage, and self-reliance have saved their people in
spite of jove, whereas in this case he would much rather give victory
to us than to the danaans, if you would only fight
 
 ___________________________
 
 instead of being so
terribly afraid."

aeneas knew apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to
hector saying, "hector and all other trojans and allies, shame on us if
we are beaten by the achaeans and driven back to ilius through our own
cowardice. a god has just come up to me and told me that jove the
supreme disposer will be with us. therefore let us make for the
danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they bear away dead
patroclus to the ships."

as he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied
and again faced the
 
 ___________________________
 
 bold as
this did she make him as he stood over patroclus and threw his spear.
now there was among the trojans a man named podes, son of eetion, who
was both rich and valiant. hector held him in the highest honour for he
was his comrade and boon companion; the spear of menelaus struck this
man in the girdle just as he had turned in flight, and went right
through him. whereon he fell heavily forward, and menelaus son of
atreus drew off his body from the trojans into the ranks of his own
people.

apollo then went up to hector and spurred him on to fight, in the
likeness of phaenops son of asius who lived in abydos and was the most
favoured of all hector's guests. in his likeness apollo said, "hector,
who of the achaeans will fear you henceforward now that you have
quailed before menelaus who has ever been rated poorly as a soldier?
yet he has now got a corpse away from the trojans single-handed, and
has slain your own true comrade, a man brave among the foremost, podes
son of eetion."

a dark 
 
 ___________________________
 
achaeans had awarded
him, and he wastes with sorrow for her sake. then the trojans hemmed
the achaeans in at their ships' sterns and would not let them come
forth; the elders, therefore, of the argives besought achilles and
offered him great treasure, whereon he refused to bring deliverance to
them himself, but put his own armour on patroclus and sent him into the
fight with much people after him. all day long they fought by the
scaean gates and would have taken the city there and then, had not
apollo vouchsafed glory to hector and slain the valiant son of
menoetius after he had done the trojans much evil. therefore i am
suppliant at your knees if haply you may be pleased to provide my son,
whose end is near at hand, with helmet and shield, with goodly greaves
fitted with ancle-clasps, and with a breastplate, for he lost his own
when his true comrade fell at the hands of the trojans, and he now lies
stretched on earth in the bitterness of his soul."

and vulcan answered, "take heart, and be 
 
 ___________________________
 
out his comrade, he will override fate
itself and storm their city."

thus spoke jove and gave the word for war, whereon the gods took their
several sides and went into battle. juno, pallas minerva,
earth-encircling neptune, mercury bringer of good luck and excellent in
all cunning--all these joined the host that came from the ships; with
them also came vulcan in all his glory, limping, but yet with his thin
legs plying lustily under him. mars of gleaming helmet joined the
trojans, and with him apollo of locks unshorn, and the archer goddess
diana, leto, xanthus, and laughter-loving venus.

so long as the gods held themselves aloof from mortal warriors the
achaeans were triumphant, for achilles who had long refused to fight
was now with them. there was not a trojan but his limbs failed him for
fear as he beheld the fleet son of peleus all glorious in his armour,
and looking like mars himself. when, however, the olympians came to
take their part among men, forthwith uprose strong strife, rous
 
 ___________________________
 
 crests of many-fountained
ida quaked, as also the city of the trojans and the ships of the
achaeans. hades, king of the realms below, was struck with fear; he
sprang panic-stricken from his throne and cried aloud in terror lest
neptune, lord of the earthquake, should crack the ground over his head,
and lay bare his mouldy mansions to the sight of mortals and
immortals--mansions so ghastly grim that even the gods shudder to think
of them. such was the uproar as the gods came together in battle.
apollo with his arrows took his stand to face king neptune, while
minerva took hers against the god of war; the archer-goddess diana with
her golden arrows, sister of far-darting apollo, stood to face juno;
mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced leto, while the mighty
eddying river whom men can scamander, but gods xanthus, matched himself
against vulcan.

the gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. but the heart of
achilles was set on meeting hector son of priam, for it was with his
bl
 
 ___________________________
 
ood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of
battle. meanwhile apollo set aeneas on to attack the son of peleus, and
put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of lycaon son of
priam. in his likeness therefore, he said to aeneas, "aeneas,
counsellor of the trojans, where are now the brave words with which you
vaunted over your wine before the trojan princes, saying that you would
fight achilles son of peleus in single combat?"

and aeneas answered, "why do you thus bid me fight the proud son of
peleus, when i am in no mind to do so? were i to face him no
 
 ___________________________
 
h to fly, else had i
fallen by the hands of achilles and minerva, who went before him to
protect him and urged him to fall upon the lelegae and trojans. no man
may fight achilles, for one of the gods is always with him as his
guardian angel, and even were it not so, his weapon flies ever
straight, and fails not to pierce the flesh of him who is against him;
if heaven would let me fight him on even terms he should not soon
overcome me, though he boasts that he is made of bronze."

then said king apollo, son to jove, "nay, hero, pray to the ever-living
gods, for men say that you were born of jove's daughter venus, whereas
achilles is son to a goddess of inferior rank. venus is child to jove,
while thetis is but daughter to the old man of the sea. bring,
therefore, your spear to bear upon him, and let him not scare you with
his taunts and menaces."

as he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his
people, and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the foremost
fighters. nor
 
 ___________________________
 
 did the son of anchises escape the notice of white-armed
juno, as he went forth into the throng to meet achilles. she called the
gods about her, and said, "look to it, you two, neptune and minerva,
and consider how this shall be; phoebus apollo has been sending aeneas
clad in full armour to fight achilles. shall we turn him back at once,
or shall one of us stand by achilles and endow him with strength so
that his heart fail not, and he may learn that the chiefs of the
immortals are on his side, while the others who have all along been
defending the trojans are but vain helpers? let us all come down from
olympus and join in the fight, that this day he may take no hurt at the
hands of the trojans. hereafter let him suffer whatever fate 
 
 ___________________________
 
s be not thus assured by the voice of a god, he may come to fear
presently when one of us meets him in battle, for the gods are terrible
if they are seen face to face."

neptune lord of the earthquake answered her saying, "juno, restrain
your fury; it is not well; i am not in favour of forcing the other gods
to fight us, for the advantage is too greatly on our own side; let us
take our places on some hill out of the beaten track, and let mortals
fight it out among themselves. if mars or phoebus apollo begin
fighting, or keep achilles in check so that he cannot fight, we too,
will at once raise the cry of battle, and in that case they will soon
leave the field and go back vanquished to olympus among the other gods."

with these words the dark-haired god led the way to the high
earth-barrow of hercules, built round solid masonry, and made by the
trojans and pallas minerva for him to fly to when the sea-monster was
chasing him from the shore on to the plain. here neptune and those that
were wit
 
 ___________________________
 
t, but aeneas wielded it quite easily.

aeneas would then have struck achilles as he was springing towards him,
either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered him, and achilles
would have closed with him and despatched him with his sword, had not
neptune lord of the earthquake been quick to mark, and said forthwith
to the immortals, "alas, i am sorry for great aeneas, who will now go
down to the house of hades, vanquished by the son of peleus. fool that
he was to give ear to the counsel of apollo. apollo will never save him
from destruction. why should this man suffer when he is guiltless, to
no purpose, and in another's quarrel? has he not at all times offered
acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven? let us then
snatch him from death's jaws, lest the son of saturn be angry should
achilles slay him. it is fated, moreover, that he should escape, and
that the race of dardanus, whom jove loved above all the sons born to
him of mortal women, shall not perish utterly without se
 
 ___________________________
 

battle were one of words only, but they would be more than a match for
me, if we had to use our spears. even so the deed of achilles will fall
somewhat short of his word; he will do in part, and the other part he
will clip short. i will go up against him though his hands be as
fire--though his hands be fire and his strength iron."

thus urged the trojans lifted up their spears against the achaeans, and
raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves into the midst of
their ranks. but phoebus apollo came up to hector and said, "hector, on
no account must you challenge achilles to single combat; keep a lookout
for him while you are under cover of the others and away from the thick
of the fight, otherwise he will either hit you with a spear or cut you
down at close quarters."

thus he spoke, and hector drew back within the crowd, for he was afraid
when he heard what the god had said to him. achilles then sprang upon
the trojans with a terrible cry, clothed in valour as with a garment.
first 
 
 ___________________________
 
a mighty warrior, mightier by far than i, nevertheless the issue lies
in the lap of heaven whether i, worse man though i be, may not slay you
with my spear, for this too has been found keen ere now."

he hurled his spear as he spoke, but minerva breathed upon it, and
though she breathed but very lightly she turned it back from going
towards achilles, so that it returned to hector and lay at his feet in
front of him. achilles then sprang furiously on him with a loud cry,
bent on killing him, but apollo caught him up easily as a god can, and
hid him in a thick darkness. thrice did achilles spring towards him
spear in hand, and thrice did he waste his blow upon the air. when he
rushed forward for the fourth time as though he were a god, he shouted
aloud saying, "hound, this time too you have escaped death--but of a
truth it came exceedingly near you. phoebus apollo, to whom it seems
you pray before you go into battle, has again saved you; but if i too
have any friend among the gods i will surel
 
 ___________________________
 
 the sea for i am choked with dead, and
yet you go on mercilessly slaying. i am in despair, therefore, o
captain of your host, trouble me no further."

achilles answered, "so be it, scamander, jove-descended; but i will
never cease dealing out death among the trojans, till i have pent them
up in their city, and made trial of hector face to face, that i may
learn whether he is to vanquish me, or i him."

as he spoke he set upon the trojans with a fury like that of the gods.
but the river said to apollo, "surely, son of jove, lord of the silver
bow, you are not obeying the commands of jove who charged you straitly
that you should stand by the trojans and defend them, till twilight
fades, and darkness is over the earth."

meanwhile achilles sprang from the bank into mid-stream, whereon the
river raised a high wave and attacked him. he swelled his stream into a
torrent, and swept away the many dead whom achilles had slain and left
within his waters. these he cast out on to the land, bellowing li
 
 ___________________________
 
ay;
for the angry flood was tiring him out as it flowed past him and ate
the ground from under his feet.

then the son of peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying, "father
jove, is there none of the gods who will take pity upon me, and save me
from the river? i do not care what may happen to me afterwards. i blame
none of the other dwellers on olympus so severely as i do my dear
mother, who has beguiled and tricked me. she told me i was to fall
under the walls of troy by the flying arrows of apollo; would that
hector, the best man among the trojans, might there slay me; then
should i fall a hero by the hand of a hero; whereas now it seems that i
shall come to a most pitiable end, trapped in this river as though i
were some swineherd's boy, who gets carried down a torrent while trying
to cross it during a storm."

as soon as he had spoken thus, neptune and minerva came up to him in
the likeness of two men, and took him by the hand to reassure him.
neptune spoke first. "son of peleus," said
 
 ___________________________
 
de at her,
striking her on the bosom with her strong hand so that she fell
fainting to the ground, and there they both lay stretched at full
length. then minerva vaunted over her saying, "may all who help the
trojans against the argives prove just as redoubtable and stalwart as
venus did when she came across me while she was helping mars. had this
been so, we should long since have ended the war by sacking the strong
city of ilius."

juno smiled as she listened. meanwhile king neptune turned to apollo
saying, "phoebus, why should we keep each other at arm's length? it is
not well, now that the others have begun fighting; it will be
disgraceful to us if we return to jove's bronze-floored mansion on
olympus without having fought each other; therefore come on, you are
the younger of the two, and i ought not to attack you, for i am older
and have had more experience. idiot, you have no sense, and forget how
we two alone of all the gods fared hardly round about ilius when we
came from jove's hous
 
 ___________________________
 
 of payment, mighty
laomedon robbed us of all our hire and sent us off with nothing but
abuse. he threatened to bind us hand and foot and sell us over into
some distant island. he tried, moreover, to cut off the ears of both of
us, so we went away in a rage, furious about the payment he had
promised us, and yet withheld; in spite of all this, you are now
showing favour to his people, and will not join us in compassing the
utter ruin of the proud trojans with their wives and children."

and king apollo answered, "lord of the earthquake, you would have no
respect for me if i were to fight you about a pack of miserable
mortals, who come out like leaves in summer and eat the fruit of the
field, and presently fall lifeless to the ground. let us stay this
fighting at once and let them settle it among themselves."

he turned away as he spoke, for he would lay no hand on the brother of
his own father. but his sister the huntress diana, patroness of wild
beasts, was very angry with him and said, "so 
 
 ___________________________
 
you would fly,
far-darter, and hand victory over to neptune with a cheap vaunt to
boot. baby, why keep your bow thus idle? never let me again hear you
bragging in my father's house, as you have often done in the presence
of the immortals, that you would stand up and fight with neptune."

apollo made her no answer, but jove's august queen was angry and
upbraided her bitterly. "bold vixen," she cried, "how dare you cross me
thus? for all your bow you will find it hard to hold your own against
me. jove made you as a lion among women, and lets you kill them
whenever you choose. you will find it better to chase wild beasts and
deer upon the mountains than to fight those who are stronger than you
are. if you would try war, do so, and find out by pitting yourself
against me, how far stronger
 
 ___________________________
 
. the
son of saturn drew her towards him, and laughing pleasantly the while
began to question her saying, "which of the heavenly beings, my dear
child, has been treating you in this cruel manner, as though you had
been misconducting yourself in the face of everybody?" and the
fair-crowned goddess of the chase answered, "it was your wife juno,
father, who has been beating me; it is always her doing when there is
any quarrelling among the immortals."

thus did they converse, and meanwhile phoebus apollo entered the strong
city of ilius, for he was uneasy lest the wall should not hold out and
the danaans should take the city then and there, before its hour had
come; but the rest of the ever-living gods went back, some angry and
some triumphant to olympus, where they took their seats beside jove
lord of the storm cloud, while achilles still kept on dealing out death
alike on the trojans and on their horses. as when the smoke from some
burning city ascends to heaven when the anger of the gods has
 
 ___________________________
 
rs to the brave warders of
the gate. "keep the gates," said he, "wide open till the people come
flying into the city, for achilles is hard by and is driving them in
rout before him. i see we are in great peril. as soon as our people are
inside and in safety, close the strong gates for i fear lest that
terrible man should come bounding inside along with the others."

as he spoke they drew back the bolts and opened the gates, and when
these were opened there was a haven of refuge for the trojans. apollo
then came full speed out of the city to meet them and protect them.
right for the city and the high wall, parched with thirst and grimy
with dust, still they fied on, with achilles wielding his spear
furiously behind them. for he was as one possessed, and was thirsting
after glory.

then had the sons of the achaeans taken the lofty gates of troy if
apollo had not spurred on agenor, valiant and noble son to antenor. he
put courage into his heart, and stood by his side to guard him, leaning
again
 
 ___________________________
 
inside who will
stand in front of our dear parents with our wives and children, to
defend ilius. here therefore, huge and mighty warrior though you be,
here shall you die."

as he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the spear
struck achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of newly
wrought tin rang loudly, but the spear recoiled from the body of him
whom it had struck, and did not pierce it, for the god's gift stayed
it. achilles in his turn attacked noble agenor, but apollo would not
vouchsafe him glory, for he snatched agenor away and hid him in a thick
mist, sending him out of the battle unmolested. then he craftily drew
the son of peleus away from going after the host, for he put on the
semblance of agenor and stood in front of achilles, who ran towards him
to give him chase and pursued him over the corn lands of the plain,
turning him towards the deep waters of the river scamander. apollo ran
but a little way before him and beguiled achilles by making him thin
 
 ___________________________
 
d escaped and who were fallen in
fight, but all whose feet and knees could still carry them poured
pell-mell into the town.



book xxii

  the death of hector.

thus the trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat from
off them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against the goodly
battlements, while the achaeans with their shields laid upon their
shoulders drew close up to the walls. but stern fate bade hector stay
where he was before ilius and the scaean gates. then phoebus apollo
spoke to the son of peleus saying, "why, son of peleus, do you, who are
but man, give chase to me who am immortal? have you not yet found out
that it is a god whom you pursue so furiously? you did not harass the
trojans whom you had routed, and now they are within their walls, while
you have been decoyed hither away from them. me you cannot kill, for
death can take no hold upon me."

achilles was greatly angered and said, "you have baulked me,
far-darter, most malicious of all gods, and have dr
 
 ___________________________
 
dardanian
gates and under the walls, that his people might help him by showering
down weapons from above, achilles would gain on him and head him back
towards the plain, keeping himself always on the city side. as a man in
a dream who fails to lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing--the
one cannot escape nor the other overtake--even so neither could
achilles come up with hector, nor hector break away from achilles;
nevertheless he might even yet have escaped death had not the time come
when apollo, who thus far had sustained his strength and nerved his
running, was now no longer to stay by him. achilles made signs to the
achaean host, and shook his head to show that no man was to aim a dart
at hector, lest another might win the glory of having hit him and he
might himself come in second. then, at last, as they were nearing the
fountains for the fourth time, the father of all balanced his golden
scales and placed a doom in each of them, one for achilles and the
other for hector. as he hel
 
 ___________________________
 
d the scales by the middle, the doom of
hector fell down deep into the house of hades--and then phoebus apollo
left him. thereon minerva went close up to the son of peleus and said,
"noble achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely take back to
the ships a triumph for the achaeans by slaying hector, for all his
lust of battle. do what apollo may as he lies grovelling before his
father, aegis-bearing jove, hector cannot escape us longer. stay here
and take breath, while i go up to him and persuade him to make a stand
and fight you."

thus spoke minerva. achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while minerva left him and
went after hector in the form and with the voice of deiphobus. she came
close up to him and said, "dear brother, i see you are hard pressed by
achilles who is chasing yo
 
 ___________________________
 
gry when he saw that the weapon had
sped from his hand in vain, and stood there in dismay for he had no
second spear. with a loud cry he called deiphobus and asked him for
one, but there was no man; then he saw the truth and said to himself,
"alas! the gods have lured me on to my destruction. i deemed that the
hero deiphobus was by my side, but he is within the wall, and minerva
has inveigled me; death is now indeed exceedingly near at hand and
there is no way out of it--for so jove and his son apollo the
far-darter have willed it, though heretofore they have been ever ready
to protect me. my doom has come upon me; let me not then die
ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me first do some great
thing that shall be told among men hereafter."

as he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong by his
side, and gathering himself together be sprang on achilles like a
soaring eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some lamb or
timid hare--even so did hector brandish hi
 
 ___________________________
 
igh it out for me on the
spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. though priam son of dardanus
should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall
never lay you out and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and
vultures shall eat you utterly up."

hector with his dying breath then said, "i know you what you are, and
was sure that i should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron;
look to it that i bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day when
paris and phoebus apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the
scaean gates."

when he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his
soul went out of him and flew down to the house of hades, lamenting its
sad fate that it should enjoy youth and strength no longer. but
achilles said, speaking to the dead body, "die; for my part i will
accept my fate whensoever jove and the other gods see fit to send it."

as he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side;
then he stripped the bloo
 
 ___________________________
 
ll," he cried, "patroclus, even in the house of hades; i am now
doing all that i have promised you. twelve brave sons of noble trojans
shall the flames consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall
devour the flesh of hector son of priam."

thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of hector, for
jove's daughter venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him
with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when
achilles was dragging him about. phoebus apollo moreover sent a dark
cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

now the pyre about dead patroclus would not kindle. achilles therefore
bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two
winds boreas and zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. he made them
many drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come and
help him that the wood might make haste to kindle and the dead b
 
 ___________________________
 
th their manes trailing on
the ground in the extremity of their sorrow. but do you others set
yourselves in order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in
his horses and in the strength of his chariot."

thus spoke the son of peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred
themselves. first among them all uprose eumelus, king of men, son of
admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. next to him rose mighty
diomed son of tydeus; he yoked the trojan horses which he had taken
from aeneas, when apollo bore him out of the fight. next to him,
yellow-haired menelaus son of atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses,
agamemnon's mare aethe, and his own horse podargus. the mare had been
given to agamemnon by echepolus son of anchises, that he might not have
to follow him to ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for
jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious sicyon.
this mare, all eager for the race, did menelaus put under the yoke.

fourth in order antilochus, son to n
 
 ___________________________
 
ir way
back towards the sea that their pace was strained to the utmost and it
was seen what each could do. the horses of the descendant of pheres now
took the lead, and close behind them came the trojan stallions of
diomed. they seemed as if about to mount eumelus's chariot, and he
could feel their warm breath on his back and on his broad shoulders,
for their heads were close to him as they flew over the course. diomed
would have now passed him, or there would have been a dead heat, but
phoebus apollo to spite him made him drop his whip. tears of anger fell
from his eyes as he saw the mares going on faster than ever, while his
own horses lost ground through his having no whip. minerva saw the
trick which apollo had played the son of tydeus, so she brought him his
whip and put spirit into his horses; moreover she went after the son of
admetus in a rage and broke his yoke for him; the mares went one to one
side of the course, and the other to the other, and the pole was broken
against the grou
 
 ___________________________
 
chaeans, and presently
offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing. he brought out a
strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of the crowd--a she-mule
never yet broken, but six years old--when it is hardest of all to break
them: this was for the victor, and for the vanquished he offered a
double cup. then he stood up and said among the argives, "son of
atreus, and all other achaeans, i invite our two champion boxers to lay
about them lustily and compete for these prizes. he to whom apollo
vouchsafes the greater endurance, and whom the achaeans acknowledge as
victor, shall take the mule back with him to his own tent, while he
that is vanquished shall have the double cup."

as he spoke there stood up a champion both brave and of great stature,
a skilful boxer, epeus, son of panopeus. he laid his hand on the mule
and said, "let the man who is to have the cup come hither, for none but
myself will take the mule. i am the best boxer of all here present, and
none can beat me. is it not
 
 ___________________________
 
he foot;
this was what they were to aim at. "whoever," he said, "can hit the
pigeon shall have all the axes and take them away with him; he who hits
the string without hitting the bird will have taken a worse aim and
shall have the single-edged axes."

then uprose king teucer, and meriones the stalwart squire of idomeneus
rose also, they cast lots in a bronze helmet and the lot of teucer fell
first. he let fly with his arrow forthwith, but he did not promise
hecatombs of firstling lambs to king apollo, and missed his bird, for
apollo foiled his aim; but he hit the string with which the bird was
tied, near its foot; the arrow cut the string clean through so that it
hung down towards the ground, while the bird flew up into the sky, and
the achaeans shouted applause. meriones, who had his arrow ready while
teucer was aiming, snatched the bow out of his hand, and at once
promised that he would sacrifice a hecatomb of firstling lambs to
apollo lord of the bow; then espying the pigeon high up unde
 
 ___________________________
 
 things he wept
bitterly and lay now on his side, now on his back, and now face
downwards, till at last he rose and went out as one distraught to
wander upon the seashore. then, when he saw dawn breaking over beach
and sea, he yoked his horses to his chariot, and bound the body of
hector behind it that he might drag it about. thrice did he drag it
round the tomb of the son of menoetius, and then went back into his
tent, leaving the body on the ground full length and with its face
downwards. but apollo would not suffer it to be disfigured, for he
pitied the man, dead though he now was; therefore he shielded him with
his golden aegis continually, that he might take no hurt while achilles
was dragging him.

thus shamefully did achilles in his fury dishonour hector; but the
blessed gods looked down in pity from heaven, and urged mercury, slayer
of argus, to steal the body. all were of this mind save only juno,
neptune, and jove's grey-eyed daughter, who persisted in the hate which
they had ever 
 
 ___________________________
 
borne towards ilius with priam and his people; for they
forgave not the wrong done them by alexandrus in disdaining the
goddesses who came to him when he was in his sheepyards, and preferring
her who had offered him a wanton to his ruin.

when, therefore, the morning of the twelfth day had now come, phoebus
apollo spoke among the immortals saying, "you gods ought to be ashamed
of yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. did not hector burn you
thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished goats? and now dare you not
rescue even his dead body, for his wife to look upon, with his mother
and child, his father priam, and his people, who would forthwith commit
him to the flames, and give him his due funeral rites? so, then, you
would all be on the side of mad achilles, who knows neither right nor
ruth? he is l
 
 ___________________________
 
ck into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right
angles to the one against which priam was sitting. "sir," he said,
"your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to
desire; you shall look upon him when you take him away at daybreak; for
the present let us prepare our supper. even lovely niobe had to think
about eating, though her twelve children--six daughters and six lusty
sons--had been all slain in her house. apollo killed the sons with
arrows from his silver bow, to punish niobe, and diana slew the
daughters, because niobe had vaunted herself against leto; she said
leto had borne two children only, whereas she had herself borne
many--whereon the two killed the many. nine days did they lie
weltering, and there was none to bury them, for the son of saturn
turned the people into stone; but on the tenth day the gods in heaven
themselves buried them, and niobe then took food, being worn out with
weeping. they 
 
 ___________________________
 
ns of woe. "hector," she cried,
"dearest to me of all my children. so long as you were alive the gods
loved you well, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful
of you; for when achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him
beyond the seas, to samos imbrus or rugged lemnos; and when he had
slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the
sepulchre of his comrade--though this could not give him life--yet here
you lie all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom apollo has slain with
his painless shafts."

thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then
helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "hector,"
said she, "dearest of all my brothers-in-law--for i am wife to
alexandrus who brought me hither to troy--would that i had died ere he
did so--twenty years are come and gone since i left my home and came
from over the sea, but i have never heard one word of insult or
unkindness from you. when another would chide with me, as 