 comes he slinks foiled and
angry away--even so did ajax, sorely against his will, retreat angrily
before the trojans, fearing for the ships of the achaeans. or as some
lazy ass that has had many a cudgel broken about his back, when he into
a field begins eating the corn--boys beat him but he is too many for
them, and though they lay about with their sticks they cannot hurt him;
still when he has had his fill they at last drive him from the
field--even so did the trojans and their allies pursue great ajax, ever
smiting the middle of his shield with their darts. now and again he
would turn and show fight, keeping back the battalions of the trojans,
and then he would again retreat; but he prevented any of them from
making his way to the ships. single-handed he stood midway between the
trojans and achaeans: the spears that sped from their hands stuck some
of them in his mighty shield, while many, though thirsting for his
blood, fell to the ground ere they could reach him to the wounding of
his fair
 
 ___________________________
 
our from his shoulders; but when alexandrus saw him, he aimed an
arrow at him which struck him in the right thigh; the arrow broke, but
the point that was left in the wound dragged on the thigh; he drew
back, therefore, under cover of his comrades to save his life, shouting
as he did so to the danaans, "my friends, princes and counsellors of
the argives, rally to the defence of ajax who is being overpowered, and
i doubt whether he will come out of the fight alive. hither, then, to
the rescue of great ajax son of telamon."

even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near,
and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their
shoulders so as to give him cover. ajax then made towards them, and
turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the mares
of neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing nestor out of the
fight, and with him machaon shepherd of his people. achilles saw and
to
 
 ___________________________
 
ng along the wall of
the achaeans. when he reached the ajaxes he said to them, "sirs,
princes of the argives, the son of noble peteos bids you come to him
for a while and help him. you had better both come if you can, or it
will be all over with him directly; the leaders of the lycians are upon
him, men who have ever fought desperately heretofore; if you have too
much on your hands to let both come, at any rate let ajax, son of
telamon, do so, and let teucer, the famous bowman, come with him."

great ajax son of telamon heeded the message, and at once spoke to the
son of oileus. "ajax," said he, "do you two, yourself and brave
lycomedes, stay here and keep the danaans in heart to fight their
hardest. i will go over yonder, and bear my part in the fray, but i
will come back here at once as soon as i have given them the help they
need."

with this, ajax son of telamon set off, and teucer, his brother by the
same father, went also, with pandion to carry teucer's bow. they went
along inside the wall
 
 ___________________________
 

right wing of the host, in the centre, or on the left wing, where i
take it the achaeans will be weakest?"

idomeneus answered, "there are others to defend the centre--the two
ajaxes and teucer, who is the finest archer of all the achaeans, and is
good also in a hand-to-hand fight. these will give hector son of priam
enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish their
indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of saturn fling a
firebrand upon them with his own hand. great ajax son of telamon will
yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of ceres, if
bronze and great stones can overthrow him. he would not yield even to
achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is none
to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing, that we may
know forthwith whether we are to give glory to some other, or he to us."

meriones, peer of fleet mars, then led the way till they came to the
part of the host which idomeneus had named.

now when 
 
 ___________________________
 
 round about.

thus did these chieftains of the danaans each of them kill his man. as
ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them when they are
alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the main flock through the
carelessness of the shepherd--and when the wolves see this they pounce
upon them at once because they cannot defend themselves--even so did
the danaans now fall on the trojans, who fled with ill-omened cries in
their panic and had no more fight left in them.

meanwhile great ajax kept on trying to drive a spear into hector, but
hector was so skilful that he held his broad shoulders well under cover
of his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the whizzing of the
arrows and the heavy thud of the spears. he well knew that the fortunes
of the day had changed, but still stood his ground and tried to protect
his comrades.

as when a cloud goes up into heaven from olympus, rising out of a clear
sky when jove is brewing a gale--even with such panic stricken rout did
the tro
 
 ___________________________
 
the double cup.

the son of peleus now brought out the prizes for the third contest and
showed them to the argives. these were for the painful art of
wrestling. for the winner there was a great tripod ready for setting
upon the fire, and the achaeans valued it among themselves at twelve
oxen. for the loser he brought out a woman skilled in all manner of
arts, and they valued her at four oxen. he rose and said among the
argives, "stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

forthwith uprose great ajax the son of telamon, and crafty ulysses,
full of wiles, rose also. the two girded themselves and went into the
middle of the ring. they gripped each other in their strong hands like
the rafters which some master-builder frames for the roof of a high
house to keep the wind out. their backbones cracked as they tugged at
one another with their mighty arms--and sweat rained from them in
torrents. many a bloody weal sprang up on their sides and shoulders,
but they kept on striving with might and main
 
 ___________________________
 
patroclus. he
stood up and said among the argives, "we bid two champions put on their
armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the
presence of the multitude; whichever of them can first wound the flesh
of the other, cut through his armour, and draw blood, to him will i
give this goodly thracian sword inlaid with silver, which i took from
asteropaeus, but the armour let both hold in partnership, and i will
give each of them a hearty meal in my own tent."

forthwith uprose great ajax the son of telamon, as also mighty diomed
son of tydeus. when they had put on their armour each on his own side
of the ring, they both went into the middle eager to engage, and with
fire flashing from their eyes. the achaeans marvelled as they beheld
them, and when the two were now close up with one another, thrice did
they spring forward and thrice try to strike each other in close
combat. ajax pierced diomed's round shield, but did not draw blood, for
the cuirass beneath the shield protected 