t the gods know that it is the tomb of
lithe myrine. here the trojans and their allies divided their forces.

priam's son, great hector of the gleaming helmet, commanded the
trojans, and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most
valiant of those who were longing for the fray.

the dardanians were led by brave aeneas, whom venus bore to anchises,
when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain
slopes of ida. he was not alone, for with him were the two sons of
antenor, archilochus and acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.

they that dwelt in telea under the lowest spurs of mt. ida, men of
substance, who drink the limpid waters of the aesepus, and are of
trojan blood--these were led by pandarus son of lycaon, whom apollo had
taught to use the bow.

they that held adresteia and the land of apaesus, with pityeia, and the
high mountain of tereia--these were led by adrestus and amphius, whose
breastplate was of linen. these were the sons of merops of perco
 
 ___________________________
 
ught that they should now have rest. they backed their chariots
toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying it
down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a
little space between them. hector sent two messengers to the city to
bring the lambs and to bid priam come, while agamemnon told talthybius
to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as agamemnon had
said.

meanwhile iris went to helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of
the son of antenor, for helicaon, son of antenor, had married laodice,
the fairest of priam's daughters. she found her in her own room,
working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering
the battles between trojans and achaeans, that mars had made them fight
for her sake. iris then came close up to her and said, "come hither,
child, and see the strange doings of the trojans and achaeans. till now
they have been warring upon the plain, mad with lust of battle, but now
they have left off fighting
 
 ___________________________
 
ears planted beside them. alexandrus and
menelaus are going to fight about yourself, and you are to be the wife
of him who is the victor."

thus spoke the goddess, and helen's heart yearned after her former
husband, her city, and her parents. she threw a white mantle over her
head, and hurried from her room, weeping as she went, not alone, but
attended by two of her handmaids, aethrae, daughter of pittheus, and
clymene. and straightway they were at the scaean gates.

the two sages, ucalegon and antenor, elders of the people, were seated
by the scaean gates, with priam, panthous, thymoetes, lampus, clytius,
and hiketaon of the race of mars. these were too old to fight, but they
were fluent orators, and sat on the tower like cicales that chirrup
delicately from the boughs of some high tree in a wood. when they saw
helen coming towards the tower, they said softly to one another, "small
wonder that trojans and achaeans should endure so much and so long, for
the sake of a woman so marvellously and
 
 ___________________________
 
ven they were not so many as the
achaeans."

the old man next looked upon ulysses; "tell me," he said, "who is that
other, shorter by a head than agamemnon, but broader across the chest
and shoulders? his armour is laid upon the ground, and he stalks in
front of the ranks as it were some great woolly ram ordering his ewes."

and helen answered, "he is ulysses, a man of great craft, son of
laertes. he was born in rugged ithaca, and excels in all manner of
stratagems and subtle cunning."

on this antenor said, "madam, you have spoken truly. ulysses once came
here as envoy about yourself, and menelaus with him. i received them in
my own house, and therefore know both of them by sight and
conversation. when they stood up in presence of the assembled trojans,
menelaus was the broader shouldered, but when both were seated ulysses
had the more royal presence. after a time they delivered their message,
and the speech of menelaus ran trippingly on the tongue; he did not say
much, for he was a man of f
 
 ___________________________
 
n to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant. alexandrus
and menelaus are to fight for helen in single combat, that she and all
her wealth may go with him who is the victor. we are to swear to a
solemn covenant of peace whereby we others shall dwell here in troy,
while the achaeans return to argos and the land of the achaeans."

the old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the
horses, and they made all haste to do so. he mounted the chariot,
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor took his seat beside him;
they then drove through the scaean gates on to the plain. when they
reached the ranks of the trojans and achaeans they left the chariot,
and with measured pace advanced into the space between the hosts.

agamemnon and ulysses both rose to meet them. the attendants brought on
the oath-offerings and mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls; they poured
water over the hands of the chieftains, and the son of atreus drew the
dagger that hung by his sword, and cut wool from the la
 
 ___________________________
 
d let their wives become the slaves of
strangers."

thus they prayed, but not as yet would jove grant them their prayer.
then priam, descendant of dardanus, spoke, saying, "hear me, trojans
and achaeans, i will now go back to the wind-beaten city of ilius: i
dare not with my own eyes witness this fight between my son and
menelaus, for jove and the other immortals alone know which shall fall."

on this he laid the two lambs on his chariot and took his seat. he
gathered the reins in his hand, and antenor sat beside him; the two
then went back to ilius. hector and ulysses measured the ground, and
cast lots from a helmet of bronze to see which should take aim first.
meanwhile the two hosts lifted up their hands and prayed saying,
"father jove, that rulest from ida, most glorious in power, grant that
he who first brought about this war between us may die, and enter the
house of hades, while we others remain at peace and abide by our oaths."

great hector now turned his head aside while he shook th
 
 ___________________________
 
most summits of olympus. she shot through the sky as some
brilliant meteor which the son of scheming saturn has sent as a sign to
mariners or to some great army, and a fiery train of light follows in
its wake. the trojans and achaeans were struck with awe as they beheld,
and one would turn to his neighbour, saying, "either we shall again
have war and din of combat, or jove the lord of battle will now make
peace between us."

thus did they converse. then minerva took the form of laodocus, son of
antenor, and went through the ranks of the trojans to find pandarus,
the redoubtable son of lycaon. she found him standing among the
stalwart heroes who had followed him from the banks of the aesopus, so
she went close up to him and said, "brave son of lycaon, will you do as
i tell you? if you dare send an arrow at menelaus you will win honour
and thanks from all the trojans, and especially from prince
alexandrus--he would be the first to requite you very handsomely if he
could see menelaus mount his f
 
 ___________________________
 
anship, for pallas minerva had dearly loved him. he it was that
made the ships for alexandrus, which were the beginning of all
mischief, and brought evil alike both on the trojans and on alexandrus
himself; for he heeded not the decrees of heaven. meriones overtook him
as he was flying, and struck him on the right buttock. the point of the
spear went through the bone into the bladder, and death came upon him
as he cried aloud and fell forward on his knees.

meges, moreover, slew pedaeus, son of antenor, who, though he was a
bastard, had been brought up by theano as one of her own children, for
the love she bore her husband. the son of phyleus got close up to him
and drove a spear into the nape of his neck: it went under his tongue
all among his teeth, so he bit the cold bronze, and fell dead in the
dust.

and eurypylus, son of euaemon, killed hypsenor, the son of noble
dolopion, who had been made priest of the river scamander, and was
honoured among the people as though he were a god. eurypyl
 
 ___________________________
 
es were kept, the work of
sidonian women, whom alexandrus had brought over from sidon when he
sailed the seas upon that voyage during which he carried off helen.
hecuba took out the largest robe, and the one that was most beautifully
enriched with embroidery, as an offering to minerva: it glittered like
a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. with this she went on
her way and many matrons with her.

when they reached the temple of minerva, lovely theano, daughter of
cisseus and wife of antenor, opened the doors, for the trojans had made
her priestess of minerva. the women lifted up their hands to the
goddess with a loud cry, and theano took the robe to lay it upon the
knees of minerva, praying the while to the daughter of great jove.
"holy minerva," she cried, "protectress of our city, mighty goddess,
break the spear of diomed and lay him low before the scaean gates. do
this, and we will sacrifice twelve heifers that have never yet known
the goad, in your temple, if you will have pit
 
 ___________________________
 
mon; near this let us
set about building a high wall, to shelter ourselves and our ships, and
let it have well-made gates that there may be a way through them for
our chariots. close outside we will dig a deep trench all round it to
keep off both horse and foot, that the trojan chieftains may not bear
hard upon us."

thus he spoke, and the princess shouted in applause. meanwhile the
trojans held a council, angry and full of discord, on the acropolis by
the gates of king priam's palace; and wise antenor spoke. "hear me," he
said, "trojans, dardanians, and allies, that i may speak even as i am
minded. let us give up argive helen and her wealth to the sons of
atreus, for we are now fighting in violation of our solemn covenants,
and shall not prosper till we have done as i say."

he then sat down and alexandrus husband of lovely helen rose to speak.
"antenor," said he, "your words are not to my liking; you can find a
better saying than this if you will; if, however, you have spoken in
good earnes
 
 ___________________________
 
y uproar rose on high into the dawning. the
chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but
these came up presently. the son of saturn sent a portent of evil sound
about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to
send many a brave man hurrying down to hades.

the trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great hector, noble polydamas, aeneas who was honoured
by the trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of antenor,
polybus, agenor, and young acamas beauteous as a god. hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in
the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of
aegis-bearing jove.

and now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon a rich
man's land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even s
 
 ___________________________
 
ng his men on to fight, and stirring
the dread strife of battle. the trojans then wheeled round, and again
met the achaeans, while the argives on their part strengthened their
battalions. the battle was now in array and they stood face to face
with one another, agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness to
be ahead of all others.

tell me now ye muses that dwell in the mansions of olympus, who,
whether of the trojans or of their allies, was first to face agamemnon?
it was iphidamas son of antenor, a man both brave and of great stature,
who was brought up in fertile thrace, the mother of sheep. cisses, his
mother's father, brought him up in his own house when he was a
child--cisses, father to fair theano. when he reached manhood, cisses
would have kept him there, and was for giving him his daughter in
marriage, but as soon as he had married he set out to fight the
achaeans with twelve ships that followed him: these he had left at
percote and had come on by land to ilius. he it was that n
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the neck. so there the poor
fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were of bronze, killed in the
defence of his fellow-citizens, far from his wedded wife, of whom he
had had no joy though he had given much for her: he had given a
hundred-head of cattle down, and had promised later on to give a
thousand sheep and goats mixed, from the countless flocks of which he
was possessed. agamemnon son of atreus then despoiled him, and carried
off his armour into the host of the achaeans.

when noble coon, antenor's eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were his
eyes at the sight of his fallen brother. unseen by agamemnon he got
beside him, spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle of his arm
below the elbow, the point of the spear going right through the arm.
agamemnon was convulsed with pain, but still not even for this did he
leave off struggling and fighting, but grasped his spear that flew as
fleet as the wind, and sprang upon coon who was trying to drag off the
body of his brother--his father's son-
 
 ___________________________
 
-by the foot, and was crying for
help to all the bravest of his comrades; but agamemnon struck him with
a bronze-shod spear and killed him as he was dragging the dead body
through the press of men under cover of his shield: he then cut off his
head, standing over the body of iphidamas. thus did the sons of antenor
meet their fate at the hands of the son of atreus, and go down into the
house of hades.

as long as the blood still welled warm from his wound agamemnon went
about attacking the ranks of the enemy with spear and sword and with
great handfuls of stone, but when the blood had ceased to flow and the
wound grew dry, the pain became great. as the sharp pangs which the
eilithuiae, goddesses of childbirth, daughters of juno and dispensers
of cruel pain, send upon a woman when she is in labour--even so
 
 ___________________________
 
d fight at the ships. cebriones was also
joined with them as third in command, for hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man of them all. these
helped to array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged
straight at the danaans, for they felt sure that they would not hold
out longer and that they should themselves now fall upon the ships.

the rest of the trojans and their allies now followed t
 
 ___________________________
 
 loudly
over him saying, "again i take it that the spear has not sped in vain
from the strong hand of the son of panthous; an argive has caught it in
his body, and it will serve him for a staff as he goes down into the
house of hades."

the argives were maddened by this boasting. ajax son of telamon was
more angry than any, for the man had fallen close beside him; so he
aimed at polydamas as he was retreating, but polydamas saved himself by
swerving aside and the spear struck archelochus son of antenor, for
heaven counselled his destruction; it struck him where the head springs
from the neck at the top joint of the spine, and severed both the
tendons at the back of the head. his head, mouth, and nostrils reached
the ground long before his legs and knees could do so, and ajax shouted
to polydamas saying, "think, polydamas, and tell me truly whether this
man is not as well worth killing as prothoenor was: he seems rich, and
of rich family, a brother, it may be, or son of the knight antenor, for
 
 ___________________________
 
him cheering on his whole host to
fire our fleet, and bidding them remember that they are not at a dance
but in battle? our only course is to fight them with might and main; we
had better chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and
without issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves."

with these words he put life and soul into them all. hector then killed
schedius son of perimedes, leader of the phoceans, and ajax killed
laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to antenor. polydamas killed
otus of cyllene a comrade of the son of phyleus and chief of the proud
epeans. when meges saw this he sprang upon him, but polydamas crouched
down, and he missed him, for apollo would not suffer the son of
panthous to fall in battle; but the spear hit croesmus in the middle of
his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and meges stripped
him of his armour. at that moment the valiant soldier dolops son of
lampus sprang upon lampus was son of laomedon and noted for his va
 
 ___________________________
 
 yet had stayed always at
the ships, the pilots and helmsmen, and even the stewards who were
about the ships and served out rations, all came to the place of
assembly because achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so
long from fighting. two sons of mars, ulysses and the son of tydeus,
came limping, for their wounds still pained them; nevertheless they
came, and took their seats in the front row of the assembly. last of
all came agamemnon, king of men, he too wounded, for coon son of
antenor had struck him with a spear in battle.

when the achaeans were got together achilles rose and said, "son of
atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you and me,
when we two were in such high anger about briseis, surely it would have
been better, had diana's arrow slain her at the ships on the day when i
took her after having sacked lyrnessus. for so, many an achaean the
less would have bitten dust before the foe in the days of my anger. it
has been well for hector and the trojans
 
 ___________________________
 
he fell heavily to the ground and achilles vaunted over him
saying, "you be low, son of otrynteus, mighty hero; your death is here,
but your lineage is on the gygaean lake where your father's estate
lies, by hyllus, rich in fish, and the eddying waters of hermus."

thus did he vaunt, but darkness closed the eyes of the other. the
chariots of the achaeans cut him up as their wheels passed over him in
the front of the battle, and after him achilles killed demoleon, a
valiant man of war and son to antenor. he struck him on the temple
through his bronze-cheeked helmet. the helmet did not stay the spear,
but it went right on, crushing the bone so that the brain inside was
shed in all directions, and his lust of fighting was ended. then he
struck hippodamas in the midriff as he was springing down from his
chariot in front of him, and trying to escape. he breathed his last,
bellowing like a bull bellows when young men are dragging him to offer
him in sacrifice to the king of helice, and the heart of
 
 ___________________________
 
the gates, and when
these were opened there was a haven of refuge for the trojans. apollo
then came full speed out of the city to meet them and protect them.
right for the city and the high wall, parched with thirst and grimy
with dust, still they fied on, with achilles wielding his spear
furiously behind them. for he was as one possessed, and was thirsting
after glory.

then had the sons of the achaeans taken the lofty gates of troy if
apollo had not spurred on agenor, valiant and noble son to antenor. he
put courage into his heart, and stood by his side to guard him, leaning
against a beech tree and shrouded in thick darkness. when agenor saw
achilles he stood still and his heart was clouded with care. "alas,"
said he to himself in his dismay, "if i fly before mighty achilles, and
go where all the others are being driven in rout, he will none the less
catch me and kill me for a coward. how would it be were i to let
achilles drive the others before him, and then fly from the wall to the
plai
 
 ___________________________
 
of saturn vouchsafes him."

so saying he stood on his guard and awaited achilles, for he was now
fain to fight him. as a leopardess that bounds from out a thick covert
to attack a hunter--she knows no fear and is not dismayed by the baying
of the hounds; even though the man be too quick for her and wound her
either with thrust or spear, still, though the spear has pierced her
she will not give in till she has either caught him in her grip or been
killed outright--even so did noble agenor son of antenor refuse to fly
till he had made trial of achilles, and took aim at him with his spear,
holding his round shield before him and crying with a loud voice. "of a
truth," said he, "noble achilles, you deem that you shall this day sack
the city of the proud trojans. fool, there will be trouble enough yet
before it, for there is many a brave man of us still inside who will
stand in front of our dear parents with our wives and children, to
defend ilius. here therefore, huge and mighty warrior though yo