who dwelt under mt.
tmolus.

nastes led the carians, men of a strange speech. these held miletus and
the wooded mountain of phthires, with the water of the river maeander
and the lofty crests of mt. mycale. these were commanded by nastes and
amphimachus, the brave sons of nomion. he came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to
save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant
of aeacus, and achilles bore away his gold.

sarpedon and glaucus led the lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the xanthus.



book iii

  alexandria, also called paris, challenges menelaus--helen and
  priam view the achaeans from the wall--the covenant--paris
  and menelaus fight, and paris is worsted--venus carries him
  off to save him--scene between him and helen.

when the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream
overhead when rain and wi
 
 ___________________________
 
us mars went
about among the ranks of the trojans, cheering them on, in the likeness
of fleet acamas chief of the thracians. "sons of priam," said he, "how
long will you let your people be thus slaughtered by the achaeans?
would you wait till they are at the walls of troy? aeneas the son of
anchises has fallen, he whom we held in as high honour as hector
himself. help me, then, to rescue our brave comrade from the stress of
the fight."

with these words he put heart and soul into them all. then sarpedon
rebuked hector very sternly. "hector," said he, "where is your prowess
now? you used to say that though you had neither people nor allies you
could hold the town alone with your brothers and brothers-in-law. i see
not one of them here; they cower as hounds before a lion; it is we,
your allies, who bear the brunt of the battle. i have come from afar,
even from lycia and the banks of the river xanthus, where i have left
my wife, my infant son, and much wealth to tempt whoever is needy;
neverthele
 
 ___________________________
 
 soldiers and stand my ground against any
who would fight me though i have nothing here for the achaeans to
plunder, while you look on, without even bidding your men stand firm in
defence of their wives. see that you fall not into the hands of your
foes as men caught in the meshes of a net, and they sack your fair city
forthwith. keep this before your mind night and day, and beseech the
captains of your allies to hold on without flinching, and thus put away
their reproaches from you."

so spoke sarpedon, and hector smarted under his words. he sprang from
his chariot clad in his suit of armour, and went about among the host
brandishing his two spears, exhorting the men to fight and raising the
terrible cry of battle. then they rallied and again faced the achaeans,
but the argives stood compact and firm, and were not driven back. as
the breezes sport with the chaff upon some goodly threshing-floor, when
men are winnowing--while yellow ceres blows with the wind to sift the
chaff from the grain, a
 
 ___________________________
 
and drew out his
spear, but the darts pressed so heavily upon him that he could not
strip the goodly armour from his shoulders. the trojan chieftains,
moreover, many and valiant, came about him with their spears, so that
he dared not stay; great, brave and valiant though he was, they drove
him from them and he was beaten back.

thus, then, did the battle rage between them. presently the strong hand
of fate impelled tlepolemus, the son of hercules, a man both brave and
of great stature, to fight sarpedon; so the two, son and grandson of
great jove, drew near to one another, and tlepolemus spoke first.
"sarpedon," said he, "councillor of the lycians, why should you come
skulking here you who are a man of peace? they lie who call you son of
aegis-bearing jove, for you are little like those who were of old his
children. far other was hercules, my own brave and lion-hearted father,
who came here for the horses of laomedon, and though he had six ships
only, and few men to follow him, sacked the city
 
 ___________________________
 
 of ilius and made a
wilderness of her highways. you are a coward, and your people are
falling from you. for all your strength, and all your coming from
lycia, you will be no help to the trojans but will pass the gates of
hades vanquished by my hand."

and sarpedon, captain of the lycians, answered, "tlepolemus, your
father overthrew ilius by reason of laomedon's folly in refusing
payment to one who had served him well. he would not give your father
the horses which he had come so far to fetch. as for yourself, you
shall meet death by my spear. you shall yield glory to myself, and your
soul to hades of the noble steeds."

thus spoke sarpedon, and tlepolemus upraised his spear. they threw at
the same moment, and sarpedon struck his foe in the middle of his
 
 ___________________________
 

throat; the spear went right through, and the darkness of death fell
upon his eyes. tlepolemus's spear struck sarpedon on the left thigh
with such force that it tore through the flesh and grazed the bone, but
his father as yet warded off destruction from him.

his comrades bore sarpedon out of the fight, in great pain by the
weight of the spear that was dragging from his wound. they were in such
haste and stress as they bore him that no one thought of drawing the
spear from his thigh so as to let him walk uprightly. meanwhile the
achaeans carried off the body of tlepolemus, whereon ulysses was moved
to pity, and panted for the fray as he beheld them. he doubted whether
to pursue the son of jove, or to make slaughter of the lycian rank and
file; it was not decreed, however, tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t he should slay the son of jove;
minerva, therefore, turned him against the main body of the lycians. he
killed coeranus, alastor, chromius, alcandrus, halius, noemon, and
prytanis, and would have slain yet more, had not great hector marked
him, and sped to the front of the fight clad in his suit of mail,
filling the danaans with terror. sarpedon was glad when he saw him
coming, and besought him, saying, "son of priam, let me not be here to
fall into the hands of the danaans. help me, and since i may not return
home to gladden the hearts of my wife and of my infant son, let me die
within the walls of your city."

hector made him no answer, but rushed onward to fall at once upon the
achaeans and kill many among them. his comrades then bore sarpedon away
and laid him beneath jove's spreading oak tree. pelagon, his friend and
comrade, drew
 
 ___________________________
 
 the spear out of his thigh, but sarpedon fainted and a
mist came over his eyes. presently he came to himself again, for the
breath of the north wind as it played upon him gave him new life, and
brought him out of the deep swoon into which he had fallen.

meanwhile the argives were neither driven towards their ships by mars
and hector, nor yet did they attack them; when they knew that mars was
with the trojans they retreated, but kept their faces still turned
towards the foe. who, then, was first and who last to be slain by mars
and he
 
 ___________________________
 
ed every one of them.
then the king knew that he must be the valiant offspring of a god, so
he kept him in lycia, gave him his daughter in marriage, and made him
of equal honour in the kingdom with himself; and the lycians gave him a
piece of land, the best in all the country, fair with vineyards and
tilled fields, to have and to hold.

"the king's daughter bore bellerophon three children, isander,
hippolochus, and laodameia. jove, the lord of counsel, lay with
laodameia, and she bore him noble sarpedon; but when bellerophon came
to be hated by all the gods, he wandered all desolate and dismayed upon
the alean plain, gnawing at his own heart, and shunning the path of
man. mars, insatiate of battle, killed his son isander while he was
fighting the solymi; his daughter was killed by diana of the golden
reins, for she was angered with her; but hippolochus was father to
myself, and when he sent me to troy he urged me again and again to
fight ever among the foremost and outvie my peers, so as not t
 
 ___________________________
 
mand, for hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. the next company was led by paris,
alcathous, and agenor; the third by helenus and deiphobus, two sons of
priam, and with them was the hero asius--asius, the son of hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river selleis
had brought him from arisbe. aeneas, the valiant son of anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of antenor, archelochus and acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him glaucus and asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man of them all. these
helped to array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged
straight at the danaans, for they felt sure that they would not hold
out longer and that they should themselves now fall upon the ships.

the rest of the trojans and their allies now followed the counsel of
polydamas but asius, son of hyrtacus, would not leave his ho
 
 ___________________________
 
on the forelands, and
havens of the grey sea, but the waves as they come rolling in stay it
that it can come no further, though all else is wrapped as with a
mantle, so heavy are the heavens with snow--even thus thickly did the
stones fall on one side and on the other, some thrown at the trojans,
and some by the trojans at the achaeans; and the whole wall was in an
uproar.

still the trojans and brave hector would not yet have broken down the
gates and the great bar, had not jove turned his son sarpedon against
the argives as a lion against a herd of horned cattle. before him he
held his shield of hammered bronze, that the smith had beaten so fair
and round, and had lined with ox hides which he had made fast with
rivets of gold all round the shield; this he held in front of him, and
brandishing his two spears came on like some lion of the wilderness,
who has been long famished for want of meat and will dare break even
into a well-fenced homestead to try and get at the sheep. he may find
the sh
 
 ___________________________
 
epherds keeping watch over their flocks with dogs and spears, but
he is in no mind to be driven from the fold till he has had a try for
it; he will either spring on a sheep and carry it off, or be hit by a
spear from some strong hand--even so was sarpedon fain to attack the
wall and break down its battlements. then he said to glaucus son of
hippolochus, "glaucus, why in lycia do we receive especial honour as
regards our place at table? why are the choicest portions served us and
our cups kept brimming, and why do men look up to us as though we were
gods? moreover we hold a large estate by the banks of the river
xanthus, fair with orchard lawns and wheat-growing land; it becomes us,
therefore, to take our stand at the head of all the lycians and 
 
 ___________________________
 
eed."

with this, ajax son of telamon set off, and teucer, his brother by the
same father, went also, with pandion to carry teucer's bow. they went
along inside the wall, and when they came to the tower where menestheus
was (and hard pressed indeed did they find him) the brave captains and
leaders of the lycians were storming the battlements as it were a thick
dark cloud, fighting in close quarters, and raising the battle-cry
aloud.

first, ajax son of telamon killed brave epicles, a comrade of sarpedon,
hitting him with a jagged stone that lay by the battlements at the very
top of the wall. as men now are, even one who is in the bloom of youth
could hardly lift it with his two hands, but ajax raised it high aloft
and flung it down, smashing epicles' four-crested helmet so that the
bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell from the high
wall as though he were diving, with no more life left in him. then
teucer wounded glaucus the brave son of hippolochus as he was coming on
to attac
 
 ___________________________
 
k the wall. he saw his shoulder bare and aimed an arrow at it,
which made glaucus leave off fighting. thereon he sprang covertly down
for fear some of the achaeans might see that he was wounded and taunt
him. sarpedon was stung with grief when he saw glaucus leave him, still
he did not leave off fighting, but aimed his spear at alcmaon the son
of thestor and hit him. he drew his spear back again and alcmaon came
down headlong after it with his bronzed armour rattling round him. then
sarpedon seized the battlement in his strong hands, and tugged at it
till it all gave way together, and a breach was made through which many
might pass.

ajax and teucer then both of them attacked him. teucer hit him with an
arrow on the band that bore the shield which covered his body, but jove
saved his son from destruction that he might not fall by the ships'
sterns. meanwhile ajax sprang on him and pierced his shield, but the
spear did not go clean through, though it hustled him back that he
could c
 
 ___________________________
 
yed if he is standing
near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing--even so did hector
fall to earth and bite the dust. his spear fell from his hand, but his
shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze armour
rang about him.

the sons of the achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him,
hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the trojans,
but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered
by the princes polydamas, aeneas, agenor, sarpedon captain of the
lycians, and noble glaucus. of the others, too, there was not one who
was unmindful of him, and they held their round shields over him to
cover him. his comrades then lifted him off the ground and bore him
away from the battle to the place where his horses stood waiting for
him at the rear of the fight with their driver and the chariot; these
then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. when they
reached the ford of the fair stream of xanthus, begotten of immortal
j
 
 ___________________________
 
 want them--iris, that she may go to the achaean host and tell
neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and apollo, that he may send
hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of achilles son of peleus. achilles will
then send his comrade patroclus into battle, and hector will kill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my
own noble son sarpedon. achilles will kill hector to avenge patroclus,
and from that time i will bring it about that the achaeans shall
persistently drive the trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of
minerva and take ilius. but i will not stay my anger, nor permit any
god to help the danaans till i have accomplished the desire of the son
of peleus, according to the promise i made by bowing my head on the day
when thetis touched my knees and besought me to give him honour."

juno heeded his words and went from th
 
 ___________________________
 
through
his throat, and down he fell. maris then sprang on antilochus in
hand-to-hand fight to avenge his brother, and bestrode the body spear
in hand; but valiant thrasymedes was too quick for him, and in a moment
had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his blow; his aim was
true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root of his arm, and
tore them right down to the bone, so he fell heavily to the ground and
his eyes were closed in darkness. thus did these two noble comrades of
sarpedon go down to erebus slain by the two sons of nestor; they were
the warrior sons of amisodorus, who had reared the invincible chimaera,
to the bane of many. ajax son of oileus sprang on cleobulus and took
him alive as he was entangled in the crush; but he killed him then and
there by a sword-blow on the neck. the sword reeked with his blood,
while dark death and the strong hand of fate gripped him and closed his
eyes.

peneleos and lycon now met in close fight, for they had missed each
other with 
 
 ___________________________
 
e pull thestor all gaping from his chariot; he then threw him down on
his face and he died while falling. on this, as erylaus was on coming
to attack him, he struck him full on the head with a stone, and his
brains were all battered inside his helmet, whereon he fell headlong to
the ground and the pangs of death took hold upon him. then he laid low,
one after the other, erymas, amphoterus, epaltes, tlepolemus, echius
son of damastor, pyris, ipheus, euippus and polymelus son of argeas.

now when sarpedon saw his comrades, men who wore ungirdled tunics,
being overcome by patroclus son of menoetius, he rebuked the lycians
saying. "shame on you, where are you flying to? show your mettle; i
will myself meet this man in fight and learn who it is that is so
masterful; he has done us much hurt, and has stretched many a brave man
upon the ground."

he sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and patroclus, when he saw
this, leaped on to the ground also. the two then rushed at one another
with loud cries li
 
 ___________________________
 
ke eagle-beaked crook-taloned vultures that scream
and tear at one another in some high mountain fastness.

the son of scheming saturn looked down upon them in pity and said to
juno who was his wife and sister, "alas, that it should be the lot of
sarpedon whom i love so dearly to perish by the hand of patroclus. i am
in two minds whether to catch him up out of the fight and set him down
safe and sound in the fertile land of lycia, or to let him now fall by
the hand of the son of menoetius."

and juno answered, "most dread son of saturn, what is this that you are
saying? would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has long been fated,
out of the jaws of death? do as you will, but we shall not all of us be
of your mind. i say further, and lay my say
 
 ___________________________
 
ing to your heart, that if
you send sarpedon safely to his own home, some other of the gods will
be also wanting to escort his son out of battle, for there are many
sons of gods fighting round the city of troy, and you will make every
one jealous. if, however, you are fond of him and pity him, let him
indeed fall by the hand of patroclus, but as soon as the life is gone
out of him, send death and sweet sleep to bear him off the field and
take him to the broad lands of lycia, where his brothers and his
kinsmen will bury him with mound and 
 
 ___________________________
 
pillar, in due honour to the dead."

the sire of gods and men assented, but he shed a rain of blood upon the
earth in honour of his son whom patroclus was about to kill on the rich
plain of troy far from his home.

when they were now come close to one another patroclus struck
thrasydemus, the brave squire of sarpedon, in the lower part of the
belly, and killed him. sarpedon then aimed a spear at patroclus and
missed him, but he struck the horse pedasus in the right shoulder, and
it screamed aloud as it lay, groaning in the dust until the life went
out of it. the other two horses began to plunge; the pole of the
chariot cracked and they got entangled in the reins through the fall of
the horse that was yoked along with them; but automedon knew what to
do; without the loss of a moment he drew the keen blade that hung by
his sturdy thigh and cut the third horse adrift
 
 ___________________________
 
; whereon the other two
righted themselves, and pulling hard at the reins again went together
into battle.

sarpedon now took a second aim at patroclus, and again missed him, the
point of the spear passed over his left shoulder without hitting him.
patroclus then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped not from his hand
in vain, for he hit sarpedon just where the midriff surrounds the
ever-beating heart. he fell like some oak or silver poplar or tall pine
to which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains to make timber
for ship-building--even so did he lie stretched at full length in front
of his chariot and horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained
dust. as when a lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and
fastens on a great black bull which dies bellowing in its
clutches--even so did the leader of the lycian war
 
 ___________________________
 
riors struggle in
death as he fell by the hand of patroclus. he called on his trusty
comrade and said, "glaucus, my brother, hero among heroes, put forth
all your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit yourself
like a valiant soldier. first go about among the lycian captains and
bid them fight for sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save my
armour from being taken. my name will haunt you henceforth and for ever
if the achaeans rob me of my armour now that i have fallen at their
ships. do your very utmost and call all my people together."

death closed his eyes as he spoke. patroclus planted his heel on his
breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out
along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and sarpedon's soul at
the same time. hard by the myrmidons held his s
 
 ___________________________
 
norting steeds, who were
wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.

glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what sarpedon said, for
he could not help him. he had to support his arm with his other hand,
being in great pain through the wound which teucer's arrow had given
him when teucer was defending the wall as he, glaucus, was assailing
it. therefore he prayed to far-darting apollo saying, "hear me o king
from your seat, may be in the rich land of lycia, or may be in troy,
for in all places you can hear the prayer of one who is in distress, as
i now am. i have a grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain, there

 
 ___________________________
 
is no staunching the blood, and my whole arm drags by reason of my
hurt, so that i cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and fight
them, though our prince, jove's son sarpedon, is slain. jove defended
not his son, do you, therefore, o king, heal me of my wound, ease my
pain and grant me strength both to cheer on the lycians and to fight
along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

thus did he pray, and apollo heard his prayer. he eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the lycian
captains, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d bade them come to fight about the body of sarpedon. from
these he strode on among the trojans to polydamas son of panthous and
agenor; he then went in search of aeneas and hector, and when he had
found them he said, "hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. sarpedon leader of the lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of lycia; mars has laid
him low by the spear of patroclus. stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body
with contumely in revenge for all the danaans whom we have speared at
the ships."

as he spoke the trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief;
for sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of
their city, both as having muc
 
 ___________________________
 
h people with him, and himself the
foremost among them all. led by hector, who was infuriated by the fall
of sarpedon, they made instantly for the danaans with all their might,
while the undaunted spirit of patroclus son of menoetius cheered on the
achaeans. first he spoke to the two ajaxes, men who needed no bidding.
"ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show yourselves the men
you have always been, or even better--sarpedon is fallen--he who was
first to overleap the wall of the achaeans; let us take the body and
outrage it; let us strip the armour from his shoulders, and kill his
comrades if they try to rescue his body."

he spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides,
therefore, the trojans and lycians on the one hand, and the myrmidons
and achaeans on the other, strengthened their battalions, and fought
desperately about the body of sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while.
mighty was the din of the
 
 ___________________________
 
e best men among the myrmidons was killed, epeigeus, son of noble
agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with peleus and thetis, who sent him to ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the trojans under achilles. hector now struck him on the head
with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains
inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost
upon the body of sarpedon, and there died. patroclus was enraged by the
death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. even so swiftly,
o noble knight patroclus, did you make straight for the lycians and
trojans to avenge your comrade. forthwith he struck sthenelaus the son
of ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join
it to the head and spine. on this hector and the front rank of his men
gave ground. as far as a man
 
 ___________________________
 
some of
them must go under ground first; blows for battle, and words for
council; fight, therefore, and say nothing."

he led the way as he spoke and the hero went forward with him. as the
sound of woodcutters in some forest glade upon the mountains--and the
thud of their axes is heard afar--even such a din now rose from
earth-clash of bronze armour and of good ox-hide shields, as men smote
each other with their swords and spears pointed at both ends. a man had
need of good eyesight now to know sarpedon, so covered was he from head
to foot with spears and blood and dust. men swarmed about the body, as
flies that buzz round the full milk-pails in spring when they are
brimming with milk--even so did they gather round sarpedon; nor did
jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept
looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill
patroclus, and considering whether hector should be allowed to end him
now in the fight round the body of sarpedon, and strip him o
 
 ___________________________
 
aw that the scales of jove had turned
against him. neither would the brave lycians stand firm; they were
dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap
of corpses--for when the son of saturn made the fight wax hot many had
fallen above him. the achaeans, therefore stripped the gleaming armour
from his shoulders and the brave son of menoetius gave it to his men to
take to the ships. then jove lord of the storm-cloud said to apollo,
"dear phoebus, go, i pray you, and take sarpedon out of range of the
weapons; cleanse the black blood from off him, and then bear him a long
way off where you may wash him in the river, anoint him with ambrosia,
and clothe him in immortal raiment; this done, commit him to the arms
of the two fleet messengers, death, and sleep, who will carry him
straightway to the rich land of lycia, where his brothers and kinsmen
will inter him, and will raise both mound and pillar to his memory, in
due honour to the dead."

thus he spoke. apollo obeyed his 
 
 ___________________________
 
father's saying, and came down from
the heights of ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he took
sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way off,
where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and
clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to the
arms of the two fleet messengers, death, and sleep, who presently set
him down in the rich land of lycia.

meanwhile patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to automedon,
pursued the trojans and lycians in the pride and foolishness of his
heart. had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of peleus
 
 ___________________________
 
cus son of hippolochus looked fiercely at hector and rebuked
him sternly. "hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight
you are sadly wanting. a runaway like yourself has no claim to so great
a reputation. think how you may now save your town and citadel by the
hands of your own people born in ilius; for you will get no lycians to
fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incessant
hardships. are you likely, sir, to do anything to help a man of less
note, after leaving sarpedon, who was at once your guest and comrade in
arms, to be the spoil and prey of the danaans? so long as he lived he
did good service both to your city and yourself; yet you had no stomach
to save his body from the dogs. if the lycians will listen to me, they
will go home and leave troy to its fate. if the trojans had any of that
daring fearless spirit which lays hold of men who are fighting for
their country and harassing those who would attack it, we should soon
bear off patroclus into ilius. cou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld we get this dead man away and
bring him into the city of priam, the argives would readily give up the
armour of sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. for he whose
squire has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the
achaeans--he and his close-fighting followers. nevertheless you dared
not make a stand against ajax, nor face him, eye to eye, with battle
all round you, for he is a braver man than you are."

hector scowled at him and answered, "glaucus, you should know better. i
have held you so far as a man of more understanding than any in all
lycia, but now i despise you for saying that i am
 
 ___________________________
 
r ulysses, he belongs to an earlier generation, but he is hale in
spite of his years, and no man of the achaeans can run against him save
only achilles."

he said this to pay a compliment to the son of peleus, and achilles
answered, "antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose; i
shall give you an additional half talent of gold." he then gave the
half talent to antilochus, who received it gladly.

then the son of peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that
had been borne by sarpedon, and were taken from him by patroclus. he
stood up and said among the argives, "we bid two champions put on their
armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the
presence of the multitude; whichever of them can first wound the flesh
of the other, cut through his armour, and draw blood, to him will i
give this goodly thracian sword inlaid with silver, which i took from
asteropaeus, but the armour let both hold in partnership, and i will
give each of them a hearty meal in my 