the iliad of homer


book i

  the quarrel between agamemnon and achilles--achilles withdraws
  from the war, and sends his mother thetis to ask jove to help
  the trojans--scene between jove and juno on olympus.

sing, o goddess, the anger of achilles son of peleus, that brought
countless ills upon the achaeans. many a brave soul did it send
hurrying down to hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and
vultures, for so were the counsels of jove fulfilled from the day on
which the son of atreus, king of men, and great achilles, first fell
out with one another.

and which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? i
 
 ___________________________
 
, for he
is stronger even than his father; when therefore he took his seat
all-glorious beside the son of saturn, the other gods were afraid, and
did not bind him. go, then, to him, remind him of all this, clasp his
knees, and bid him give succour to the trojans. let the achaeans be
hemmed in at the sterns of their ships, and perish on the sea-shore,
that they may reap what joy they may of their king, and that agamemnon
may rue his blindness in offering insult to the foremost of the
achaeans."

thetis wept and answered, "my son, woe is me that i should have borne
or suckled you. would indeed that you had lived your span free from all
sorrow at your ships, for it is all too brief; alas, that you should be
at once short of life and long of sorrow above your peers: woe,
therefore, was the hour in which i bore you; nevertheless i will go to
the snowy heights of olympus, and tell this tale to jove, if he will
hear our prayer: meanwhile stay where you are with your ships, nurse
your anger against 
 
 ___________________________
 
ped onward. when they reached the
wide-stretching host of the achaeans, they drew the vessel ashore, high
and dry upon the sands, set her strong props beneath her, and went
their ways to their own tents and ships.

but achilles abode at his ships and nursed his anger. he went not to
the honourable assembly, and sallied not forth to fight, but gnawed at
his own heart, pining for battle and the war-cry.

now after twelve days the immortal gods came back in a body to olympus,
and jove led the way. thetis was not unmindful of the charge her son
had laid upon her, so she rose from under the sea and went through
great heaven with early morning to olympus, where she found the mighty
son of saturn sitting all alone upon its topmost ridges. she sat
herself down before him, and with her left hand seized his knees, while
with her right she caught him under the chin, and besought him,
saying:--

"father jove, if i ever did you service in word or deed among the
immortals, hear my prayer, and do honour to
 
 ___________________________
 
 my son, whose life is to be
cut short so early. king agamemnon has dishonoured him by taking his
prize and keeping her. honour him then yourself, olympian lord of
counsel, and grant victory to the trojans, till the achaeans give my
son his due and load him with riches in requital."

jove sat for a while silent, and without a word, but thetis still kept
firm hold of his knees, and besought him a second time. "incline your
head," said she, "and promise me surely, or else deny me--for you have
nothing to fear--that i may learn how greatly you disdain me."

at this jove was much troubled and answered, "i shall have trouble if
you set me quarrelling with juno, for she will provoke me with her
taunting speeches; even now she is always railing at me before the
other gods and accusing me of giving aid to the trojans. go back now,
lest she 
 
 ___________________________
 
ambrosial
locks swayed on his immortal head, till vast olympus reeled.

when the pair had thus laid their plans, they parted--jove to his
house, while the goddess quitted the splendour of olympus, and plunged
into the depths of the sea. the gods rose from their seats, before the
coming of their sire. not one of them dared to remain sitting, but all
stood up as he came among them. there, then, he took his seat. but
juno, when she saw him, knew that he and the old merman's daughter,
silver-footed thetis, had been hatching mischief, so she at once began
to upbraid him. "trickster," she cried, "which of the gods have you
been taking into your counsels now? you are always settling matters in
secret behind my back, and have never yet told me, if you could help
it, one word of your intentions."

"juno," replied the sire of gods and men, "you must not expect to be
informed of all my counsels. you are my wife, but you would find it
hard to understand them. when it is proper for you to hear, there is 
 
 ___________________________
 
no
one, god or man, who will be told sooner, but when i mean to keep a
matter to myself, you must not pry nor ask questions."

"dread son of saturn," answered juno, "what are you talking about? i?
pry and ask questions? never. i let you have your own way in
everything. still, i have a strong misgiving that the old merman's
daughter thetis has been talking you over, for she was with you and had
hold of your knees this self-same morning. i believe, therefore, that
you have been promising her to give glory to achilles, and to kill much
people at the ships of the achaeans."

"wife," said jove, "i can do nothing but you suspect me and find it
out. you will take nothing by it, for i shall only dislike you the
more, and it will go harder with you. granted that it is as you say; i
mean to have it so; sit down and hold your tongue as i b
 
 ___________________________
 
ing round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. hector, and they that were in
front, then gave round while the argives raised a shout and drew off
the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. but apollo looked
down from pergamus and called aloud to the trojans, for he was
displeased. "trojans," he cried, "rush on the foe, and do not let
yourselves be thus beaten by the argives. their skins are not stone nor
iron that when hit them you do them no harm. moreover, achilles, the
son of lovely thetis, is not fighting, but is nursing his anger at the
ships."

thus spoke the mighty god, crying to them from the city, while jove's
redoubtable daughter, the trito-born, went about among the host of the
achaeans, and urged them forward whenever she beheld them slackening.

then fate fell upon diores, son of amarynceus, for he was struck by a
jagged stone near the ancle of his right leg. he that hurled it was
peirous, son of imbrasus, captain of the thracians, who had come from
aenus; the bones and
 
 ___________________________
 
set. woe to those fathers whose sons face my
might. if, however, you are one of the immortals and have come down
from heaven, i will not fight you; for even valiant lycurgus, son of
dryas, did not live long when he took to fighting with the gods. he it
was that drove the nursing women who were in charge of frenzied bacchus
through the land of nysa, and they flung their thyrsi on the ground as
murderous lycurgus beat them with his oxgoad. bacchus himself plunged
terror-stricken into the sea, and thetis took him to her bosom to
comfort him, for he was scared by the fury with which the man reviled
him. thereon the gods who live at ease were angry with lycurgus and the
son of saturn struck him blind, nor did he live much longer after he
had become hateful to the immortals. therefore i will not fight with
the blessed gods; but if you are of them that eat the fruit of the
ground, draw near and meet your doom."

and the son of hippolochus answered, "son of tydeus, why ask me of my
lineage? men come
 
 ___________________________
 
 mad
with spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and unjust. he forgets
how often i saved his son when he was worn out by the labours
eurystheus had laid on him. he would weep till his cry came up to
heaven, and then jove would send me down to help him; if i had had the
sense to foresee all this, when eurystheus sent him to the house of
hades, to fetch the hell-hound from erebus, he would never have come
back alive out of the deep waters of the river styx. and now jove hates
me, while he lets thetis have her way because she kissed his knees and
took hold of his beard, when she was begging him to do honour to
achilles. i shall know what to do next time he begins calling me his
grey-eyed darling. get our horses ready, while i go within the house of
aegis-bearing jove and put on my armour; we shall then find out whether
priam's son hector will be glad to meet us in the highways of battle,
or whether the trojans will glut hounds and vultures with the fat of
their flesh as they be dead by the s
 
 ___________________________
 
 woman who would make me a
suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old father peleus. my life
is more to me than all the wealth of ilius while it was yet at peace
before the achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies on
the stone floor of apollo's temple beneath the cliffs of pytho. cattle
and sheep are to be had for harrying, and a man buy both tripods and
horses if he wants them, but when his life has once left him it can
neither be bought nor harried back again.

"my mother thetis tells me that there are two ways in which i may meet
my end. if i stay here and fight, i shall not return alive but my name
will live for ever: whereas if i go home my name will die, but it will
be long ere death shall take me. to the rest of you, then, i say, 'go
home, for you will not take ilius.' jove has held his hand over her to
protect her, and her people have taken heart. go, therefore, as in duty
bound, and tell the princes of the achaeans the message that i have
sent them; tell them to
 
 ___________________________
 
 fresh-burnished
breastplates, and glittering shields as they joined battle with one
another. iron indeed must be his courage who could take pleasure in the
sight of such a turmoil, and look on it without being dismayed.

thus did the two mighty sons of saturn devise evil for mortal heroes.
jove was minded to give victory to the trojans and to hector, so as to
do honour to fleet achilles, nevertheless he did not mean to utterly
overthrow the achaean host before ilius, and only wanted to glorify
thetis and her valiant son. neptune on the other hand went about among
the argives to incite them, having come up from the grey sea in secret,
for he was grieved at seeing them vanquished by the trojans, and was
furiously angry with jove. both were of the same race and country, but
jove was elder born and knew more, therefore neptune feared to defend
the argives openly, but in the likeness of man, he kept on encouraging
them throughout their host. thus, then, did these two devise a knot of
war and bat
 
 ___________________________
 
ill him
in front of ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my
own noble son sarpedon. achilles will kill hector to avenge patroclus,
and from that time i will bring it about that the achaeans shall
persistently drive the trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of
minerva and take ilius. but i will not stay my anger, nor permit any
god to help the danaans till i have accomplished the desire of the son
of peleus, according to the promise i made by bowing my head on the day
when thetis touched my knees and besought me to give him honour."

juno heeded his words and went from the heights of ida to great
olympus. swift as the thought of one whose fancy carries him over vast
continents, and he says to himself, "now i will be here, or there," and
he would have all manner of things--even so swiftly did juno wing her
way till she came to high olympus and went in among the gods who were
gathered in the house of jove. when they saw her they all of them came
up to her, and held out th
 
 ___________________________
 
owered their weapons after him;
nor did he turn round and stay his flight till he had reached his
comrades.

the trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships
in fulfilment of the behests of jove who kept spurring them on to new
deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the argives and
defeated them by encouraging the trojans. for he meant giving glory to
hector son of priam, and letting him throw fire upon the ships, till he
had fulfilled the unrighteous prayer that thetis had made him; jove,
therefore, bided his time till he should see the glare of a blazing
ship. from that hour he was about so to order that the trojans should
be driven back from the ships and to vouchsafe glory to the achaeans.
with this purpose he inspired hector son of priam, who was eager enough
already, to assail the ships. his fury was as that of mars, or as when
a fire is raging in the glades of some dense forest upon the mountains;
he foamed at the mouth, his eyes glared under his terrib
 
 ___________________________
 
pear,
while famed ulysses and agamemnon have received sword-wounds; eurypylus
again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries
are attending to these heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are
you still, o achilles, so inexorable? may it never be my lot to nurse
such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good name.
who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the
argives from ruin? you know no pity; knight peleus was not your father
nor thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore you and the sheer cliffs
begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you. if however you are kept
back through knowledge of some oracle, or if your mother thetis has
told you something from the mouth of jove, at least send me and the
myrmidons with me, if i may bring deliverance to the danaans. let me
moreover wear your armour; the trojans may thus mistake me for you and
quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the achaeans may have
breathing time--which w
 
 ___________________________
 
from the winds--even so closely were the
helmets and bossed shields set against one another. shield pressed on
shield, helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the
horse-hair plumes on the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each
other as they bent their heads.

in front of them all two men put on their armour--patroclus and
automedon--two men, with but one mind to lead the myrmidons. then
achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest
which silver-footed thetis had given him to take on board ship, and
which she had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good
thick rugs. in this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which
no man but himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to
any other god save only to father jove. he took the cup from the chest
and cleansed it with sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and
after he had washed his hands he drew wine. then he stood in the middle
of the court and prayed, looking
 
 ___________________________
 
 sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while.
mighty was the din of their armour as they came together, and jove shed
a thick darkness over the fight, to increase the toil of the battle
over the body of his son.

at first the trojans made some headway against the achaeans, for one of
the best men among the myrmidons was killed, epeigeus, son of noble
agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with peleus and thetis, who sent him to ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the trojans under achilles. hector now struck him on the head
with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains
inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost
upon the body of sarpedon, and there died. patroclus was enraged by the
death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. even so swiftly,
o noble knight patroclus, d
 
 ___________________________
 
too shall live but for a
little season; death and the day of your doom are close upon you, and
they will lay you low by the hand of achilles son of aeacus."

when he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left
his body and flitted down to the house of hades, mourning its sad fate
and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. dead though
he was, hector still spoke to him saying, "patroclus, why should you
thus foretell my doom? who knows but achilles, son of lovely thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?"

as he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. he then
went spear in hand after automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of
aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the
gods had given as a rich gift to peleus bore him swiftly from the field.



book xvii

  the fight around the body of patroclus.

brave menelaus son of atreus now came t
 
 ___________________________
 
g them all was aeneas son
of anchises with valiant hector. as a flock of daws or starlings fall
to screaming and chattering when they see a falcon, foe to all small
birds, come soaring near them, even so did the achaean youth raise a
babel of cries as they fled before aeneas and hector, unmindful of
their former prowess. in the rout of the danaans much goodly armour
fell round about the trench, and of fighting there was no end.



book xviii

  the grief of achilles over patroclus--the visit of thetis
  to vulcan and the armour that he made for achilles.

thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. meanwhile the fleet
runner antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached achilles,
and found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that which was
indeed too surely true. "alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of
his heart, "why are the achaeans again scouring the plain and flocking
towards the ships? heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that
sorrow upon me of which my mo
 
 ___________________________
 
ther thetis spoke, saying that while i was
yet alive the bravest of the myrmidons should fall before the trojans,
and see the light of the sun no longer. i fear the brave son of
menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet i bade him return
to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing
fire against them, and not join battle with hector."

as he was thus pondering, the son of nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "alas," he cried, "son of noble
 
 ___________________________
 
, speo, thoe and dark-eyed halie,
cymothoe, actaea and limnorea, melite, iaera, amphithoe and agave, doto
and proto, pherusa and dynamene, dexamene, amphinome and callianeira,
doris, panope, and the famous sea-nymph galatea, nemertes, apseudes and
callianassa. there were also clymene, ianeira and ianassa, maera,
oreithuia and amatheia of the lovely locks, with other nereids who
dwell in the depths of the sea. the crystal cave was filled with their
multitude and they all beat their breasts while thetis led them in
their lament.

"listen," she cried, "sisters, daughters of nereus, that you may hear
the burden of my sorrows. alas, woe is me, woe in that i have borne the
most glorious of offspring. i bore him fair and strong, hero among
heroes, and he shot up as a sapling; i tended him as a plant in a
goodly garden, and sent him with his ships to ilius to fight the
trojans, but never shall i welcome him back to the house of peleus. so
long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun he is in h
 
 ___________________________
 
ipped the wondrous armour, so
glorious to behold, which the gods gave to peleus when they laid you in
the couch of a mortal man. would that you were still dwelling among the
immortal sea-nymphs, and that peleus had taken to himself some mortal
bride. for now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of
that son whom you can never welcome home--nay, i will not live nor go
about among mankind unless hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for
having slain patroclus son of menoetius."

thetis wept and answered, "then, my son, is your end near at hand--for
your own death awaits you full soon after that of hector."

then said achilles in his great grief, "i would die here and now, in
that i could not save my comrade. he has fallen far from home, and in
his hour of need my hand was not there to help him. what is there for
me? return to my own land i shall not, and i have brought no saving
neither to patroclus nor to my other comrades of whom so many have been
slain by mighty hector; i 
 
 ___________________________
 
he could not escape the hand of death, but
fate and juno's fierce anger laid him low, as i too shall lie when i am
dead if a like doom awaits me. till then i will win fame, and will bid
trojan and dardanian women wring tears from their tender cheeks with
both their hands in the grievousness of their great sorrow; thus shall
they know that he who has held aloof so long will hold aloof no longer.
hold me not back, therefore, in the love you bear me, for you shall not
move me."

then silver-footed thetis answered, "my son, what you have said is
true. it is well to save your comrades from destruction, but your
armour is in the hands of the trojans; hector bears it in triumph upon
his own shoulders. full well i know that his vaunt shall not be
lasting, for his end is close at hand; go not, however, into the press
of battle till you see me return hither; to-morrow at break of day i
shall be here, and will bring you goodly armour from king vulcan."

on this she left her brave son, and as she turned
 
 ___________________________
 
 away she said to the
sea-nymphs her sisters, "dive into the bosom of the sea and go to the
house of the old sea-god my father. tell him everything; as for me, i
will go to the cunning workman vulcan on high olympus, and ask him to
provide my son with a suit of splendid armour."

when she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves, while
silver-footed thetis went her way that she might bring the armour for
her son.

thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to olympus, and meanwhile the
achaeans were flying with loud cries before murderous hector till they
reached the ships and the hellespont, and they could not draw the body
of mars's servant patroclus out of reach of the weapons that were
showered upon him, for hector son of priam with his host and horsemen
had again caught up to him like the flame of a fiery furnace; thrice
did brave hector seiz
 
 ___________________________
 
 mad with rage--even so with many a sigh did
achilles speak among the myrmidons saying, "alas! vain were the words
with which i cheered the hero menoetius in his own house; i said that i
would bring his brave son back again to opoeis after he had sacked
ilius and taken his share of the spoils--but jove does not give all men
their heart's desire. the same soil shall be reddened here at troy by
the blood of us both, for i too shall never be welcomed home by the old
knight peleus, nor by my mother thetis, but even in this place shall
the earth cover me. nevertheless, o patroclus, now that i am left
behind you, i will not bury you, till i have brought hither the head
and armour of mighty hector who has slain you. twelve noble sons of
trojans will i behead before your bier to avenge you; till i have done
so you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women of troy and
dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we
sacked men's goodly cities, shall weep over you both night
 
 ___________________________
 
ueen juno, you have
gained your end, and have roused fleet achilles. one would think that
the achaeans were of your own flesh and blood."

and juno answered, "dread son of saturn, why should you say this thing?
may not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than we do, do
what he can for another person? and shall not i--foremost of all
goddesses both by descent and as wife to you who reign in
heaven--devise evil for the trojans if i am angry with them?"

thus did they converse. meanwhile thetis came to the house of vulcan,
imperishable, star-bespangled, fairest of the abodes in heaven, a house
of bronze wrought by the lame god's own hands. she found him busy with
his bellows, sweating and hard at work, for he was making twenty
tripods that were to stand by the wall of his house, and he set wheels
of gold under them all that they might go of their own selves to the
assemblies of the gods, and come back again--marvels indeed to see.
they were finished all but the ears of cunning workman
 
 ___________________________
 
ship which yet
remained to be fixed to them: these he was now fixing, and he was
hammering at the rivets. while he was thus at work silver-footed thetis
came to the house. charis, of graceful head-dress, wife to the
far-famed lame god, came towards her as soon as she saw her, and took
her hand in her own, saying, "why have you come to our house, thetis,
honoured and ever welcome--for you do not visit us often? come inside
and let me set refreshment before you."

the goddess led the way as she spoke, and bade thetis sit on a richly
decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under her
feet. then she called vulcan and said, "vulcan, come here, thetis wants
you"; and the far-famed lame god answered, "then it is indeed an august
and honoured goddess who has come here; she it was that took care of me
when i was suffering from the
 
 ___________________________
 
 heavy fall which i had through my cruel
mother's anger--for she would have got rid of me because i was lame. it
would have gone hardly with me had not eurynome, daughter of the
ever-encircling waters of oceanus, and thetis, taken me to their bosom.
nine years did i stay with them, and many beautiful works in bronze,
brooches, spiral armlets, cups, and chains, did i make for them in
their cave, with the roaring waters of oceanus foaming as they rushed
ever past it; and no one knew, neither of gods nor men, save only
thetis and eurynome who took care of me. if, then, thetis has come to
my house i must make her due requital for having saved me; entertain
her, therefore, with all hospitality, while i put by my bellow
 
 ___________________________
 
y under him. he set the bellows away from the fire, and
gathered his tools into a silver chest. then he took a sponge and
washed his face and hands, his shaggy chest and brawny neck; he donned
his shirt, grasped his strong staff, and limped towards the door. there
were golden handmaids also who worked for him, and were like real young
women, with sense and reason, voice also and strength, and all the
learning of the immortals; these busied themselves as the king bade
them, while he drew near to thetis, seated her upon a goodly seat, and
took her hand in his own, saying, "why have you come to our house,
thetis honoured and ever welcome--for you do not visit us often? say
what you want, and i will do it for you at once if i can, and if it can
be done at all."

thetis wept and answered, "vulcan, is there another goddess in olympus
whom the son of saturn has been pleased to try with so much affliction
as he has me? me alone of the marine goddesses did he make subject to a
mortal husband, peleus 
 
 ___________________________
 
 also of beaten tin.

lastly, when the famed lame god had made all the armour, he took it and
set it before the mother of achilles; whereon she darted like a falcon
from the snowy summits of olympus and bore away the gleaming armour
from the house of vulcan.



book xix

  achilles is reconciled with agamemnon, puts on the armour
  which vulcan had made him, and goes out to fight.

now when dawn in robe of saffron was hasting from the streams of
oceanus, to bring light to mortals and immortals, thetis reached the
ships with the armour that the god had given her. she found her son
fallen about the body of patroclus and weeping bitterly. many also of
his followers were weeping round him, but when the goddess came among
them she clasped his hand in her own, saying, "my son, grieve as we may
we must let this man lie, for it is by heaven's will that he has
fallen; now, therefore, accept from vulcan this rich and goodly armour,
which no man has ever yet borne upon his shoulders."

as she spoke she
 
 ___________________________
 
e light, for he
was glad when he handled the splendid present which the god had made
him. then, as soon as he had satisfied himself with looking at it, he
said to his mother, "mother, the god has given me armour, meet
handiwork for an immortal and such as no-one living could have
fashioned; i will now arm, but i much fear that flies will settle upon
the son of menoetius and breed worms about his wounds, so that his
body, now he is dead, will be disfigured and the flesh will rot."

silver-footed thetis answered, "my son, be not disquieted about this
matter. i will find means to protect him from the swarms of noisome
flies that prey on the bodies of men who have been killed in battle. he
may lie for a whole year, and his flesh shall still be as sound as
ever, or even sounder. call, therefore, the achaean heroes in assembly;
unsay your anger against agamemnon; arm at once, and fight with might
and main."

as she spoke she put strength and courage into his heart, and she then
dropped ambrosia an
 
 ___________________________
 
ways with him as his
guardian angel, and even were it not so, his weapon flies ever
straight, and fails not to pierce the flesh of him who is against him;
if heaven would let me fight him on even terms he should not soon
overcome me, though he boasts that he is made of bronze."

then said king apollo, son to jove, "nay, hero, pray to the ever-living
gods, for men say that you were born of jove's daughter venus, whereas
achilles is son to a goddess of inferior rank. venus is child to jove,
while thetis is but daughter to the old man of the sea. bring,
therefore, your spear to bear upon him, and let him not scare you with
his taunts and menaces."

as he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his
people, and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the foremost
fighters. nor did the son of anchises escape the notice of white-armed
juno, as he went forth into the throng to meet achilles. she called the
gods about her, and said, "look to it, you two, neptune and minerva,
and co
 
 ___________________________
 
ct you now, but they will not do so; therefore i
say go back into the host, and do not face me, or you will rue it. even
a fool may be wise after the event."

then aeneas answered, "son of peleus, think not that your words can
scare me as though i were a child. i too, if i will, can brag and talk
unseemly. we know one another's race and parentage as matters of common
fame, though neither have you ever seen my parents nor i yours. men say
that you are son to noble peleus, and that your mother is thetis,
fair-haired daughter of the sea. i have noble anchises for my father,
and venus for my mother; the parents of one or other of us shall this
day mourn a son, for it will be more than silly talk that shall part us
when the fight is over. learn, then, my lineage if you will--and it is
known to many.

"in the beginning dardanus was the son of jove, and founded dardania,
for ilius was not yet stablished on the plain for men to dwell in, and
her people still abode on the spurs of many-fountained ida
 
 ___________________________
 
 myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave
comrades saying, "myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends,
not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw near
to the body and mourn patroclus, in due honour to the dead. when we
have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take
supper all of us here."

on this they all joined in a cry of wailing and achilles led them in
their lament. thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round
the body, and thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning. the
sands of the seashore and the men's armour were wet with their weeping,
so great a minister of fear was he whom they had lost. chief in all
their mourning was the son of peleus: he laid his bloodstained hand on
the breast of his friend. "fare well," he cried, "patroclus, even in
the house of hades. i will now do all that i erewhile promised you; i
will drag hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons
of trojans will i also slay b
 
 ___________________________
 
o, be not so bitter. their honour shall not be
equal, but of all that dwell in ilius, hector was dearest to the gods,
as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. never was my
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we claim of right. i shall therefore permit the body of
mighty hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without achilles
coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside him. let
some one of you, therefore, send thetis to me, and i will impart my
counsel to her, namely that achilles is to accept a ransom from priam,
and give up the body."

on this iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message. down
she plunged into the dark sea midway between samos and rocky imbrus;
the waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank into the bottom
as the lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is sped to carry death to
fishes. she found thetis sitting in a great cave with the other
sea-goddesses gathered round her;
 
 ___________________________
 
 there she sat in the midst of them
weeping for her noble son who was to fall far from his own land, on the
rich plains of troy. iris went up to her and said, "rise thetis; jove,
whose counsels fail not, bids you come to him." and thetis answered,
"why does the mighty god so bid me? i am in great grief, and shrink
from going in and out among the immortals. still, i will go, and the
word that he may speak shall not be spoken in vain."

the goddess took her dark veil, than which there can be no robe more
sombre, and went forth with fleet iris leading the way before her. the
waves of the sea opened them a path, and when they reached the shore
they flew up into the heavens, where they found the all-seeing son of
saturn with the ble
 
 ___________________________
 
ssed gods that live for ever assembled near him.
minerva gave up her seat to her, and she sat down by the side of father
jove. juno then placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and spoke to her
in words of comfort, whereon thetis drank and gave her back the cup;
and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.

"so, goddess," said he, "for all your sorrow, and the grief that i well
know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to olympus, and i
will tell you why i have sent for you. this nine days past the
immortals have been quarrelling about achilles waster of cities and the
body of hector. the gods would have mercury slayer of argus steal the
body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, i 
 
 ___________________________
 

concede such honour to your son as i will now tell you. go, then, to
the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry
with him, and that i am myself more angry than them all, in that he
keeps hector at the ships and will not give him up. he may thus fear me
and let the body go. at the same time i will send iris to great priam
to bid him go to the ships of the achaeans, and ransom his son, taking
with him such gifts for achilles as may give him satisfaction."

silver-footed thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down
she darted from the topmost summits of olympus. she went to her son's
tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades
round him were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had
killed a great woolly sheep. his mother sat down beside him and
caressed him with her hand saying, "my son, how long will you keep on
thus grieving and making moan? you are gnawing at your own heart, and
think neither of food nor of woman's 