f he will now forgo his anger. let him
then yield; it is only hades who is utterly ruthless and
unyielding--and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to
mankind. moreover i am older and more royal than himself. therefore,
let him now obey me."

then nestor answered, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon. the gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send
chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of achilles son of peleus
without delay. let those go whom i shall name. let phoenix, dear to
jove, lead the way; let ajax and ulysses follow, and let the heralds
odius and eurybates go with them. now bring water for our hands, and
bid all keep silence while we pray to jove the son of saturn, if so be
that he may have mercy upon us."

thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering; then, when they ha
 
 ___________________________
 
the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them
with salt. when the meat was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed
bread round the table in fair baskets, while achilles dealt them their
portions. then achilles took his seat facing ulysses against the
opposite wall, and bade his comrade patroclus offer sacrifice to the
gods; so he cast the offerings into the fire, and they laid their hands
upon the good things that were before them. as soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink, ajax made a sign to phoenix, and when he saw
this, ulysses filled his cup with wine and pledged achilles.

"hail," said he, "achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer, neither
in the tent of agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat
and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. sir, we are in
the face of great disaster, and without your help know not whether we
shall save our fleet or lose it. the trojans and their allies have
camped hard by our ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires
throug
 
 ___________________________
 
 i go home my name will die, but it will
be long ere death shall take me. to the rest of you, then, i say, 'go
home, for you will not take ilius.' jove has held his hand over her to
protect her, and her people have taken heart. go, therefore, as in duty
bound, and tell the princes of the achaeans the message that i have
sent them; tell them to find some other plan for the saving of their
ships and people, for so long as my displeasure lasts the one that they
have now hit upon may not be. as for phoenix, let him sleep here that
he may sail with me in the morning if he so will. but i will not take
him by force."

they all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which he had
denied them, till presently the old knight phoenix in his great fear
for the ships of the achaeans, burst into tears and said, "noble
achilles, if you are now minded to return, and in the fierceness of
your anger will do nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my son,
can i remain here without you? your father 
 
 ___________________________
 
ians; but they now gave him nothing of those rich rewards that
they had offered earlier, and though he saved the city he took nothing
by it. be not then, my son, thus minded; let not heaven lure you into
any such course. when the ships are burning it will be a harder matter
to save them. take the gifts, and go, for the achaeans will then honour
you as a god; whereas if you fight without taking them, you may beat
the battle back, but you will not be held in like honour."

and achilles answered, "phoenix, old friend and father, i have no need
of such honour. i have honour from jove himself, which will abide with
me at my ships while i have breath in my body, and my limbs are strong.
i say further--and lay my saying to your heart--vex me no more with
this weeping and lamentation, all in the cause of the son of atreus.
love him so well, and you may lose the love i bear you. you ought to
help me rather in troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as i
am, and share like honour with myself; 
 
 ___________________________
 
the others shall take my answer;
stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we
will consider whether to remain or go."

on this he nodded quietly to patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare
a bed for phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. ajax
son of telamon then said, "ulysses, noble son of laertes, let us be
gone, for i see that our journey is vain. we must now take our answer,
unwelcome though it be, to the danaans who are waiting to receive it.
achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for
the love his comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. he
is implacable--and yet if a man's brother or son has been slain he will
accept a fine by way of 
 
 ___________________________
 
r your message; say that i will have no concern with fighting
till hector, son of noble priam, reaches the tents of the myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. for all his
lust of battle, i take it he will be held in check when he is at my own
tent and ship."

on this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, ulysses leading the way. but patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for
phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of
fine linen. the old man then laid himself down and waited till morning
came. but achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter
of phorbas lovely diomede, whom he had carried off from lesbos.
patroclus lay on the other side of the room, and with him fair iphis
whom achilles had given him when he took scyros the city of enyeus.

when the envoys reached the tents of the son of atreus, the achaeans
rose, pledged them in cu
 
 ___________________________
 
save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself, he
said that at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water. he said
further that he should advise every one to sail home likewise, for that
you will not reach the goal of ilius. 'jove,' he said, 'has laid his
hand over the city to protect it, and the people have taken heart.'
this is what he said, and the others who were with me can tell you the
same story--ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be
trusted. the old man phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so
achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the morning
if he so would; but he will not take him by force."

they all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected,
by reason of the sternness with which achilles had refused them, till
presently diomed said, "most noble son of atreus, king of men,
agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the son of peleus nor offered him
gifts. he is proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 you can choose some other time for paying your
visit to oceanus--for the present let us devote ourselves to love and
to the enjoyment of one another. never yet have i been so overpowered
by passion neither for goddess nor mortal woman as i am at this moment
for yourself--not even when i was in love with the wife of ixion who
bore me pirithous, peer of gods in counsel, nor yet with danae the
daintily-ancled daughter of acrisius, who bore me the famed hero
perseus. then there was the daughter of phoenix, who bore me minos and
rhadamanthus: there was semele, and alcmena in thebes by whom i begot
my lion-hearted son hercules, while semele became mother to bacchus the
comforter of mankind. there was queen ceres again, and lovely leto, and
yourself--but with none of these was i ever so much enamoured as i now
am with you."

juno again answered him with a lying tale. "most dread son of saturn,"
she exclaimed, "what are you talking about? would you have us enjoy one
another here on the top of mount 
 
 ___________________________
 
in fight valiant. when
ilithuia goddess of the pains of child-birth brought him to the light
of day, and he saw the face of the sun, mighty echecles son of actor
took the mother to wife, and gave great wealth to gain her, but her
father phylas brought the child up, and took care of him, doting as
fondly upon him as though he were his own son. the third company was
led by pisander son of maemalus, the finest spearman among all the
myrmidons next to achilles' own comrade patroclus. the old knight
phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and alcimedon, noble son of
laerceus of the fifth.

when achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, "myrmidons, remember your
threats against the trojans while you were at the ships in the time of
my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'cruel son of peleus,'
you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless
are you. you keep us here at the ships against our will; if y
 
 ___________________________
 
erce groanful fight again raged about patroclus, for
minerva came down from heaven and roused its fury by the command of
far-seeing jove, who had changed his mind and sent her to encourage the
danaans. as when jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token to
mankind either of war or of the chill storms that stay men from their
labour and plague the flocks--even so, wrapped in such radiant raiment,
did minerva go in among the host and speak man by man to each. first
she took the form and voice of phoenix and spoke to menelaus son of
atreus, who was standing near her. "menelaus," said she, "it will be
shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of achilles
under the walls of troy. therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be
so also."

menelaus answered, "phoenix, my good old friend, may minerva vouchsafe
me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall i stand by
patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but hector is
as a raging fire and deals his blows 
 
 ___________________________
 
as
though their tears were for patroclus, but in truth each was weeping
for her own sorrows. the elders of the achaeans gathered round achilles
and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. "i
pray you," said he, "if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat
nor drink, for i am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to
the going down of the sun."

on this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of
atreus and ulysses, nestor, idomeneus, and the knight phoenix, who
stayed behind and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow:
but he would not be comforted till he should have flung himself into
the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of
patroclus. then he said--

"hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner
ready for me at once and without delay when the achaeans were hasting
to fight the trojans; now, therefore, though i have meat and drink in
my tents, yet will i fast for sorrow. grief greater
 
 ___________________________
 
horses. they then all
mounted their chariots and cast lots. achilles shook the helmet, and
the lot of antilochus son of nestor fell out first; next came that of
king eumelus, and after his, those of menelaus son of atreus and of
meriones. the last place fell to the lot of diomed son of tydeus, who
was the best man of them all. they took their places in line; achilles
showed them the doubling-post round which they were to turn, some way
off upon the plain; here he stationed his father's follower phoenix as
umpire, to note the running, and report truly.

at the same instant they all of them lashed their horses, struck them
with the reins, and shouted at them with all their might. they flew
full speed over the plain away from the ships, the dust rose from under
them as it were a cloud or whirlwind, and their manes were all flying
in the wind. at one moment the chariots seemed to touch the ground, and
then again they bounded into the air; the drivers stood erect, and
their hearts beat fast and fu