a bite at a macaroon or two?

_nora_. no, torvald, i assure you really--

_helmer_. there, there, of course i was only joking.

_nora_ (_going to the table on the right_). i should not think of going
against your wishes.

_helmer_. no, i am sure of that; besides, you gave me your word--(_going
up to her_.) keep your little christmas secrets to yourself, my darling.
they will all be revealed tonight when the christmas tree is lit, no
doubt.

_nora_. did you remember to invite doctor rank?

_helmer_. no. but there is no need; as a matter of course he will come
to dinner with us. however, i will ask him when he comes in this
morning. i have ordered some good wine. nora, you can't think how i am
looking forward to this evening.

_nora_. so am i! and how the children will enjoy themselves, torvald!

_helmer_. it is splendid to feel that one has a perfectly safe
appointment, and a big enough income. it's delightful to think of, isn't
it?

_nora_. it's wonderful!

_hel
 
 ___________________________
 
known since our marriage.

_mrs. linde_. i know how fond you were of him. and then you went off to
italy?

_nora_. yes; you see we had money then, and the doctors insisted on our
going, so we started a month later.

_mrs. linde_. and your husband came back quite well?

_nora_. as sound as a bell!

_mrs linde_. but--the doctor?

_nora_. what doctor?

_mrs linde_. i thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here
just as i did, was the doctor?

_nora_. yes, that was doctor rank, but he doesn't come here
professionally. he is our greatest friend, and comes in at least once
every day. no, torvald has not had an hour's illness since then, and our
children are strong and healthy and so am i. (_jumps up and claps her
hands_.) christine! christine! it's good to be alive and happy!--but how
horrid of me; i am talking of nothing but my own affairs. (_sits on a
stool near her, and rests her arms on her knees_.) you mustn't be angry
with me. tell me, is it really true th
 
 ___________________________
 
n our town.

_nora_. yes, he was.

_mrs. linde_. he is greatly altered.

_nora_. he made a very unhappy marriage.

_mrs. linde_. he is a widower now, isn't he?

_nora_. with several children. there now, it is burning up. (_shuts the
door of the stove and moves the rocking-chair aside_.)

_mrs. linde_. they say he carries on various kinds of business.

_nora_. really! perhaps he does; i don't know anything about it. but
don't let us think of business; it is so tiresome.

_doctor rank_ (_comes out of_ helmer's _study. before he shuts the door
he calls to him_). no, my dear fellow, i won't disturb you; i would
rather go in to your wife for a little while. (_shuts the door and sees_
mrs. linde.) i beg your pardon; i am afraid i am disturbing you too.

_nora_. no, not at all. (_introducing him_.) doctor rank, mrs. linde.

_rank_. i have often heard mrs. linde's name mentioned here. i think i
passed you on the stairs when i arrived, mrs. linde?

_mrs. linde_. yes, i go
 
 ___________________________
 
 up very slowly; i can't manage stairs well.

_rank_. ah! some slight internal weakness?

_mrs. linde_. no, the fact is i have been overworking myself.

_rank_. nothing more than that? then i suppose you have come to town to
amuse yourself with our entertainments?

_mrs. linde_. i have come to look for work.

_rank_. is that a good cure for overwork?

_mrs. linde_. one must live, doctor rank.

_rank_. yes, the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary.

_nora_. look here, doctor rank--you know you want to live.

_rank_. certainly. however wretched i may feel, i want to prolong the
agony as long as possible. all my patients are like that. and so are
those who are morally diseased; one of them, and a bad case, too, is at
this very moment with helmer--

_mrs. linde_ (_sadly_). ah!

_nora_. whom do you mean?

_rank_. a lawyer of the name of krogstad, a fellow you 
 
 ___________________________
 
nora_. what do i care about tiresome society? i am laughing at
something quite different, something extremely amusing. tell me, doctor
rank, are all the people who are employed in the bank dependent on
torvald now?

_rank_. is that what you find so extremely amusing?

_nora_ (_smiling and humming_). that's my affair! (_walking about the
room_.) it's perfectly glorious to think that we have--that torvald has
so much power over so many people. (_takes the packet from her pocket_.)
doctor rank, what do you say to a macaroon?

_rank_. what, macaroons? i thought they were forbidden here.

_nora_. yes, but these are some christine gave me.

_mrs. linde_. what! i?--

_nora_. oh, well, don't be alarmed! you couldn't know that torvald had
forbidden them. i must tell you that he is afraid they will spoil my
teeth. but, bah!--once in a way--that's so, isn't it, doctor rank? by
your leave! (_puts a macaroon into his mouth.)_ you must have one too,
christine. and i shall have one, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 an hour, not more.

_nora_. are you going too, christine?

_mrs. linde_ (_putting on her cloak_). yes, i must go and look for a
room.

_helmer_. oh, well then, we can walk down the street together.

_nora_ (_helping her_). what a pity it is we are so short of space here;
i am afraid it is impossible for us--

_mrs. linde_. please don't think of it! good-bye, nora dear, and many
thanks.

_nora_. good-bye for the present. of course you will come back this
evening. and you too, dr. rank. what do you say? if you are well enough?
oh, you must be! wrap yourself up well. (_they go to the door all
talking together. children's voices are heard on the staircase._)

_nora_. there they are. there they are! (_she runs to open the door.
the_ nurse _comes in with the children._) come in! come in! (_stoops and
kisses them._) oh, you sweet blessings! look at them, christine! aren't
they darlings?

_rank_. don't let us stand here in the draught.

_helmer_. come along, mrs. linde; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 come in for a moment and see you in
your fine feathers. but i have completely forgotten to thank you for a
delightful evening yesterday.

_nora_ (_gets up, and crosses the stage_). well i don't think yesterday
was as pleasant as usual. you ought to have come to town a little
earlier, christine. certainly torvald does understand how to make a
house dainty and attractive.

_mrs. linde_. and so do you, it seems to me; you are not your father's
daughter for nothing. but tell me, is doctor rank always as depressed as
he was yesterday?

_nora_. no; yesterday it was very noticeable. i must tell you that he
suffers from a _very_ dangerous disease. he has consumption of the
spine, poor creature. his father was a horrible man who committed all
sorts of excesses; and that is why his son was sickly from childhood, do
you understand?

_mrs. linde_ (_dropping her sewing_). but, my dearest nora, how do you
know anything about such things?

_nora_ (_walking about_). pooh! when you ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve three children, you get
visits now and then from--from married women, who know something of
medical matters, and they talk about one thing and another.

_mrs. linde_ (_goes on sewing. a short silence_). does doctor rank come
here every day?

_nora_. every day regularly. he is torvald's most intimate friend, and a
great friend of mine too. he is just like one of the family.

_mrs. linde_. but tell me this--is he perfectly sincere? i mean, isn't
he the kind of a man that is very anxious to make himself agreeable?

_nora_. not in the least. what makes you think that?

_mrs. linde_. when you introduced him to me yesterday, he declared he
had often heard my name mentioned in this house; but afterwards i
 
 ___________________________
 

noticed that your husband hadn't the slightest idea who i was. so how
could doctor rank--?

_nora_. that is quite right, christine. torvald is so absurdly fond of
me that he wants me absolutely to himself, as he says. at first he used
to seem almost jealous if i mentioned any of the dear folk at home, so
naturally i gave up doing so. but i often talk about such things with
doctor rank, because he likes hearing about them.

_mrs. linde_. listen to me, nora. you are still very like a child in
many ways, and i am older than you in many ways and have a little more
experience. let me tell you this--you ought to make an end of it with
doctor rank.

_nora_. what ought i to make an end of?

_mrs. linde_. of two things, i think. yesterday you talked some nonsense
about a rich admirer who was to leave you money--

_nora_. an admirer who doesn't exist, unfortunately! but wh
 
 ___________________________
 
at then?

_mrs. linde_. is doctor rank a man of means?

_nora_. yes, he is.

_mrs. linde_. and has no one to provide for?

_nora_. no, no one; but--

_mrs. linde_. and comes here every day?

_nora_. yes, i told you so.

_mrs. linde_. but how can this well-bred man be so tactless?

_nora_. i don't understand you at all.

_mrs. linde_. don't prevaricate, nora. do you suppose i don't guess who
lent you the two hundred and fifty pounds.

_nora_. are you out of your senses? how can you think of such a thing! a
friend 
 
 ___________________________
 
of ours, who comes here every day! do you realise what a horribly
painful position that would be?

_mrs. linde_. then it really isn't he?

_nora_. no, certainly not. it would never have entered into my head for
a moment. besides, he had no money to lend then; he came into his money
afterwards.

_mrs. linde_. well, i think that was lucky for you, my dear nora.

_nora_. no, it would never have come into my head to ask doctor rank.
although i am quite sure that if i had asked him--

_mrs. linde_. but of course you won't.

_nora_. of course not. i have no reason to think it could possibly be
necessary. but i am quite sure that if i told doctor rank--

_mrs. linde_. behind your husband's back?

_nora_. i must make an end of it with the other one, and that will be
behind his back too. i _must_ make an end of it with him.

_mrs. linde_. yes, that is what i told you yesterday, but--

_nora_ (_walking up and dow
 
 ___________________________
 
ve to do that.

_helmer_. that's right. well, we will share it, nora, as man and wife
should. that is how it shall be. (_caressing her_.) are you content now?
there! there!--not these frightened dove's eyes! the whole thing is only
the wildest fancy!--now, you must go and play through the tarantella and
practice with your tambourine. i shall go into the inner office and shut
the door, and i shall hear nothing; you can make as much noise as you
please. (_turns back at the door.)_ and when rank comes, tell him where
he will find me. (_nods to her, takes his papers and goes into his room,
and shuts the door after him_.)

_nora_ (_bewildered with anxiety, stands as if rooted to the spot, and
whispers_). he was capable of doing it. he will do it. he will do it in
spite of everything.--no, not that! never, never! anything rather than
that! oh, for some help, some way out of it. (_the door-bell rings_.)
doctor rank! anything rather than that--anything, whatever it is! (_she
puts h
 
 ___________________________
 
er hands over her face, pulls herself together, goes to the door
and opens it. _rank_ is standing without, hanging up his coat. during
the following dialogue it begins to grow dark_.)

_nora_. good-day, doctor rank. i knew your ring. but you mustn't go into
torvald now; i think he is busy with something.

_rank_. and you?

_nora_ (_brings him in and shuts the door after him_). oh, you know very
well i always have time for you.

_rank_. thank you. i shall make use of as much of it as i can.

_nora_. what do you mean by that? as much of it as you can.

_rank_. well, does that alarm you?

_nora_. it was such a strange way of putting it. is anything likely to
happen?

_rank_. nothing but what
 
 ___________________________
 
ng to say!

_rank_. the thing itself is cursedly ugly, and the worst of it is that i
shall have to face so much more that is ugly before that. i shall only
make one more examination of myself; when i have done that, i shall know
pretty certainly when it will be that the horrors of dissolution will
begin. there is something i want to tell you. helmer's refined nature
gives him an unconquerable disgust of everything that is ugly; i won't
have him in my sick-room.

_nora_. oh, but, doctor rank--

_rank_. i won't have him there. not on any account. i bar my door to
him. as soon as i am quite certain that the worst has come, i shall send
you my card with a black cross on it, and then you will know that the
loathsome end has begun.

_nora_. you are quite absurd to-day. and i wanted you so much to be in a
really good humour.

_rank_. with death stalking beside me?--to have to pay this penalty for
another man's sin! is there any justice in that? and in every single
family, in 
 
 ___________________________
 
_nora_. and heaps of port and champagne. it is sad that all these nice
things should take their revenge on our bones.

_rank_. especially that they should revenge themselves on the unlucky
bones of those who have not had the satisfaction of enjoying them.

_nora_. yes, that's the saddest part of it all.

_rank_ (_with a searching look at her_). hm!--

_nora_ (_after a short pause_). why did you smile?

_rand_. no, it was you that laughed.

_nora_. no, it was you that smiled, doctor rank!

_rank_ (_rising_). you are a greater rascal than i thought.

_nora_. i am in a silly mood today.

_rank_. so it seems.

_nora_ (_putting her hands on his shoulders_). dear, dear doctor rank,
death mustn't take you away from torvald and me.

_rank_. it is a loss you would easily recover from. those who are gone
are soon forgotten.

_nora_ (_looking at him anxiously_). do you believe that?

_rank_. people form new ties, and then--

_nora_. who will form new ties?

_rank_. bo
 
 ___________________________
 
 successor in this house. when i am
done for, this woman will--

_nora_. hush! don't speak so loud. she is in that room.

_rank_. to-day again. there, you see.

_nora_. she has only come to sew my dress for me. bless my soul, how
unreasonable you are! (_sits down on the sofa_.) be nice now, doctor
rank, and to-morrow you will see how beautifully i shall dance, and you
can imagine i am doing it all for you--and for torvald too, of course.
(_takes various things out of the box._) doctor rank, come and sit down
here, and i will show you something.

_rank_ (_sitting down_). what is it?

_nora_. just look at those.

_rank_. silk stockings.

_nora_. flesh-coloured. aren't they lovely? it is so dark here now, but
to-morrow--. no, no, no! you must only look at the feet. oh, well, you
may have leave to look at the legs too.

_rank_. hm!--

_nora_. why are you looking so critical? don't you think they will fit
me?

_rank_. i have no means of forming an opinion about that.
 
 ___________________________
 
slightest
token of one's gratitude, scarcely even a fleeting regret--nothing but
an empty place which the first comer can fill as well as any other.

_nora_. and if i asked you now for a--? no!

_rank_. for what?

_nora_. for a big proof of your friendship--

_rank_. yes, yes.

_nora_. i mean a tremendously big favour--

_rank_. would you really make me so happy for once?

_nora_. ah, but you don't know what it is yet.

_rank_. no--but tell me.

_nora_. i really can't, doctor rank. it is something out of all reason;
it means advice, and help, and a favour--

_rank_. the bigger a thing it is the better. i can't conceive what it is
you mean. do tell me. haven't i your confidence?

_nora_. more than anyone else. i know you are my truest and best friend,
and so i will tell you what it is. well, doctor rank, it is something
you must help me to prevent. you know how devotedly, how inexpressibly
deeply torvald loves me; he would never for a moment hesitate to give
his
 
 ___________________________
 
 for your sake.

_nora_ (_sadly_). is that it?

_rank_. i was determined you should know it before i went away, and
there will never be a better opportunity than this. now you know it,
nora. and now you know, too, that you can trust me as you would trust no
one else.

_nora_ (_rises deliberately and quietly_). let me pass.

_rank_ (_makes room for her to pass him, but sits still_). nora!

_nora_ (_at the hall door_). helen, bring in the lamp. (_goes over to
the stove_.) dear doctor rank, that was really horrid of you.

_rank_. to have loved you as much as anyone else does? was that horrid?

_nora_. no, but to go and tell me so. there was really no need--

_rank_. what do you mean? did you know--? (maid _enters with lamp, puts
it down on the table, and goes out_.) nora--mrs. helmer--tell me, had
you any idea of this?

_nora_. oh, how do i know whether i had or whether i hadn't. i really
can't tell you--to think you could be so clumsy, doctor rank! we were
getting on
 
 ___________________________
 
d?

_rank_. i beg you to let me know what it is.

_nora_. i can't tell you anything now.

_rank_. yes, yes. you mustn't punish me in that way. let me have
permission to do for you whatever a man may do.

_nora_. you can do nothing for me now. besides, i really don't need any
help at all. you will find that the whole thing is merely fancy on my
part. it really is so--of course it is! (_sits down in the
rocking-chair, and looks at him with a smile_.) you are a nice sort of
man, doctor rank!--don't you feel ashamed of yourself, now the lamp has
come?

_rank_. not a bit. but perhaps i had better go--forever?

_nora_. no, indeed, you shall not. of course you must come here just as
before. you know very well torvald can't do without you.

_rank_. yes, but you?

_nora_. oh, i am always tremendously pleased when you come.

_rank_. it is just that, that put me on the wrong track. you are a
riddle to me. i have often thought that you would almost as soon be in
my company as
 
 ___________________________
 
e are some people one loves best, and others
whom one would almost always rather have as companions.

_rank_. yes, there is something in that.

_nora_. when i was at home, of course i loved papa best. but i always
thought it tremendous fun if i could steal down into the maids' room,
because they never moralized at all, and talked to each other about such
entertaining things.

_rank_. i see--it is their place i have taken.

_nora_ (_jumping-up and going to him_). oh, dear, nice doctor rank, i
never meant that at all. but surely you can understand that being with
torvald is a little like being with papa--(_enter_ maid _from the hall_.)

_maid_. if you please, ma'am. (_whispers and hands her a card_.)

_nora_ (_glancing at the card_). oh! (_puts it in her pocket_.)

_rank_. is there anything wrong?

_nora_. no, no, not in the least. it is only something--it is my new
dress--

_rank_. what? your dress is lying there.

_nora_. oh, yes, that one; but this is another. i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 always.

_mrs. linde_. krogstad must ask for his letter back unread, he must find
some pretence--

_nora_. but it is just at this time that torvald generally--

_mrs. linde_. you must delay him. go in to him in the meantime. i will
come back as soon as i can. (_she goes out hurriedly through the hall
door_.)

_nora_ (_goes to_ helmer's _door, opens it and peeps in_). torvald!

_helmer_ (_from the inner room_). well? may i venture at last to come
into my own room again? come along, rank, now you will see--(_ halting
in the doorway_.) but what is this?

_nora_. what is what, dear?

_helmer_. rank led me to expect a splendid transformation.

_rank_ (_in the doorway_). i understood so, but evidently i was
mistaken.

_nora_. yes, nobody is to have the chance of admiring me in my dress
until to-morrow.

_helmer_. but, my dear nora, you look so worn out. have you been
practising too much?

_nora_. no, i have not practised at all.

_helmer_. but you will need to--

 
 ___________________________
 
afraid of it. let me practise at once; there
is time now, before we go to dinner. sit down and play for me, torvald
dear; criticise me, and correct me as you play.

_helmer_. with great pleasure, if you wish me to. (_sits down at the
piano_.)

_nora_ (_takes out of the box a tambourine and a long variegated shawl.
she hastily drapes the shawl round her. then she springs to the front of
the stage and calls out_). now play for me! i am going to dance!

(helmer _plays and_ nora _dances_. rank _stands by the piano behind_
helmer, _and looks on_.)

_helmer_ (_as he plays_). slower, slower!

_nora_. i can't do it any other way.

_helmer_. not so violently, nora!

_nora_. this is the way.

_helmer_ (_stops playing_). no, no--that is not a bit right.

_nora_ (_laughing and swinging the tambourine_). didn't i tell you so?

_rank_. let me play for her.

_helmer_ (_getting up_). yes, do. i can correct her better then.

(rank _sits down at the piano and plays. nora dances 
 
 ___________________________
 
lmer _has taken up a position beside the stove, and during
her dance gives her frequent instructions. she does not seem to hear
him; her hair comes down and falls over her shoulders; she pays no
attention to it, but goes on dancing. enter_ mrs. linde.)

_mrs. linde_ (_standing as if spell-bound in the doorway_). oh!--

_nora_ (_as she dances_). such fun, christine!

_helmer_. my dear darling nora, you are dancing as if your life depended
on it.

_nora_. so it does.

_helmer_. stop, rank; this is sheer madness. stop, i tell you. (rank
_stops playing, and,_ nora _suddenly stands still_. helmer _goes up to
her._) i could never have believed it. you have forgotten everything i
taught you.

_nora_ (_throwing away the tambourine_). there, you see.

_helmer_. you will want a lot of coaching.

_nora_. yes, you see how much i need it. you must coach me up to the
last minute. promise me that, torvald!

_helmer_. you can depend on me.

_nora_. you must not think of anything
 
 ___________________________
 
e_ maid _appears in the doorway to
the right_.)

_maid_. dinner is served, ma'am.

_nora_. we will have champagne, helen.

_maid_. very good, ma'am.

_helmer_. hullo!--are we going to have a banquet? (_exit._)

_nora_. yes, a champagne banquet till the small hours. (_calls out_.)
and a few macaroons, helen--lots, just for once!

_helmer_. come, come, don't be so wild and nervous. be my own little
skylark, as you used.

_nora_. yes, dear, i will. but go in now and you too, doctor rank.
christine, you must, help me to do up my hair.

_rank_ (_whispers to_ helmer _as they go out_). i suppose there is
nothing--she is not expecting anything?

_helmer_. far from it, my dear fellow; it is simply nothing more than
this childish nervousness i was telling you of. (_they go into the
right-hand room_.)

_nora_. well!

_mrs. linde_. gone out of town.

_nora_. i could tell from your face.

_mrs. linde_. he is coming home tomorrow evening. i wrote a note for
him.

_nora
 
 ___________________________
 
o, not in the least.

_nora_. nor sleepy?

_helmer_. not a bit. on the contrary, i feel extraordinarily lively. and
you?--you really look both tired and sleepy.

_nora_. yes, i am very tired. i want to go to sleep at once.

_helmer_. there, you see it was quite right of me not to let you stay
there any longer.

_nora_. everything you do is quite right, torvald.

_helmer_ (_kissing her on the forehead_). now my little skylark is
speaking reasonably. did you notice what good spirits rank was in this
evening?

_nora_. really? was he? i didn't speak to him at all.

_helmer_. and i very little, but i have not for a long time seen him in
such good form. (_looks for a while at her and then goes nearer to
her_.) it is delightful to be at home by ourselves again, to be all
alone with you--you fascinating, charming little darling!

_nora_. don't look at me like that, torvald.

_helmer_. why shouldn't i look at my dearest treasure?--at all the
beauty that is mine, all my ve
 
 ___________________________
 
_. especially the champagne.

_rank_. so you noticed that too? it is almost incredible how much i
managed to put away!

_nora_. torvald drank a great deal of champagne tonight, too.

_rank_. did he?

_nora_. yes, and he is always in such good spirits afterwards.

_rank_. well, why should one not enjoy a merry evening after a
well-spent day?

_helmer_. well spent? i am afraid i can't take credit for that.

_rank_ (_clapping him on the back_). but i can, you know!

_nora_. doctor rank, you must have been occupied with some scientific
investigation today.

_rank_. exactly.

_helmer_. just listen!--little nora talking about scientific
investigations!

_nora_. and may i congratulate you on the result?

_rank_. indeed you may.

_nora_. was it favourable, then.

_rank_. the best possible, for both doctor and patient--certainty.

_nora_ (_quickly and searchingly_). certainty?

_rank_. absolute certainty. so wasn't i entitled to make a merry evening
of it after t
 
 ___________________________
 
hat?

_nora_. yes, you certainly were, doctor rank.

_helmer_. i think so too, so long as you don't have to pay for it in the
morning.

_rank_. oh well, one can't have anything in this life without paying for
it.

_nora_. doctor rank--are you fond of fancy-dress balls?

_rank_. yes, if there is a fine lot of pretty costumes.

_nora_. tell me--what shall we two wear at the next?

_helmer_. little featherbrain!--are you thinking of the next already?

_rank_. we two? yes, i can tell you. you shall go as a good fairy--

_helmer_. yes, but what do you suggest as an appropriate costume for
that?

_rank_. let your wife go dressed just as she is in every-day life.

_helmer_. that was really very prettily turned. but 
 
 ___________________________
 
ressing a smile_). yes, you are quite right.

_rank_. but i am clean forgetting what i came for. helmer, give me a
cigar--one of the dark havanas.

_helmer_. with the greatest pleasure. (_offers him his case_.)

_rank_ (_takes a cigar and cuts off the end_). thanks.

_nora_ (_striking a match_). let me give you a light.

_rank_. thank you. (_she holds the match for him to light his cigar_.)
and now good-bye!

_helmer_. good-bye, good-bye, dear old man!

_nora_. sleep well, doctor rank.

_rank_. thank you for that wish.

_nora_. wish me the same.

_rank_. you? well, if you want me to sleep well! and thanks for the
light. (_he nods to them both and goes out_.)

_helmer_ (_in a subdued voice_). he has drunk more than he ought.

_nora_ (_absently_). maybe. (helmer _takes a bunch of keys out of his
pocket and goes into the hall_.) torvald! what are you going to do
there?

_helmer_. empty the letter-box; it is quite full; there will be no room
to put the newspaper 
 
 ___________________________
 

_helmer_. then you must get them out of those ways. there, at last i
have got it open. (_takes out the contents of the letter-box, and calls
to the kitchen_.) helen!--helen, put out the light over the front door.
(_goes back into the room and shuts the door into the hall. he holds out
his hand full of letters_.) look at that--look what a heap of them there
are. (_turning them over_.) what on earth is that?

_nora_ (_at the window_). the letter--no! torvald, no!

_helmer._ two cards--of rank's.

_nora._ of doctor rank's?

_helmer_ (_looking at them_). doctor rank. they were on the top. he must
have put them in when he went out.

_nora._ is there anything written on them?

_helmer._ there is a black cross over the name. look there--what an
uncomfortable idea! it looks as if he were announcing his own death.

_nora._ it is just what he is doing.

_helmer._ what? do you know anything about it? has he said anything to
you?

_nora._ yes. he told me that when the cards c