as christmas is over--(_a bell rings in the hall_.)
there's the bell. (_she tidies the room a little_.) there's someone at
the door. what a nuisance!

_helmer_. if it is a caller, remember i am not at home.

_maid_ (_in the doorway_). a lady to see you, ma'am,--a stranger.

_nora_. ask her to come in.

_maid_ (_to_ helmer). the doctor came at the same time, sir.

_helmer_. did he go straight into my room?

_maid_. yes, sir.

(helmer _goes into his room. the_ maid _ushers in_ mrs. linde, _who is
in traveling dress, and shuts the door_.)

_mrs linde_ (_in a dejected and timid voice_). how do you do, nora?

_nora_ (_doubtfully_). how do you do--

_mrs. linde_. you don't recognize me, i suppose.

_nora_ no, i don't know--yes, to be sure, i seem to--(_suddenly_.) yes!
christine! is it really you?

_mrs. linde_. yes, it is i.

_nora_. christine! to think of my not recognising you! and yet how could
i--(_in a gentle voice_.) how you have altered, christine!

_mrs. l
 
 ___________________________
 
inde_. yes, i have indeed. in nine, ten long years--

_nora_. is it so long since we met? i suppose it is. the last eight
years have been a happy time for me, i can tell you. and so now you have
come into the town, and have taken this long journey in winter--that was
plucky of you.

_mrs. linde_. i arrived by steamer this morning.

_nora_. to have some fun at christmas-time, of course. how delightful!
we will have such fun together! but take off your things. you are not
cold, i hope. (_helps her_.) now we will sit down by the stove, and be
cosy. no, take this arm-chair; i will sit here in the rocking-chair.
(_takes her hands_.) now you look like your old self again; it was only
the first moment--you are a little paler, christine, and perhaps a
little thinner.

_mrs. linde_. 
 
 ___________________________
 
and much, much older, nora.

_nora_. perhaps a little older; very, very little; certainly not much.
(_stops suddenly and speaks seriously_.) what a thoughtless creature i
am, chattering away like this. my poor, dear christine, do forgive me.

_mrs. linde_. what do you mean, nora?

_nora_ (_gently_). poor christine, you are a widow.

_mrs. linde_. yes; it is three years ago now.

_nora_. yes, i knew; i saw it in the papers. i assure you, christine, i
meant ever so often to write to you at the time, but i always put it off
and something always prevented me.

_mrs. linde_. i quite understand, dear.

_nora_. it was very bad of me, christine. poor thing, how you must have
suffered. and he left you nothing?

_mrs. linde_. no.

_nora_. and no children?

_mrs. linde_. no.

_nora_. nothing at all, then?

_mrs. linde_. not ev
 
 ___________________________
 
en any sorrow or grief to live upon.

_nora_ (_looking incredulously at her_). but, christine, is that
possible?

_mrs. linde_ (_smiles sadly and strokes her hair_). it sometimes
happens, nora.

_nora_. so you are quite alone. how dreadfully sad that must be. i have
three lovely children. you can't see them just now, for they are out
with their nurse. but now you must tell me all about it.

_mrs. linde_. no, no; i want to hear about you.

_nora_. no, you must begin. i mustn't be selfish today; today i must
only think of your affairs. but there is one thing i must tell you. do
you know we have just had a great piece of good luck?

_mrs. linde_. no, what is it?

_nora_. just fancy, my husband has been made manager of the bank!

_mrs. linde_. your husband? what good luck!

_nora_. yes tremendous! a barrister's profession is such an uncertain
thing, especially if he won't undertake u
 
 ___________________________
 
nsavoury cases; and naturally
torvald has never been willing to do that, and i quite agree with him.
you may imagine how pleased we are! he is to take up his work in the
bank at the new year, and then he will have a big salary and lots of
commissions. for the future we can live quite differently--we can do
just as we like. i feel so relieved and so happy, christine! it will be
splendid to have heaps of money and not need to have any anxiety, won't
it?

_mrs. linde_. yes, anyhow i think it would be delightful to have what
one needs.

_nora_. no, not only what one needs, but heaps and heaps of money.

_mrs. linde_ (_smiling_). nora, nora, haven't you learnt sense yet? in
our schooldays you were a great spendthrift.

_nora_ (_laughing_). yes, that is what torvald says now. (_wags her
finger at her_.) but "nora, nora" is not so silly as you think. we have
not been in a position for me to waste money. we have both had to work.

_mrs. linde_. you t
 
 ___________________________
 
-work, embroidery, and
that kind of thing. (_dropping her voice_.) and other things as well.
you know torvald left his office when we were married? there was no
prospect of promotion there, and he had to try and earn more than
before. but during the first year he overworked himself dreadfully. you
see, he had to make money every way he could, and he worked early and
late; but he couldn't stand it, and fell dreadfully ill, and the doctors
said it was necessary for him to go south.

_mrs. linde_. you spent a whole year in italy, didn't you?

_nora_. yes. it was no easy matter to get away, i can tell you. it was
just after ivar was born; but naturally we had to go. it was a
wonderfully beautiful journey, and it saved torvald's life. but it cost
a tremendous lot of money, christine.

_mrs. linde_. so i should think.

_nora_. it cost about two hundred and fifty pounds. that's a lot, isn't
it?

_mrs. linde_. yes, and in emergencies like that it is lucky to have the
money.


 
 ___________________________
 
_nora_. i ought to tell you that we had it from papa.

_mrs. linde_. oh, i see. it was just about that time that he died,
wasn't it?

_nora_. yes; and, just think of it, i couldn't go and nurse him. i was
expecting little ivar's birth every day and i had my poor sick torvald
to look after. my dear, kind father--i never saw him again, christine.
that was the saddest time i have known since our marriage.

_mrs. linde_. i know how fond you were of him. and then you went off to
italy?

_nora_. yes; you see we had money then, and the doctors insisted on our
going, so we started a month later.

_mrs. linde_. and your husband came back quite well?

_nora_. as sound as a bell!

_mrs linde_. but--the doctor?

_nora_. what doctor?

_mrs linde_. i thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here
just as i did, was the doctor?

_nora_. yes, that was doctor rank, but he doesn't come here
profess
 
 ___________________________
 
end, and comes in at least once
every day. no, torvald has not had an hour's illness since then, and our
children are strong and healthy and so am i. (_jumps up and claps her
hands_.) christine! christine! it's good to be alive and happy!--but how
horrid of me; i am talking of nothing but my own affairs. (_sits on a
stool near her, and rests her arms on her knees_.) you mustn't be angry
with me. tell me, is it really true that you did not love your husband?
why did you marry him?

_mrs. linde_. my mother was alive then, and was bedridden and helpless,
and i had to provide for my two younger brothers; so i did not think i
was justified in refusing his offer.

_nora_. no, perhaps you were quite right. he was rich at that time,
then?

_mrs. linde_. i believe he was quite well off. but his business was a
precarious one; and, when he died, it all went to pieces and there was
nothing left.

_nora_. and then?--

_mrs. linde_. well, i had to turn my hand to anything i could
fi
 
 ___________________________
 
nd--first a small shop, then a small school, and so on. the last three
years have seemed like one long working-day, with no rest. now it is at
an end, nora. my poor mother needs me no more, for she is gone; and the
boys do not need me either; they have got situations and can shift for
themselves.

_nora_. what a relief you must feel it--

_mrs. linde_. no, indeed; i only feel my life unspeakably empty. no one
to live for any more. (_gets up restlessly_.) that is why i could not
stand the life in my little backwater any longer. i hope it may be
easier here to find something which will busy me and occupy my thoughts.
if only i could have the good luck to get some regular work--office work
of some kind--

_nora_. but, christine, that is so frightfully tiring, and you look
tired out now. you had far better go away to some watering-place
 
 ___________________________
 
.

_mrs. linde_ (_walking to the window_). i have no father to give me
money for a journey, nora.

_nora_ (_rising_). oh, don't be angry with me.

_mrs. linde_ (_going up to her_). it is you that must not be angry with
me, dear. the worst of a position like mine is that it makes one so
bitter. no one to work for, and yet obliged to be always on the look-out
for chances. one must live, and so one becomes selfish. when you told me
of the happy turn your fortunes have taken--you will hardly believe
it--i was delighted not so much on your account as on my own.

_nora_. how do you mean?--oh, i understand. you mean that perhaps
torvald could get yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u something to do.

_mrs. linde_. yes, that was what i was thinking of.

_nora_. he must, christine. just leave it to me; i will broach the
subject very cleverly--i will think of something that will please him
very much. it will make me so happy to be of some use to you.

_mrs. linde_. how kind you are, nora, to be so anxious to help me! it is
doubly kind in you, for you know so little of the burdens and troubles
of life.

_nora_. i--? i know so little of them?

_mrs linde_ (_smiling_). my dear! small household cares and that sort of
thing!--you are a child, nora.

_nora_ (_tosses her head and crosses the stage_). you ought not to be so
superior.

_mrs. linde_. no?

_nora_. you are just like all the others. they all think that i am
incapable of anything really serious--

_mrs. linde_. come, come--

_nora_.--that i have gone through nothing in this world of cares.

_mrs. linde_. but, my dear nora, you have just told me all your
troubles.

_nora_.
 
 ___________________________
 
 pooh!--those were trifles. (_lowering her voice_.) i have not
told you the important thing.

_mrs. linde_. the important thing? what do you mean?

_nora_. you look down upon me altogether, christine--but you ought not
to. you are proud, aren't you, of having-worked so hard and so long for
your mother?

_mrs. linde_. indeed, i don't look down on any one. but it is true that
i am both proud and glad to think that i was privileged to make the end
of my mother's life almost free from care.

_nora_. and you are proud to think of what you have done for your
brothers.

_mrs. linde_. i think i have the right to be.

_nora_. i think so, too. but now, listen to this; i too have something
to be proud and glad of.

_mrs. linde_. i have no doubt you have. but what do you refer to?

_nora_. speak low. su
 
 ___________________________
 
ppose torvald were to hear! he mustn't on any
account--no one in the world must know, christine, except you.

_mrs. linde_. but what is it?

_nora_. come here. (_pulls her down on the sofa beside her_.) now i will
show you that i too have something to be proud and glad of. it was i who
saved torvald's life.

_mrs. linde_. "saved"? how?

_nora_. i told you about our trip to italy. torvald would never have
recovered if he had not gone there--

_mrs. linde_. yes, but your father gave you the necessary funds.

_nora_ (_smiling_). yes, that is what torvald and all the others think,
but--

_mrs. linde_. but.--

_nora_. papa didn't give us a shilling. it was i who procured the money.

_mrs. linde_. you? all that large sum?

_nora_. two hundred and fifty pounds. what do you think of that?

_mrs. linde_. but, nora, how could you possibly do it? did you win a
prize in the lottery?

_nora_ (_contemptuously_). in the lottery? there would h
 
 ___________________________
 
ave been no
credit in that.

_mrs. linde_. but where did you get it from, then?

_nora_ (_humming and smiling with an air of mystery_). hm, hu! aha!

_mrs. linde_. because you couldn't have borrowed it.

_nora_. couldn't i? why not?

_mrs. linde_. no, a wife cannot borrow without her husband's consent.

_nora_ (_tossing her head_). oh, if it is a wife who has any head for
business--a wife who has the wit to be a little bit clever--

_mrs. linde_. i don't understand it at all, nora.

_nora_. there is no need you should. i never said i had borrowed the
money. i may have got it some other way. (_lies back on the sofa._)
perhaps i got it from some other admirer. when anyone is as attractive
as i am--

_mrs. linde_. you are a mad creature.

_nora_. now, you know you're full of curiosity, christine.

_mrs. linde_. listen to me, nora dear. haven't you been a little bit
imprudent?

_nora_ (_sits up straight_). is it imprudent to
 
 ___________________________
 
 save your husband's
life?

_mrs. linde_. it seems to me imprudent, without his knowledge, to--

_nora_. but it was absolutely necessary that he should not know! my
goodness, can't you understand that? it was necessary he should have no
idea what a dangerous condition he was in. it was to me that the doctors
came and said that his life was in danger, and that the only thing to
save him was to live in the south. do you suppose i didn't try, first of
all, to get what i wanted as if it were for myself? i told him how much
i shou
 
 ___________________________
 
ng wives; i tried tears and
entreaties with him; i told him that he ought to remember the condition
i was in, and that he ought to be kind and indulgent to me; i even
hinted that he might raise a loan. that nearly made him angry,
christine. he said i was thoughtless, and that it was his duty as my
husband not to indulge me in my whims and caprices--as i believe he
called them. very well, i thought, you must be saved--and that was how i
came to devise a way out of the difficulty--

_mrs. linde_. and did your husband never get to know from your father
that the money had not come from him?

_nora_. no, never. papa died just at that time. i had meant to let him
into the secret and beg him never to reveal it. but he was so ill
then--alas, there never was any need to tell him.

_mrs. linde_. and since then have you never told your secret to your
husband?

_nora_. good heavens, no! how could you think so? a man who has such
strong opinions about these things! and besides, how pa
 
 ___________________________
 
inful and
humiliating it would be for torvald, with his manly independence, to
know that he owed me anything! it would upset our mutual relations
altogether; our beautiful happy home would no longer be what it is now.

_mrs. linde_. do you mean never to tell him about it?

_nora_ (_meditatively, and with a half smile._) yes--some day, perhaps,
after many years, when i am no longer as nice-looking as i am now.
don't laugh at me! i mean, of course, when torvald is no longer as
devoted to me as he is now; when my dancing and dressing-up and reciting
have palled on him; then it may be a good thing to have something in
reserve--(_breaking off,_) what nonsense! that time will never come.
now, what do you think of my gr
 
 ___________________________
 
at there is something that is called, in
business, quarterly interest, and another thing called payment in
instalments, and it is always so dreadfully difficult to manage them. i
have had to save a little here and there, where i could, you understand.
i have not been able to put aside much from my housekeeping money, for
torvald must have a good table. i couldn't let my children be shabbily
dressed; i have felt obliged to use up all he gave me for them, the
sweet little darlings!

_mrs. linde_. so it has all had to come out of your own necessaries of
life, poor nora?

_nora_. of course. besides, i was the one responsible for it. whenever
torvald has given me money for new dresses and such things, i have never
spent more than half of it; i have always bought the simplest and
cheapest things. thank heaven, any clothes look well on me, and so
torvald has never noticed it. but it was often very hard on me,
christine--because it is delightful to be really well dressed, isn't it?
 
 ___________________________
 


_mrs. linde_. quite so.

_nora_. well, then i have found other ways of earning money. last winter
i was lucky enough to get a lot of copying to do; so i locked myself up
and sat writing every evening until quite late at night. many a time i
was desperately tired; but all the same it was a tremendous pleasure to
sit there working and earning money. it was like being a man.

_mrs. linde_. how much have you been able to pay off in that way?

_nora_. i can't tell you exactly. you see, it is very difficult to keep
an account of a business matter of that kind. i only know that i have
paid every penny that i could scrape together. many a time i was at my
wits' end. (_smiles._) then i used to sit here and imagine that a rich
old gentleman had fallen in love with me--

_mrs. linde_. what! who was it?

_nora_. be quiet!--that he had died; and that when his will was opened
i
 
 ___________________________
 
t contained, written in big letters, the instruction: "the lovely mrs.
nora helmer is to have all i possess paid over to her at once in cash."

_mrs. linde_. but, my dear nora--who could the man be?

_nora_. good gracious, can't you understand? there was no old gentleman
at all; it was only something that i used to sit here and imagine, when
i couldn't think of any way of procuring money. but it's all the same
now; the tiresome old person can stay where he is, as far as i am
concerned; i don't care about him or his will either, for i am free from
care now. (_jumps up_.) my goodness, it's delightful to think of,
christine! free from care! t
 
 ___________________________
 
o be able to be free from care, quite free
from care; to be able to play and romp with the children; to be able to
keep the house beautifully and have everything just as torvald likes it!
and, think of it, soon the spring will come and the big blue sky!
perhaps we shall be able to take a little trip--perhaps i shall see the
sea again! oh, it's a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy. (_a bell
is heard in the hall_.)

_mrs. linde_ (_rising_). there is the bell; perhaps i had better go.

_nora_. no, don't go; no one will come in here; it is sure to be for
torvald.

_servant_ (_at the hall door_). excuse me, ma'am--there is a gentleman
to see the master, and as the doctor is with him--

_nora_. who is it?

_krogstad_ (_at the door_). it is i, mrs. helmer. (_mrs._ linde _starts,
trembles, and turns to the window_.)

_nora_ (_takes a step towards him, and speaks in a strained low voice_).
you? what is it? what
 
 ___________________________
 
 do you want to see my husband about?

_krogstad_. bank business--in a way. i have a small post in the bank,
and i hear your husband is to be our chief now--

_nora_. then it is--

_krogstad_. nothing but dry business matters, mrs. helmers; absolutely
nothing else.

_nora_. be so good as to go into the study then. (_she bows
indifferently to him and shuts the door into the hall; then comes back
and makes up the fire in the stove_.)

_mrs. linde_. nora--who was that man?

_nora_. a lawyer, of the name of krogstad.

_mrs. linde_. then it really was he.

_nora_. do you know the man?

_mrs. linde_. i used to--many years ago. at one time he was a
solicitor's clerk in our town.

_nora_. yes, he was.

_mrs. linde_. he is greatly altered.

_nora_. he made a very unhappy marriage.

_mrs. linde_. he is a widower now, isn't he?

_nora_. with several children. there now, it is burning up. (_shuts the
door of the stove and move
 
 ___________________________
 
s the rocking-chair aside_.)

_mrs. linde_. they say he carries on various kinds of business.

_nora_. really! perhaps he does; i don't know anything about it. but
don't let us think of business; it is so tiresome.

_doctor rank_ (_comes out of_ helmer's _study. before he shuts the door
he calls to him_). no, my dear fellow, i won't disturb you; i would
rather go in to your wife for a little while. (_shuts the door and sees_
mrs. linde.) i beg your pardon; i am afraid i am disturbing you too.

_nora_. no, not at all. (_introducing him_.) doctor rank, mrs. linde.

_rank_. i have often heard mrs. linde's name mentioned here. i think i
passed you on the stairs when i arrived, mrs. linde?

_mrs. linde_. yes, i go up very slowly; i can't manage stairs well.

_rank_. ah! some slight internal weakness?

_mrs. linde_. no, the fact is i have been overworking myself.

_rank_. nothing more than that? then i suppose you have
 
 ___________________________
 
 come to town to
amuse yourself with our entertainments?

_mrs. linde_. i have come to look for work.

_rank_. is that a good cure for overwork?

_mrs. linde_. one must live, doctor rank.

_rank_. yes, the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary.

_nora_. look here, doctor rank--you know you want to live.

_rank_. certainly. however wretched i may feel, i want to prolong the
agony as long as possible. all my patients are like that. and so are
those who are morally diseased; one of them, and a bad case, too, is at
this very moment with helmer--

_mrs. linde_ (_sadly_). ah!

_nora_. whom do you mean?

_rank_. a lawyer of the na
 
 ___________________________
 
me of krogstad, a fellow you don't know at
all. he suffers from a diseased moral character, mrs. helmer; but even
he began talking of its being highly important that he should live.

_nora_. did he? what did he want to speak to torvald about?

_rank_. i have no idea; i only heard that it was something about the
bank.

_nora_. i didn't know this--what's his name--krogstad had anything to do
with the bank.

_rank_. yes, he has some sort of appointment there. (_to_ mrs. linde.) i
don't know whether you find also in your part of the world that there
are certain people who go zealously snuffing about to smell out moral
corruption, and, as soon as they have found some, put the person
concerned into some lucrative position where they can keep their eye on
him. healthy natures are left out in the cold.

_mrs. linde_. still i think the sick are those who most need taking care
of.

_rank_ (_shrugging his shoulders_). yes, there you are. that is the
sentiment tha
 
 ___________________________
 
o are employed in the bank dependent on
torvald now?

_rank_. is that what you find so extremely amusing?

_nora_ (_smiling and humming_). that's my affair! (_walking about the
room_.) it's perfectly glorious to think that we have--that torvald has
so much power over so many people. (_takes the packet from her pocket_.)
doctor rank, what do you say to a macaroon?

_rank_. what, macaroons? i thought they were forbidden here.

_nora_. yes, but these are some christine gave me.

_mrs. linde_. what! i?--

_nora_. oh, well, don't be alarmed! you couldn't know that torvald had
forbidden them. i must tell you that he is afraid they will spoil my
teeth. but, bah!--once in a way--that's so, isn't it, doctor rank? by
your leave! (_puts a macaroon into his mouth.)_ you must have one too,
christine. and i shall have one, just a little one--or at most two.
(_walking about_.) i am tremendously happy. there is just one thing in
the world now that i should dearly love to do.

_rank_.
 
 ___________________________
 
 well, what is that?

_nora_. it's something i should dearly love to say, if torvald could
hear me.

_rank_. well, why can't you say it?

_nora_, no, i daren't; it's so shocking.

_mrs. linde_. shocking?

_rank_. well, i should not advise you to say it. still, with us you
might. what is it you would so much like to say if torvald could hear
you?

_nora_. i should just love to say--well, i'm damned!

_rank_. are you mad?

_mrs. linde_. nora, dear--!

_rank_. say it, here he is!

_nora_ (_hiding the packet_). hush! hush! hush! (helmer _comes out of
his room, with his coat over his arm and his hat in his hand_.)

_nora_. well, torvald dear, have you got rid of him?

_helmer_. yes, he has just gone.

_nora_. let me introduce you--this is christine, who has come to town.

_helmer_. christine--? excuse me, but i don't know--

_nora_. mrs. linde, dear; christine linde.

_helmer_. of course. a school friend of my 
 
 ___________________________
 
wife's, i presume?

_mrs. linde_. yes, we have known each other since then.

_nora_. and just think, she has taken a long journey in order to see
you.

_helmer_. what do you mean?

_mrs. linde_. no, really, i--

_nora_. christine is tremendously clever at book-keeping, and she is
frightfully anxious to work under some clever man, so as to perfect
herself--

_helmer_. very sensible, mrs. linde.

_nora_. and when she heard you had been appointed manager of the
bank--the news was telegraphed, you know--she traveled here as quick as
she could, torvald, i am sure you will be able to do something for
christine, for my sake, won't you?

_helmer_. well, it is not altogether impossible. i presume you are a
widow, mrs. linde?

_mrs. linde_. yes.

_helmer_. and have had some experience of bookkeeping?

_mrs. linde_. yes, a fair amount.

_helmer_. ah! well it's very likely i may
 
 ___________________________
 
 be able to find something for
you--

_nora_ (_clapping her hands_). what did i tell you? what did i tell you?

_helmer_. you have just come at a fortunate moment, mrs. linde.

_mrs. linde_. how am i to thank you?

_helmer_. there is no need. (_puts on his coat_.) but today you must
excuse me--

_rank_. wait a minute; i will come with you. (_brings his fur coat from
the hall and warms it at the fire_.)

_nora_. don't be long away, torvald dear.

_helmer_. about an hour, not more.

_nora_. are you going too, christine?

_mrs. linde_ (_putting on her cloak_). yes, i must go and look for a
room.

_helmer_. oh, well then, we can walk down the street together.

_nor
 
 ___________________________
 
a_ (_helping her_). what a pity it is we are so short of space here;
i am afraid it is impossible for us--

_mrs. linde_. please don't think of it! good-bye, nora dear, and many
thanks.

_nora_. good-bye for the present. of course you will come back this
evening. and you too, dr. rank. what do you say? if you are well enough?
oh, you must be! wrap yourself up well. (_they go to the door all
talking together. children's voices are heard on the staircase._)

_nora_. there they are. there they are! (_she runs to open the door.
the_ nurse _comes in with the children._) come in! come in! (_stoops and
kisses
 
 ___________________________
 
 them._) oh, you sweet blessings! look at them, christine! aren't
they darlings?

_rank_. don't let us stand here in the draught.

_helmer_. come along, mrs. linde; the place will only be bearable for a
mother now!

(rank, helmer, _and_ mrs. linde _go downstairs. the_ nurse _comes
forward with the children;_ nora _shuts the hall door._)

_nora_. how fresh and well you look! such red cheeks!--like apples and
roses. (_the children all talk at once while she speaks to them._) have
you had great fun? that's splendid! what, you pulled both emmy and bob
along on the sledge?--both at once?--that _was_ good. you are a clever
boy, ivar. let me take her for a little, anne. my sweet little baby
doll! (_takes the baby from the_ maid _and dan
 
 ___________________________
 
self what
sort of a christmas you will spend.

_nora_. what do you want? today it is absolutely impossible for me--

_krogstad_. we won't talk about that till later on. this is something
different. i presume you can give me a moment?

_nora_. yes--yes, i can--although--

_krogstad_. good. i was in olsen's restaurant and saw your husband going
down the street--

_nora_. yes?

_krogstad_. with a lady.

_nora_. what then?

_krogstad_. may i make so bold as to ask if it was a mrs. linde?

_nora_. it was.

_krogstad_. just arrived in town?

_nora_. yes, today.

_krogstad_. she is a great friend of yours, isn't she?

_nora_: she is. but i don't see--

_krogstad_. i knew her too, once upon a time.

_nora_. i am aware of that.

_krogstad_. are you? so you know all about it; i thought as much. then i
can ask you, without beating about the bush--is mrs. linde to have an
appointment in the bank?

_nora_. what right have you to question me, mr. krogstad?--you, one 
 
 ___________________________
 
dn't happen; it is impossible--i have three little children.

(_enter the_ nurse _from the room on the left, carrying a big cardboard
box._)

_nurse_. at last i have found the box with the fancy dress.

_nora_. thanks; put it on the table.

_nurse_ (_doing so_). but it is very much in want of mending.

_nora_. i should like to tear it into a hundred thousand pieces.

_nurse_. what an idea! it can easily be put in order--just a little
patience.

_nora_. yes, i will go and get mrs. linde to come and help me with it.

_nurse_. what, out again? in this horrible weather? you will catch cold,
ma'am, and make yourself ill.

_nora_. well, worse than that might happen. how are the children?

_nurse_. the poor little souls are playing with their christmas
presents, but--

_nora_. do they ask much for me?

_nurse_. you see, they are so accustomed to have their mamma with them.

_nora_. yes, but, nurse, i shall not be able to be so much with them now
as i was before.

_n
 
 ___________________________
 
egins to unpack the box, but soon pushes it away from her_).
if only i dared go out. if only no one would come. if only i could be
sure nothing would happen here in the meantime. stuff and nonsense! no
one will come. only i mustn't think about it. i will brush my muff. what
lovely, lovely gloves! out of my thoughts, out of my thoughts! one, two,
three, four, five, six--(_screams._) ah! there is someone coming--.
(_makes a movement towards the door, but stands irresolute_.)

(_enter_ mrs. linde _from the hall, where she has taken off her cloak
and hat_.)

_nora_. oh, it's you, christine. there is no one else out there, is
there? how good of you to come!

_mrs. linde_. i heard you were up asking for me.

_nora_. yes, i was passing by. as a matter of fact, it is something you
could help me with. let us sit down here on the sofa. look here.
tomorrow evening there is to be a fancy-dress ball at the stenborgs',
who live above us; and torvald wants me to go as a neapolitan
fishe
 
 ___________________________
 
r-girl, and dance the tarantella that i learnt at capri.

_mrs. linde_. i see; you are going to keep up the character.

_nora_. yes, torvald wants me to. look, here is the dress; torvald had
it made for me there, but now it is all so torn, and i haven't any
idea--

_mrs. linde_. we will easily put that right. it is only some of the
trimming come unsewn here and there. needle and thread? now then, that's
all we want.

_nora_. it _is_ nice of you.

_mrs. linde_ (_sewing_). so you are going to be dressed up tomorrow,
nora. i will tell you what--i shall come in for a moment and see you in
your fine feathers. but i have completely forgotten to thank you for a
delightful evening yesterday.

_nora_ (_gets up, and crosses the stage_). well i don't think yesterday
was as pleasant as usual. you ought to have come to town a little
earlier, christine. certainly torvald does understand how to make a
house dainty and attractive.

_mrs. linde_. and so d
 
 ___________________________
 
o you, it seems to me; you are not your father's
daughter for nothing. but tell me, is doctor rank always as depressed as
he was yesterday?

_nora_. no; yesterday it was very noticeable. i must tell you that he
suffers from a _very_ dangerous disease. he has consumption of the
spine, poor creature. his father was a horrible man who committed all
sorts of excesses; and that is why his son was sickly from childhood, do
you understand?

_mrs. linde_ (_dropping her sewing_). but, my dearest nora, how do you
know anything about such things?

_nora_ (_walking about_). pooh! when you have three children, you get
visits now and then from--from married women, who know something of
medical matters, and they talk about one thing and another.

_mrs. linde_ (_goes on sewing. a short silence_). does doctor rank come
here every day?

_nora_. every day regularly. he is torvald's most intimate friend, and a
great friend of mine too. he is ju
 
 ___________________________
 
st like one of the family.

_mrs. linde_. but tell me this--is he perfectly sincere? i mean, isn't
he the kind of a man that is very anxious to make himself agreeable?

_nora_. not in the least. what makes you think that?

_mrs. linde_. when you introduced him to me yesterday, he declared he
had often heard my name mentioned in this house; but afterwards i
noticed that your husband hadn't the slightest idea who i was. so how
could doctor rank--?

_nora_. that is quite right, christine. torvald is so absurdly fond of
me that he wants me absolutely to himself, as he says. at first he used
to seem almost jealous if i mentioned any of the dear folk at home, so
naturally i gave up doing so. but i often talk about such thi
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs with
doctor rank, because he likes hearing about them.

_mrs. linde_. listen to me, nora. you are still very like a child in
many ways, and i am older than you in many ways and have a little more
experience. let me tell you this--you ought to make an end of it with
doctor rank.

_nora_. what ought i to make an end of?

_mrs. linde_. of two things, i think. yesterday you talked some nonsense
about a rich admirer who was to leave you money--

_nora_. an admirer who doesn't exist, unfortunately! but what then?

_mrs. linde_. is doctor rank a man of means?

_nora_. yes, he is.

_mrs. linde_. and has no one to provide for?

_nora_. no, no one; but--

_mrs. linde_. and comes here every day?

_nora_. yes, i told you so.

_mrs. linde_. but how can this well-bred man be so tactless?

_nora_. i don't understand 
 
 ___________________________
 
you at all.

_mrs. linde_. don't prevaricate, nora. do you suppose i don't guess who
lent you the two hundred and fifty pounds.

_nora_. are you out of your senses? how can you think of such a thing! a
friend of ours, who comes here every day! do you realise what a horribly
painful position that would be?

_mrs. linde_. then it really isn't he?

_nora_. no, certainly not. it would never have entered into my head for
a moment. besides, he had no money to lend then; he came into his money
afterwards.

_mrs. linde_. well, i think that was lucky for you, my dear nora.

_nora_. no, it would never have come into my head to ask doctor rank.
although i am quite sure that if i had asked him--

_mrs. linde_. but of course you won't.

_nora_. of course not. i have no reason to think it could possibly be
n
 
 ___________________________
 
ecessary. but i am quite sure that if i told doctor rank--

_mrs. linde_. behind your husband's back?

_nora_. i must make an end of it with the other one, and that will be
behind his back too. i _must_ make an end of it with him.

_mrs. linde_. yes, that is what i told you yesterday, but--

_nora_ (_walking up and down_). a man can put a thing like that straight
much easier than a woman--

_mrs. linde_. one's husband, yes.

_nora_. nonsense! (_standing still_.) when you pay off a debt you get
your bond back, don't you?

_mrs. linde_. yes, as a matter of course.

_nora_. and can tear it into a hundred thousand pieces, and burn it
up--the nasty, dirty paper!

_mrs. linde_ (_looks hard at her, lays down her sewing and gets up
slowly_). nora, you are concealing something from me.

_nora_. do i look as if i were?

_mrs. linde_. something has happened to you since yesterday morning.
 
 ___________________________
 

nora, what is it?

_nora_ (_going nearer to her_). christine! (_listens_.) hush! there's
torvald come home. do you mind going in to the children for the present?
torvald can't bear to see dressmaking going on. let anne help you.

_mrs. linde_ (_gathering some of the things together_). certainly--but i
am not going away from here till we have had it out with one another.
(_she goes into the room, on the left, as helmer comes in from, the
hall_.)

_nora_ (_going up to_ helmar). i have wanted you so much, torvald dear.

_helmer_. was that the dressmaker?

_nora_. no, it was christine; she is helping me to put my dress in
order. you will see i shall look quite smart.

_helmer_. wasn't that a happy thought of mine, now?

_
 
 ___________________________
 
my skylark does that anyhow.

_nora_. i would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight,
torvald.

_helmer_. nora--you surely don't mean that request you made of me this
morning?

_nora_ (_going near him_). yes, torvald, i beg you so earnestly--

_helmer_. have you really the courage to open up that question again?

_nora_. yes, dear, you _must_ do as i ask; you _must_ let krogstad keep
his post in the bank.

_helmer_. my dear nora, it is his post that i have arranged mrs. linde
shall have.

_nora._ yes, you have been awfully kind about that; but you could just
as well dismiss some other clerk instead of krogstad.

_helmer._ this is simply incredible obstinacy! because you chose to give
him a thoughtless promise that you would speak for him, i am expected
to--

_nora._ that isn't the reason, torvald. it is for your own sake. this
fellow writes in the most scurrilous newspapers; you have told me so
yourself. he can do you an unspeakable amount of harm. i am 
 
 ___________________________
 
_. so it seems.

_nora_ (_putting her hands on his shoulders_). dear, dear doctor rank,
death mustn't take you away from torvald and me.

_rank_. it is a loss you would easily recover from. those who are gone
are soon forgotten.

_nora_ (_looking at him anxiously_). do you believe that?

_rank_. people form new ties, and then--

_nora_. who will form new ties?

_rank_. both you and helmer, when i am gone. you yourself are already on
the high road to it, i think. what did that mrs. linde want here last
night?

_nora_. oho!--you don't mean to say you are jealous of poor christine?

_rank_. yes, i am. she will be my successor in this house. when i am
done for, this woman will--

_nora_. hush! don't speak so loud. she is in that room.

_rank_. to-day again. there, you see.

_nora_. she has only come to sew my dress for me. bless my soul, how
unreasonable you are! (_sits down on the sofa_.) be nice now, doctor
rank, and to-morrow you will see how beautifully i shall d
 
 ___________________________
 
 no, that's
impossible! (_opens the door by degrees._) what is that? he is standing
outside. he is not going downstairs. is he hesitating? can he--? (_a
letter drops into the box; then_ krogstad's _footsteps are heard, till
they die away as he goes downstairs._ nora _utters a stifled cry, and
runs across the room to the table by the sofa. a short pause_.)

_nora_. in the letter-box. (_steals across to the hall-door_.) there it
lies--torvald, torvald, there is no hope for us now!

(mrs. linde _comes in from the room on the left, carrying the dress_.)

_mrs. linde_. there, i can't see anything more to mend now. would you
like to try it on--?

_nora_ (_in a hoarse whisper_). christine, come here.

_mrs. linde_ (_throwing the dress down on the sofa_). what is the matter
with you? you look so agitated!

_nora_. come here. do you see that letter? there, look--you can see it
through the glass in the letter-box.

_mrs. linde_. yes, i see it.

_nora_. that letter is from krog
 
 ___________________________
 
stad.

_mrs. linde_. nora--it was krogstad who lent you the money!

_nora_. yes, and now torvald will know all about it.

_mrs. linde_. believe me, nora, that's the best thing for both of you.

_nora_. you don't know all. i forged a name.

_mrs. linde_. good heavens--!

_nora_. i only want to say this to you, christine--you must be my witness.

_mrs. linde_. your witness! what do you mean? what am i to--?

_nora_. if i should go out of my mind--and it might easily happen--

_mrs. linde_. nora!

_nora_. or if anything else should happen to me--anything, for instance,
that might prevent my being here--

_mrs. linde_. nora! nora! you are quite out of your mind.

_nora_. and if it should happen that there were someone who wanted to
take all the responsibility, all the blame, you understand--

_mrs. linde_. yes, yes--but how can you supp
 
 ___________________________
 
ose--?

_nora_. then you must be my witness, that it is not true, christine. i
am not out of my mind at all; i am in my right senses now, and i tell
you no one else has known anything about it; i and i alone, did the
whole thing. remember that.

_mrs. linde_. i will, indeed. but i don't understand all this.

_nora_. how should you understand it? a wonderful thing is going to
happen.

_mrs. linde_. a wonderful thing?

_nora_. yes, a wonderful thing!--but it is so terrible, christine; it
_mustn't_ happen, not for all the world.

_mrs. linde_. i will go at once and see krogstad.

_nora_. don't go to him; he will do you some harm.

_mrs. linde_. there was a time when he would gladly do anything for my
sake.

_nora_. he?

_mrs. linde_. where does he live?

_nora_. how should i know--? yes (_feeling in her pocket_) here is his
card. but the letter, the letter--!

_helmer_ 
 
 ___________________________
 
(_calls from his room, knocking at the door_). nora.

_nora_ (_cries out anxiously_). oh, what's that? what do you want?

_helmer_. don't be so frightened. we are not coming in; you have locked
the door. are you trying on your dress?

_nora_. yes, that's it. i look so nice, torvald.

_mrs. linde_ (_who has read the card_) i see he lives at the corner
here.

_nora_. yes, but it's no use. it is hopeless. the letter is lying there
in the box.

_mrs. linde_. and your husband keeps the key?

_nora_. yes, always.

_mrs. linde_. krogstad must ask for his letter back unread, he must find
some pretence--

_nora_. but it is just at this time that torvald generally--

_mrs. linde_. you must delay him. go in to him in the meantime. i will
come back as soon as i can. (_she goes out hurriedly through the hall
door_.)

_nora_ (_goes to_ helmer's _door, opens it and peeps in_). torvald!

_helmer_ (_from the inner room_). well? may i venture at
 
 ___________________________
 
_nora_ (_laughing and swinging the tambourine_). didn't i tell you so?

_rank_. let me play for her.

_helmer_ (_getting up_). yes, do. i can correct her better then.

(rank _sits down at the piano and plays. nora dances more and more
wildly_. helmer _has taken up a position beside the stove, and during
her dance gives her frequent instructions. she does not seem to hear
him; her hair comes down and falls over her shoulders; she pays no
attention to it, but goes on dancing. enter_ mrs. linde.)

_mrs. linde_ (_standing as if spell-bound in the doorway_). oh!--

_nora_ (_as she dances_). such fun, christine!

_helmer_. my dear darling nora, you are dancing as if your life depended
on it.

_nora_. so it does.

_helmer_. stop, rank; this is sheer madness. stop, i tell you. (rank
_stops playing, and,_ nora _suddenly stands still_. helmer _goes up to
her._) i could never have believed it. you have forgotten everything i
taught you.

_nora_ (_throwing away the tambourine_)
 
 ___________________________
 
_. come, come, don't be so wild and nervous. be my own little
skylark, as you used.

_nora_. yes, dear, i will. but go in now and you too, doctor rank.
christine, you must, help me to do up my hair.

_rank_ (_whispers to_ helmer _as they go out_). i suppose there is
nothing--she is not expecting anything?

_helmer_. far from it, my dear fellow; it is simply nothing more than
this childish nervousness i was telling you of. (_they go into the
right-hand room_.)

_nora_. well!

_mrs. linde_. gone out of town.

_nora_. i could tell from your face.

_mrs. linde_. he is coming home tomorrow evening. i wrote a note for
him.

_nora_. you should have let it alone; you must prevent nothing. after
all, it is splendid to be waiting for a wonderful thing to happen.

_mrs. linde_. what is it that you are waiting for?

_nora_, oh, you wouldn't understand. go in to them. i will come in a
moment. (mrs. linde _goes into the dining-room._ nora _stands still for
a little while, as i
 
 ___________________________
 
nd-twenty hours
till the next midnight. then the tarantella will be over. twenty-four
and seven? thirty-one hours to live.

_helmer_ (_from the doorway on the right_). where's my little skylark?

_nora_ (_going to him with her arms out-stretched_). here she is!




act iii


(the same scene--_the table has been placed in the middle of the stage,
with chairs around it. a lamp is burning on the table. the door into the
hall stands open. dance music is heard in the room above_. mrs. linde
_is sitting at the table idly turning over the leaves of a book; she
tries to read, but does not seem able to collect her thoughts. every now
and then she listens intently for a sound at the outer door_.)


_mrs. linde_ (_looking at her watch_). not yet--and the time is nearly
up. if only he does not--. (_listens again_.) ah, there he is. (_goes
into the hall and opens the outer door carefully. light footsteps are
heard on the stairs. she whispers_.) come in. there is no one here.

_
 
 ___________________________
 
krogstad_ (_in the doorway_). i found a note from you at home. what
does this mean?

_mrs. linde_. it is absolutely necessary that i should have a talk with
you.

_krogstad_. really? and is it absolutely necessary that it should be
here?

_mrs. linde_. it is impossible where i live; there is no private
entrance to my rooms. come in; we are quite alone. the maid is asleep,
and the helmers are at the dance upstairs.

_krogstad_ (_coming into the room_). are the helmers really at a dance
tonight?

_mrs. linde_. yes, why not?

_krogstad_. certainly--why not?

_mrs. linde_. now, nils, let us have a talk.

_krogstad_. can we two have anything to talk about?

_mrs. linde_. we have a great deal to talk about.

_krogstad_. i shouldn
 
 ___________________________
 
't have thought so.

_mrs. linde_. no, you have never properly understood me.

_krogstad_. was there anything else to understand except what was
obvious to all the world--a heartless woman jilts a man when a more
lucrative chance turns up.

_mrs. linde_. do you believe i am as absolutely heartless as all that?
and do you believe that i did it with a light heart?

_krogstad_. didn't you?

_mrs. linde_. nils, did you really think that?

_krogstad_. if it were as you say, why did you write to me as you did at
the time?

_mrs. linde_. i could do nothing else. as i had to break with you, it
was my duty also to put an end to all that you felt for me.

_krogstad_ (_wringing his hands_). so that was it. and all this--only
for the sake of money.

_mrs. linde_. you must not forget that i had a helpless mother and two
little brothers. we couldn't wait for you, nils; your prospects seemed
 
 ___________________________
 

hopeless then.

_krogstad_. that may be so, but you had no right to throw me over for
any one else's sake.

_mrs. linde_. indeed i don't know. many a time did i ask myself if i had
a right to do it.

_krogstad_ (_more gently_). when i lost you, it was as if all the solid
ground went from under my feet. look at me now--i am a shipwrecked man
clinging to a bit of wreckage.

_mrs. linde_. but help may be near.

_krogstad_. it _was_ near; but then you came and stood in my way.

_mrs. linde_. unintentionally, nils. it was only today that i learnt it
was your place i was going to take in the bank.

_krogstad_. i believe you, if you say so. but now that you know it, are
you not going to give it up to me?

_mrs. linde_. no, because that would not benefit you in the least.

_krogstad_. oh, benefit, benefit--i would have done it whether or no.

_mrs. linde_. i have lear
 
 ___________________________
 
nt to act prudently. life, and hard, bitter
necessity have taught me that.

_krogstad_. and life has taught me not to believe in fine speeches.

_mrs. linde_. then life has taught you something very reasonable. but
deeds you must believe in?

_krogstad_. what do you mean by that?

_mrs. linde_. you said you were like a shipwrecked man clinging to some
wreckage.

_krogstad_. i had good reason to say so.

_mrs. linde_. well, i am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some
wreckage--no one to mourn for, no one to care for.

_krogstad_. it was your own choice.

_mrs. linde_. there was no other choice, then.

_krogstad_. well, what now?

_mrs. linde_. nils, how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could
join forces?

_krogstad_. what are you saying?

_mrs. linde_. two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better
chance than each on their own.

_krogstad_. christine!

_mrs. linde_. w
 
 ___________________________
 
hat do you suppose brought me to town?

_krogstad_. do you mean that you gave me a thought?

_mrs. linde_. i could not endure life without work. all my life, as long
as i can remember, i have worked, and it has been my greatest and only
pleasure. but now i am quite alone in the world--my life is so dreadfully
empty and i feel so forsaken. there is not the least pleasure in working
for one's self. nils, give me someone and something to work for.

_krogstad_. i don't trust that. it is nothing but a woman's overstrained
sense of generosity that prompts you to make such an offer of your self.

 
 ___________________________
 

_mrs. linde_. have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?

_krogstad_. could you really do it? tell me--do you know all about my
past life?

_mrs. linde_. yes.

_krogstad_. and do you know what they think of me here?

_mrs. linde_. you seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been
quite another man.

_krogstad_. i am certain of it.

_mrs. linde_. is it too late now?

_krogstad_. christine, are you saying this deliberately? yes, i am sure
you are. i see it in your face. have you really the courage, then--?

_mrs. linde_. i want to be a mother to someone, and your children need a
mother. we two need each other. nils, i have faith in your real
character--i can dare anything together with you.

_krogstad_ (_grasps her hands_). thanks, thanks, christine! now i shall
find a way to clear myself in the eyes of the world. ah, but i f
 
 ___________________________
 
orgot--

_mrs. linde_ (_listening_). hush! the tarantella! go, go!

_krogstad_. why? what is it?

_mrs. linde_. do you hear them up there? when that is over, we may
expect them back.

_krogstad_. yes, yes--i will go. but it is all no use. of course you are
not aware what steps i have taken in the matter of the helmers.

_mrs. linde_. yes, i know all about that.

_krogstad_. and in spite of that have you the courage to--?

_mrs. linde_. i understand very well to what lengths a man like you
might be driven by despair.

_krogstad_. if i could only undo what i have done!

_mrs. linde_. you cannot. your letter is lying in the letter-box now.

_krogstad_. are you sure of that?

_mrs. linde_. quite sure, but--

_krogstad_ (_with a searching look at her_). is that what it all
means?--that you want to save your friend at any cost? tell me frankly.
is that it?

_mrs. linde_. nils, a woman who has once sold herself for 
 
 ___________________________
 
another's
sake, doesn't do it a second time.

_krogstad_. i will ask for my letter back.

_mrs. linde_. no, no.

_krogstad_. yes, of course i will. i will wait here till helmer comes; i
will tell him he must give me my letter back--that it only concerns my
dismissal--that he is not to read it--

_mrs. linde_. no, nils, you must not recall your letter.

_krogstad._ but, tell me, wasn't it for that very purpose that you asked
me to meet you here?

_mrs. linde_. in my first moment of fright, it was. but twenty-four
hours have elapsed since then, and in that time i have witnessed
incredible things in this house. helmer must know all about it. this
unhappy secret must be enclosed; they must have a complete understanding
between them, which is impossible with all this concealment and
falsehood going on.

_krogstad_. very well, if you will take the responsibility. but there is
one thing i can do in any case, and i shall do it at once.

_mrs. li
 
 ___________________________
 
nde_ (_listening_). you must be quick and go! the dance is over;
we are not safe a moment longer.

_krogstad_. i will wait for you below.

_mrs. linde_. yes, do. you must see me back to my door.

_krogstad_. i have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my
life! (_goes out through the outer door. the door between the room and
the hall remains open_.)

_mrs. linde_ (_tidying up the room and laying her hat and cloak ready_).
what a difference! what a difference! someone to work for and live
for--a home to bring comfort into. that i will do, indeed. i wish they
would be quick and come. (_listens._) ah, there they are now. i must put
on my things. (_takes up her hat and cloak_. helmer's _and_ nora's
_voices are heard outside; a key is turned, and_ helmer _brings_ nora
_almost by force into the hall. she is in an italian costume with a
large black sha
 
 ___________________________
 
pen_.)

_nora_ (_hanging back in the doorway, and struggling with him_). no, no,
no!--don't take me in. i want to go upstairs again; i don't want to
leave so early.

_helmer_. but, my dearest nora--

_nora_. please, torvald dear--please, _please_--only an hour more.

_helmer_. not a single minute, my sweet nora. you know that was our
agreement. come along into the room; you are catching cold standing
there. (_he brings her gently into the room, in spite of her
resistance_.)

_mrs. linde_. good evening.

_nora_. christine!

_helmer_. you here, so late, mrs. linde?

_mrs. linde_. yes, you must excuse me; i was so anxious to see nora in
her dress.

_nora_. have you been sitting here waiting for me?

_mrs. linde_. yes, unfortunately i came too late, you had already gone
upstairs; and i thought i couldn't go away again without having seen
you.

_helmer_ (_taking off_ nora's _shawl_). yes, take a good look at her. i
think she is worth looking at. isn't she charming, 
 
 ___________________________
 
mrs. linde?

_mrs. linde_. yes, indeed she is.

_helmer_. doesn't she look remarkably pretty? everyone thought so at the
dance. but she is terribly self-willed, this sweet little person. what
are we to do with her? you will hardly believe that i had almost to
bring her away by force.

_nora_. torvald, you will repent not having let me stay, even if it were
only for half an hour.

_helmer_. listen to her, mrs. linde! she had danced her tarantella, and
it had been a tremendous success, as it deserved--although possibly the
performance was a trifle too realistic--little more so, i mean, than
was strictly compatible with the limitations of art. but never mind
about that! the chief thing is, she had made a success--she had made a
tremendous success. do you think i was going to let her remain there
after that, and spoil the effect? no, indeed! i took my charming little
capri maiden--my capricious little 
 
 ___________________________
 
capri maiden, i should say--on my
arm; took one quick turn round the room; a curtsey on either side, and,
as they say in novels, the beautiful apparition disappeared. an exit
ought always to be effective, mrs. linde; but that is what i cannot make
nora understand. pooh! this room is hot. (_throws his domino on a chair,
and opens the door of his room_.) hullo! it's all dark in here. oh, of
course--excuse me--. (_he goes in, and lights some candles_.)

_nora_ (_in a hurried and breathless whisper_). well?

_mrs. linde._ (_in a low voice_). i have had a talk with him.

_nora._ yes, and--

_mrs. linde_. nora, you must tell your husband all about it.

_nora_ (_in an expressionless voice_). i knew i
 
 ___________________________
 
t.

_mrs. linde._ you have nothing to be afraid of as far as krogstad is
concerned; but you must tell him.

_nora_. i won't tell him.

_mrs. linde_. then the letter will.

_nora_. thank you, christine. now i know what i must do. hush--!

_helmer_ (_coming in again_). well, mrs. linde, have you admired her?

_mrs. linde_. yes, and now i will say good-night.

_helmer_. what, already? is this yours, this knitting?

_mrs. linde_ (_taking it_). yes, thank you, i had very nearly forgotten
it.

_helmer_. so you knit?

_mrs. linde_. of course.

_helmer_. do you know, you ought to embroider?

_mrs. linde_. really? why?

_helmer_. yes, it's far more becoming. let me show you. you hold the
embroidery thus in your left hand, and use the needle with the
right--like this--with a long, easy sweep. do you see?

_mrs. linde_. yes, perhaps--

_helmer_. but in the case of knitting--that can never be anything but
un
 
 ___________________________
 
graceful; look here--the arms close together, the knitting-needles
going up and down--it has a sort of chinese effect--. that was really
excellent champagne they gave us.

_mrs. linde_. well,--good-night, nora, and don't be self-willed any
more.

_helmer_. that's right, mrs. linde.

_mrs. linde_. good-night, mr. helmer.

_helmer_ (_accompanying her to the door_). good-night, good-night. i
hope you will get home all right. i should be very happy to--but you
haven't any great distance to go. good-night, good-night. (_she goes
out; he shuts the door after her and comes in again_.) ah!--at last we
have got rid of her. she is a frightful bore, that woman.

_nora_. aren't you very tired, torvald?

_helmer_. no, not in the least.

_nora_. nor sleepy?

_helmer_. not a bit. on th