and the big blue sky!
perhaps we shall be able to take a little trip--perhaps i shall see the
sea again! oh, it's a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy. (_a bell
is heard in the hall_.)

_mrs. linde_ (_rising_). there is the bell; perhaps i had better go.

_nora_. no, don't go; no one will come in here; it is sure to be for
torvald.

_servant_ (_at the hall door_). excuse me, ma'am--there is a gentleman
to see the master, and as the doctor is with him--

_nora_. who is it?

_krogstad_ (_at the door_). it is i, mrs. helmer. (_mrs._ linde _starts,
trembles, and turns to the window_.)

_nora_ (_takes a step towards him, and speaks in a strained low voice_).
you? what is it? what do you want to see my husband about?

_krogstad_. bank business--in a way. i have a small post in the bank,
and i hear your husband is to be our chief now--

_nora_. then it is--

_krogstad_. nothing but dry business matters, mrs. helmers; absolutely
nothing else.

_nora_. be so good as t
 
 ___________________________
 
o go into the study then. (_she bows
indifferently to him and shuts the door into the hall; then comes back
and makes up the fire in the stove_.)

_mrs. linde_. nora--who was that man?

_nora_. a lawyer, of the name of krogstad.

_mrs. linde_. then it really was he.

_nora_. do you know the man?

_mrs. linde_. i used to--many years ago. at one time he was a
solicitor's clerk in our town.

_nora_. yes, he was.

_mrs. linde_. he is greatly altered.

_nora_. he made a very unhappy marriage.

_mrs. linde_. he is a widower now, isn't he?

_nora_. with several children. there now, it is burning up. (_shuts the
door of the stove and moves the rocking-chair aside_.)

_mrs. linde_. they say he carries on va
 
 ___________________________
 
 must live, doctor rank.

_rank_. yes, the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary.

_nora_. look here, doctor rank--you know you want to live.

_rank_. certainly. however wretched i may feel, i want to prolong the
agony as long as possible. all my patients are like that. and so are
those who are morally diseased; one of them, and a bad case, too, is at
this very moment with helmer--

_mrs. linde_ (_sadly_). ah!

_nora_. whom do you mean?

_rank_. a lawyer of the name of krogstad, a fellow you don't know at
all. he suffers from a diseased moral character, mrs. helmer; but even
he began talking of its being highly important that he should live.

_nora_. did he? what did he want to speak to torvald about?

_rank_. i have no idea; i only heard that it was something about the
bank.

_nora_. i didn't know this--what's his name--krogstad had anything to do
with the bank.

_rank_. yes, he has some sort of appointment there. (_to_ mrs. linde.) i
don't know whether 
 
 ___________________________
 
t.
must i hide? very well, i'll hide first. (_she and the children laugh
and shout, and romp in and out of the room; at last nora hides under the
table the children rush in and look for her, but do not see her; they
hear her smothered laughter run to the table, lift up the cloth and find
her. shouts of laughter. she crawls forward and pretends to frighten
them. fresh laughter. meanwhile there has been a knock at the hall door,
but none of them has noticed it. the door is half opened, and krogstad
appears. he waits a little; the game goes on._)

_krogstad_. excuse me, mrs. helmer.

_nora_ (_with a stifled cry, turns round and gets up on to her knees_).
ah! what do you want?

_krogstad_. excuse me, the outer door was ajar; i suppose someone forgot
to shut it.

_nora_ (_rising_). my husband is out, mr. krogstad.

_krogstad_. i know that.

_nora_. what do you want here, then?

_krogstad_. a word with you.

_nora_. with me?--(_to the children, gently_.) go in to nurse. wha
 
 ___________________________
 
t? no,
the strange man won't do mother any harm. when he has gone we will have
another game. (_she takes the children into the room on the left, and
shuts the door after them._) you want to speak to me?

_krogstad_. yes, i do.

_nora_. today? it is not the first of the month yet.

_krogstad_. no, it is christmas eve, and it will depend on yourself what
sort of a christmas you will spend.

_nora_. what do you want? today it is absolutely impossible for me--

_krogstad_. we won't talk about that till later on. this is something
different. i presume you can give me a moment?

_nora_. yes--yes, i can--although--

_krogstad_. good. i was in olsen's restaurant and saw your husband going
down the street--

_nora_. yes?

_krogstad_. with a lady.

_nora_. what then?

_krogstad_. may i make so bold as to ask if it was a mrs. linde?

_nora_. it was.

_krogstad_. just arrived in town?

_nora_. yes, today.

_krogstad_. she is a great friend of your
 
 ___________________________
 
s, isn't she?

_nora_: she is. but i don't see--

_krogstad_. i knew her too, once upon a time.

_nora_. i am aware of that.

_krogstad_. are you? so you know all about it; i thought as much. then i
can ask you, without beating about the bush--is mrs. linde to have an
appointment in the bank?

_nora_. what right have you to question me, mr. krogstad?--you, one of
my husband's subordinates! but since you ask, you shall know. yes, mrs.
linde _is_ to have an appointment. and it was i who pleaded her cause,
mr. krogstad, let me tell you that.

_krogstad_. i was right in what i thought, then.

_nora_ (_walking up and down the stage_). sometimes one has a tiny
little bit of influence, i should hope. because one is a woman, it does
not necessarily follow that--. when anyone is in a subordinate position,
mr. krogstad, they should really 
 
 ___________________________
 
be careful to avoid offending anyone
who--who--

_krogstad_. who has influence?

_nora_. exactly.

_krogstad_ (_changing his tone_). mrs. helmer, you will be so good as to
use your influence on my behalf.

_nora_. what? what do you mean?

_krogstad_. you will be so kind as to see that i am allowed to keep my
subordinate position in the bank.

_nora_. what do you mean by that? who proposes to take your post away
from you?

_krogstad_. oh, there is no necessity to keep up the pretence of
ignorance. i can quite understand that your friend is not very anxious
to expose herself to the chance of rubbing shoulders with me; and i
quite understand, too, whom i have to thank for being turned off.

_nora_. but i assure you--

_krogstad_. very likely; but, to come to the point, the time has come
when i should advise you to use your influence to prevent that.

_nora_. but, mr. krogstad, i _have_ no influence.

_krogstad_. 
 
 ___________________________
 
haven't you? i thought you said yourself just now--

_nora_. naturally i did not mean you to put that construction on it. i!
what should make you think i have any influence of that kind with my
husband?

_krogstad_. oh, i have known your husband from our student days. i don't
suppose he is any more unassailable than other husbands.

_nora_. if you speak slightly of my husband, i shall turn you out of the
house.

_krogstad_. you are bold, mrs. helmer.

_nora_. i am not afraid of you any longer, as soon as the new year
comes, i shall in a very short time be free of the whole thing.

_krogstad_ (_controlling himself_). listen to me, mrs. helmer. if
necessary, i am prepared to fight for my small post in the bank as if i
were fighting for my life.

_nora_. so it seems.

_krogstad_. it is not only for the sake of the money; indeed, that
weighs least with me in the matter. there is another reason--well, i m
 
 ___________________________
 
ay
as well tell you. my position is this. i daresay you know, like
everybody else, that once, many years ago, i was guilty of an
indiscretion.

_nora_. i think i have heard something of the kind.

_krogstad_. the matter never came into court; but every way seemed to be
closed to me after that. so i took to the business that you know of. i
had to do something; and, honestly, don't think i've been one of the
worst. but now i must cut myself free from all that. my sons are growing
up; for their sake i must try and win back as much respect as i can in
the town. this post in the bank was like the first step up for me--and
now your husband is going to kick me downstairs again into the mud.

_nor
 
 ___________________________
 
a_. but you must believe me, mr. krogstad; it is not in my power to
help you at all.

_krogstad_. then it is because you haven't the will; but i have means to
compel you.

_nora_. you don't mean that you will tell my husband that i owe you
money?

_krogstad_. hm!--suppose i were to tell him?

_nora_. it would be perfectly infamous of you. (_sobbing_.) to think of
his learning my secret, which has been my joy and pride, in such an
ugly, clumsy way--that he should learn it from you! and it would put me
in a horribly disagreeable position--

_krogstad_. only disagreeable?

_nora_ (_impetuously_). well, do it, then!--and it will be the worse for
you. my husband will see for himself what a blackguard you are, and you
certainly won't keep you
 
 ___________________________
 
r post then.

_krogstad_. i asked you if it was only a disagreeable scene at home that
you were afraid of?

_nora_. if my husband does get to know of it, of course he will at once
pay you what is still owing, and we shall have nothing more to do with
you.

_krogstad_ (_coming a step nearer_). listen to me, mrs. helmer. either
you have a very bad memory or you know very little of business. i shall
be obliged to remind you of a few details.

_nora_. what do you mean?

_krogstad_. when your husband was ill, you came to me to borrow two
hundred and fifty pounds.

_nora_. i didn't know any one else to go to.

_krogstad_. i promised to get you that amount--

_nora_. yes, and you did so.

_krogstad_. i promised to get you that amount, on certain conditions.
your mind was so taken up with your husband's illness, and you were so
anxious to get the money for your journey, that you seem to have paid no
attention to the conditions of our bargain. therefore it will n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot be
amiss if i remind you of them. now, i promised to get the money on the
security of a bond which i drew up.

_nora_. yes, and which i signed.

_krogstad_. good. but below your signature there were a few lines
constituting your father a surety for the money; those lines your father
should have signed.

_nora_. should? he did sign them.

_krogstad_. i had left the date blank; that is to say your father should
himself have inserted the date on which he signed the paper. do you
remember that?

_nora_. yes, i think i remember--

_krogstad_. then i gave you the bond to send by post to your father. is
that not so?

_nora_. yes.

_krogstad_. and you naturally did so at once, because five or six days
afterwards you brought me the bond with your father's signature. and
then i gave you the money.

_nora_. well, haven't i been payin
 
 ___________________________
 
g it off regularly?

_krogstad_. fairly so, yes. but--to come back to the matter in
hand--that must have been a very trying time for you, mrs. helmer?

_nora_. it was, indeed.

_krogstad_. your father was very ill, wasn't he?

_nora_. he was very near his end.

_krogstad_. and died soon afterwards?

_nora_. yes.

_krogstad_. tell me, mrs. helmer, can you by any chance remember what
day your father died?--on what day of the month, i mean.

_nora_. papa died on the 29th of september.

_krogstad_. that is correct; i have ascertained it for myself. and, as
that is so, there is a discrepancy (_taking a paper from his pocket_)
which i cannot account for.

_nora_. what discrepancy? i don't know--

_krogstad_. the discrepancy consists, mrs. helmer, in the fact that your
father signed this bond three days afte
 
 ___________________________
 
r his death.

_nora_. what do you mean? i don't understand--

_krogstad_. your father died on the 29th of september. but, look here;
your father dated his signature the 2nd of october. it is a discrepancy,
isn't it? (nora _is silent_.) can you explain it to me? (nora _is still
silent_.) it is a remarkable thing, too, that the words "2nd of
october," as well as the year, are not written in your father's
handwriting but in one that i think i know. well, of course it can be
explained; your father may have forgotten to date his signature, and
someone else may ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve dated it haphazard before they knew of his death.
there is no harm in that. it all depends on the signature of the name;
and _that_ is genuine, i suppose, mrs. helmer? it was your father
himself who signed his name here?

_nora_ (_after a short pause, throws her head up and looks defiantly at
him_). no, it was not. it was i that wrote papa's name.

_krogstad_. are you aware that is a dangerous confession?

_nora_. in what way? you shall have your money soon.

_krogstad_. let me ask you a question; why did you not send the paper to
your father?

_nora_. it was impossible; papa was so ill. if i had asked him for his
signature, i should have had to tell him what the money was to be used
for; and when he was so ill himself i couldn't tell him that my
husband's life was in danger--it was impossible.

_krogstad_. it would have been better for you if you had given up your
trip abroad.

_nora_. no, that was impossible. that trip was to save my husband's
l
 
 ___________________________
 
ife; i couldn't give that up.

_krogstad_. but did it never occur to you that you were committing a
fraud on me?

_nora_. i couldn't take that into account; i didn't trouble myself about
you at all. i couldn't bear you, because you put so many heartless
difficulties in my way, although you knew what a dangerous condition my
husband was in.

_krogstad_. mrs. helmer, you evidently do not realise clearly what it is
that you have been guilty of. but i can assure you that my one false
step, which lost me all my reputation, was nothing more or nothing worse
than what you have done.

_nora_. you? do you ask me to believe that you were brave enough to run
a risk to save your wife's life.

_krogstad_. the law cares nothing about motives.

_nora_. then it must be a very foolish law.

_krogstad_. foolish or not, it is the law by which you 
 
 ___________________________
 
will be judged,
if i produce this paper in court.

_nora_. i don't believe it. is a daughter not to be allowed to spare her
dying father anxiety and care? is a wife not to be allowed to save her
husband's life? i don't know much about law; but i am certain that there
must be laws permitting such things as that. have you no knowledge of
such laws--you who are a lawyer? you must be a very poor lawyer, mr.
krogstad.

_krogstad_. maybe. but matters of business--such business as you and i
have had together--do you think i don't understand that? very well. do
as you please. but let me tell you this--if i lose my position a second
time, you shall lose yours with me. (_he bows, and goes out through the
hall_.)

_nora_ (_appears buried in thought for a short time, then tosses her
head)_. nonsense! trying to frighten me like that!--i am not so silly as
he thinks. (_begins to busy herself putting the children's thing
 
 ___________________________
 


_nora_. no, thank you. i have all i want.

[_exit_ maid

_nora_ (_begins dressing the tree_). a candle here--and flowers here--.
the horrible man! it's all nonsense--there's nothing wrong. the tree
shall be splendid! i will do everything i can think of to please you,
torvald!--i will sing for you, dance for you--(helmer _comes in with
some papers under his arm_.) oh! are you back already?

_helmer_. yes. has anyone been here?

_nora_. here? no.

_helmer_. that is strange. i saw krogstad going out of the gate.

_nora_. did you? oh yes, i forgot krogstad was here for a moment.

_helmer_. nora, i can see from your manner that he has been here begging
you to say a good word for him.

_nora_. yes.

_helmer_. and you were to appear to do it of your own accord; you were
to conceal from me the fact of his having been here; didn't he beg that
of you too?

_nora_. yes, torvald, but--

_helmer_. nora, nora, and you would be a party to that sort of thing? to
have any talk 
 
 ___________________________
 


_nora_ (_standing behind his chair with her arms on the back of it_).
are you very busy, torvald?

_helmer_. well--

_nora_. what are all those papers?

_helmer_. bank business.

_nora_. already?

_helmer_. i have got authority from the retiring manager to undertake
the necessary changes in the staff and in the rearrangement of the work;
and i must make use of the christmas week for that, so as to have
everything in order for the new year.

_nora_. then that was why this poor krogstad--

_helmer_. hm!

_nora_ (_leans against the back of his chair and strokes his hair_). if
you hadn't been so busy i should have asked you a tremendously big
favour, torvald.

_helmer_. what is that? tell me.

_nora_. there is no one has such good taste as you. and i do so want to
look nice at the fancy-dress ball. torvald, couldn't you take me in hand
and decide what i shall go as, and what sort of a dress i shall wear?

_helmer_. aha! so my obstinate little woman is obliged to ge
 
 ___________________________
 
t someone to
come to her rescue?

_nora_. yes, torvald, i can't get along a bit without your help.

_helmer_ very well, i will think it over, we shall manage to hit upon
something.

_nora_. that _is_ nice of you. (_goes to the christmas tree. a short
pause.)_ how pretty the red flowers look--. but, tell me, was it really
something very bad that this krogstad was guilty of?

_helmer_. he forged someone's name. have you any idea what that means?

_nora_. isn't it possible that he was driven to do it by necessity?

_helmer_. yes; or, as in so many cases, by imprudence. i am not so
heartless as to condemn a man altogether because of a single false step
of that kind.

_nora_. no you wouldn't, would you, torvald?

_helmer_. many a man has been able to retrieve his character, if he has
openly confessed his fault and taken his punishment.

_
 
 ___________________________
 
nora_. punishment--?

_helmer_. but krogstad did nothing of that sort; he got himself out of
it by a cunning trick, and that is why he has gone under altogether.

_nora_. but do you think it would--?

_helmer_. just think how a guilty man like that has to lie and play the
hypocrite with everyone, how he has to wear a mask in the presence of
those near and dear to him, even before his own wife and children. and
about the children--that is the most terrible part of it all, nora.

_nora_. how?

_helmer_. because such an atmospher
 
 ___________________________
 
h the children take in such a house is
full of the germs of evil.

_nora_ (_coming nearer him_). are you sure of that?

_helmer_. my dear, i have often seen it in the course of my life as a
lawyer. almost everyone who has gone to the bad early in life has had a
deceitful mother.

_nora_. why do you only say--mother?

_helmer_. it seems most commonly to be the mother's influence, though
naturally a bad father's would have the same result. every lawyer is
familiar with the fact. this krogstad, now, has been persistently
poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation; that is why i
say he has lost all moral character. (_holds out his hands to her.)_
that is why my sweet little nora must promise me not to plead his cause.
give me your hand on it. come, come, what is this? give me your hand.
there now, that's settled. i assure you it would be quite impossible for
me to work with him; i literally feel physically ill when i am in the
company of such people.

_nora_ (_tak
 
 ___________________________
 
_. your skylark would chirp about in every room, with her song
rising and falling--

_helmer_. well, my skylark does that anyhow.

_nora_. i would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight,
torvald.

_helmer_. nora--you surely don't mean that request you made of me this
morning?

_nora_ (_going near him_). yes, torvald, i beg you so earnestly--

_helmer_. have you really the courage to open up that question again?

_nora_. yes, dear, you _must_ do as i ask; you _must_ let krogstad keep
his post in the bank.

_helmer_. my dear nora, it is his post that i have arranged mrs. linde
shall have.

_nora._ yes, you have been awfully kind about that; but you could just
as well dismiss some other clerk instead of krogstad.

_helmer._ this is simply incredible obstinacy! because you chose to give
him a thoughtless promise that you would speak for him, i am expected
to--

_nora._ that isn't the reason, torvald. it is for your own sake. this
fellow writes in the most sc
 
 ___________________________
 
ial was not
above suspicion. mine is, and i hope it will continue to be so, as long
as i hold my office.

_nora._ you never can tell what mischief these men may contrive. we
ought to be so well off, so snug and happy here in our peaceful home,
and have no cares--you and i and the children, torvald! that is why i
beg you so earnestly--

_helmer_. and it is just by interceding for him that you make it
impossible for me to keep him. it is already known at the bank that i
mean to dismiss krogstad. is it to get about now that the new manager
has changed his mind at his wife's bidding--

_nora_. and what if it did?

_helmer_. of course!--if only this obstinate little person can get her
way! do you suppose i am going to make myself ridiculous before my whole
staff, to let people think that i am a man to be swayed by all sorts of
outside influence? i should very soon feel the consequences of it, i can
tell you. and besides, there is one thing that makes it quite impossible
for me 
 
 ___________________________
 
to have krogstad in the bank as long as i am manager.

_nora_. whatever is that?

_helmer_. his moral failings i might perhaps have overlooked, if
necessary--

_nora_. yes, you could--couldn't you?

_helmer_. and, i hear he is a good worker, too. but i knew him when we
were boys. it was one of those rash friendships that so often prove an
incubus in after life. i may as well tell you plainly, we were once on
very intimate terms with one another. but this tactless fellow lays no
restraint upon himse
 
 ___________________________
 
nd calls.)_ helen!

_nora_. what are you going to do?

_helmer_ (_looking among his papers)_. settle it. (_enter_ maid.) look
here; take this letter and go downstairs with it at once. find a
messenger and tell him to deliver it, and be quick. the address is on
it, and here is the money.

_maid_. very well, sir. (_exit with the letter_.)

_helmer_ (_putting his papers together_). now, then, little miss
obstinate.

_nora_ (_breathlessly_). torvald--what was that letter?

_helmer_. krogstad's dismissal.

_nora_. call her back, torvald! there is still time. oh torvald, call
her back! do it for my sake--for your own sake, for the children's sake!
do you hear me, torvald? call her back! you don't know what that letter
can bring upon us.

_helmer_. it's too late.

_nora_. yes, it's too late.

_helmer_. my dear nora, i can forgive the anxiety you are in, although
really it is an insult to me. it is, indeed. isn't it an insult to think
that i should be afraid of a starving 
 
 ___________________________
 
 was no good.

_nora_. he won't go away?

_maid_. no; he says he won't until he has seen you, ma'am.

_nora_. well, let him come in--but quietly. helen, you mustn't say
anything about it to any one. it is a surprise for my husband.

_maid_. yes, ma'am, i quite understand. (_exit_.)

_nora_. this dreadful thing is going to happen. it will happen in spite
of me! no, no, no, it can't happen--it shan't happen! (_she bolts the
door of_ helmer's _room. the_ maid _opens the hall door for_ krogstad
_and shuts it after him. he is wearing a fur coat, high boots and a fur
cap_.)

_nora_ (_advancing towards him_). speak low--my husband is at home.

_krogstad_. no matter about that.

_nora_. what do you want of me?

_krogstad_. an explanation of something.

_nora_. make haste then. what is it?

_krogstad_. you know, i suppose, that i have got my dismissal.

_nora_. i couldn't prevent it, mr. krogstad. i fought as hard as i could
on your side, but it was no good.

_krogstad_.
 
 ___________________________
 
 does your husband love you so little, then? he knows what i
can expose you to, and yet he ventures--

_nora_. how can you suppose that he has any knowledge of the sort?

_krogstad_. i didn't suppose so at all. it would not be the least like
our dear torvald helmer to show so much courage--

_nora_. mr. krogstad, a little respect for my husband, please.

_krogstad_. certainly--all the respect he deserves. but since you have
kept the matter so carefully to yourself, i make bold to suppose that
you have a little clearer idea than you had yesterday, of what it
actually is that you have done?

_nora_. more than you could ever teach me.

_krogstad_. yes, such a bad lawyer as i am.

_nora_. what is it you want of me?

_krogstad_. only to see how you were, mrs. helmer. i have been thinking
about you all day long. a mere cashier--a quill-driver, a--w
 
 ___________________________
 
ell, a man
like me--even he has a little of what is called feeling, you know.

_nora_. show it, then; think of my little children.

_krogstad_. have you and your husband thought of mine? but never mind
about that. i only wanted to tell you that you need not take this matter
too seriously. in the first place there will be no accusation made on my
part.

_nora_. no, of course not; i was sure of that.

_krogstad_. the whole thing can be arranged amicably; there is no reason
why anyone should know anything about it. it will remain a secret
between us three.

_nora_. my husband must never get to know anything about it.

_krogstad_. how will you be able to prevent it? am i to understand that
you can pay the balance that is owing?

_nora_. no, not just at present.

_krogstad_. or perhaps that you have some expedient for raising the
money soon?

_nora_. no expedient that i mean to make use of.
 
 ___________________________
 


_krogstad_. well, in any case, it would have been of no use to you now.
if you stood there with ever so much money in your hand, i would never
part with your bond.

_nora_. tell me what purpose you mean to put it to.

_krogstad_. i shall only preserve it--keep it in my possession. no one
who is not concerned in the matter shall have the slightest hint of it.
so that if the thought of it has driven you to any desperate
resolution--

_nora_. it has.

_krogstad_. if you had it in your mind to run away from your home--

_nora_. i had.

_krogstad_. or even something worse--

_nora_. how could you know that?

_krogstad_. give up the idea.

_nora_. how did you know i had thought of _that?_

_krogstad_. most of us think of that at first. i did, too--but i hadn't
the courage.

_nora_ (_faintly_). no more had i.

_krogstad_ (_in a tone of relief)_. no, that's it, isn't it--you hadn't
the courage either?

_nora_. no, i haven't--i haven't.
 
 ___________________________
 


_krogstad_. besides, it would have been a great piece of folly. once the
first storm at home is over--. i have a letter for your husband in my
pocket.

_nora_. telling him everything?

_krogstad_. in as lenient a manner as i possibly could.

_nora_ (_quickly)_. he mustn't get the letter. tear it up. i will find
some means of getting money.

_krogstad_. excuse me, mrs. helmer, but i think i told you just how--

_nora_. i am not speaking of what i owe you. tell me what sum you are
asking my husband for, and i will get the money.

_krogstad_. i am not asking your husband for a penny.

_nora_. what do you want, then?

_krogstad_. i will tell you. i want to rehabilitate myself, mrs. helmer;
i want to get on; and in that your husband must help me. for the last
year and a half i have not had a hand in anything dishonourable, and all
th
 
 ___________________________
 
at time i have been struggling in most restricted circumstances. i was
content to work my way up step by step. now i am turned out, and i am
not going to be satisfied with merely being taken into favour again. i
want to get on, i tell you. i want to get into the bank again, in a
higher position. your husband must make a place for me--

_nora_. that he will never do!

_krogstad_. he will; i know him; he dare not protest. and as soon as i
am in there again with him, then you will see! within a year i shall be
the manager's right hand. it will be nils krogstad and not torvald
helmer who manages the bank.

_nora_. that's a thing you will never see!

_krogstad_. do you mean that you will--?

_nora_. i have courage enough for it now.

_krogstad_. oh, you can't frighten me. a fine, spoilt lady like you--

_nora_. you will see, you will see.

_krogstad_. under
 
 ___________________________
 
 the ice, perhaps? down into the cold, coal-black
water? and then, in the spring, to float up to the surface, all horrible
and unrecognizable, with your hair fallen out--

_nora_. you can't frighten me.

_krogstad_. nor you me. people don't do such things, mrs. helmer.
besides, what use would it be? i should have him completely in my power
all the same.

_nora_. afterwards? when i am no longer--

_krogstad_. have you forgot that it is i who have the keeping of your
reputation? (_nora stands speechlessly looking at him.)_ well, now, i
have warned you. do not do anything foolish. when helmer has had my
letter, i shall expect a message from him. and be sure you remember that
it is your husband himself who has forced me into such ways as this
again. i will never forgive him for that. good-bye, mrs. helmer. (_exit
through the hall.)_

_nora_ (_goes to the hall door, opens it slightly and liste
 
 ___________________________
 
ns_). he is
going. he is not putting the letter in the box. oh, no, no, that's
impossible! (_opens the door by degrees._) what is that? he is standing
outside. he is not going downstairs. is he hesitating? can he--? (_a
letter drops into the box; then_ krogstad's _footsteps are heard, till
they die away as he goes downstairs._ nora _utters a stifled cry, and
runs across the room to the table by the sofa. a short pause_.)

_nora_. in the letter-box. (_steals across to the hall-door_.) there it
lies--torvald, torvald, there is no hope for us now!

(mrs. linde _comes in from the room on the left, carrying the dress_.)

_mrs. linde_. there, i can't see anything more to mend now. would you
like to try it on--?

_nora_ (_in a hoarse whisper_). c
 
 ___________________________
 
hristine, come here.

_mrs. linde_ (_throwing the dress down on the sofa_). what is the matter
with you? you look so agitated!

_nora_. come here. do you see that letter? there, look--you can see it
through the glass in the letter-box.

_mrs. linde_. yes, i see it.

_nora_. that letter is from krogstad.

_mrs. linde_. nora--it was krogstad who lent you the money!

_nora_. yes, and now torvald will know all about it.

_mrs. linde_. believe me, nora, that's the best thing for both of you.

_nora_. you don't know all. i forged a name.

_mrs. linde_. good heavens--!

_nora_. i only want to say this to you, christine--you must be my witness.

_mrs. linde_. your witness! what do you mean? what am i to--?

_nora_. if i should go out of my mind--and it might easily happen--

_mrs. linde_. nora!

_nora_. or if anything e
 
 ___________________________
 
ut of my mind at all; i am in my right senses now, and i tell
you no one else has known anything about it; i and i alone, did the
whole thing. remember that.

_mrs. linde_. i will, indeed. but i don't understand all this.

_nora_. how should you understand it? a wonderful thing is going to
happen.

_mrs. linde_. a wonderful thing?

_nora_. yes, a wonderful thing!--but it is so terrible, christine; it
_mustn't_ happen, not for all the world.

_mrs. linde_. i will go at once and see krogstad.

_nora_. don't go to him; he will do you some harm.

_mrs. linde_. there was a time when he would gladly do anything for my
sake.

_nora_. he?

_mrs. linde_. where does he live?

_nora_. how should i know--? yes (_feeling in her pocket_) here is his
card. but the letter, the letter--!

_helmer_ (_calls from his room, knocking at the door_). nora.

_nora_ (_cries out anxiously_). oh, what's that? what do you want?

_helmer_. don't be so frightened. we are not coming in; you ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve locked
the door. are you trying on your dress?

_nora_. yes, that's it. i look so nice, torvald.

_mrs. linde_ (_who has read the card_) i see he lives at the corner
here.

_nora_. yes, but it's no use. it is hopeless. the letter is lying there
in the box.

_mrs. linde_. and your husband keeps the key?

_nora_. yes, always.

_mrs. linde_. krogstad must ask for his letter back unread, he must find
some pretence--

_nora_. but it is just at this time that torvald generally--

_mrs. linde_. you must delay him. go in to him in the meantime. i will
come back as soon as i can. (_she goes out hurriedly through the hall
door_.)

_nora_ (_goes to_ helmer's _door, opens it and peeps in_). torvald!

_helmer_ (_from the inner room_). well? may i venture at last to come
into my own room again? come along, rank, now you will see--(_ haltin
 
 ___________________________
 

_is sitting at the table idly turning over the leaves of a book; she
tries to read, but does not seem able to collect her thoughts. every now
and then she listens intently for a sound at the outer door_.)


_mrs. linde_ (_looking at her watch_). not yet--and the time is nearly
up. if only he does not--. (_listens again_.) ah, there he is. (_goes
into the hall and opens the outer door carefully. light footsteps are
heard on the stairs. she whispers_.) come in. there is no one here.

_krogstad_ (_in the doorway_). i found a note from you at home. what
does this mean?

_mrs. linde_. it is absolutely necessary that i should have a talk with
you.

_krogstad_. really? and is it absolutely necessary that it should be
here?

_mrs. linde_. it is impossible where i live; there is no private
entrance to my rooms. come in; we are quite alone. the maid is asleep,
and the helmers are at the dance upstairs.

_krogstad_ (_coming into the room_). are the helmers really at a dance
toni
 
 ___________________________
 
ght?

_mrs. linde_. yes, why not?

_krogstad_. certainly--why not?

_mrs. linde_. now, nils, let us have a talk.

_krogstad_. can we two have anything to talk about?

_mrs. linde_. we have a great deal to talk about.

_krogstad_. i shouldn't have thought so.

_mrs. linde_. no, you have never properly understood me.

_krogstad_. was there anything else to understand except what was
obvious to all the world--a heartless woman jilts a man when a more
lucrative chance turns up.

_mrs. linde_. do you believe i am as absolutely heartless as all that?
and do you believe that i did it with a light heart?

_krogstad_. didn't you?

_mrs. linde_. nils, did you really think that?

_krogstad_. if it were as you say, why did you write to me as you did at
the time?

_mrs. linde_. i could do nothing else. as i had to 
 
 ___________________________
 
break with you, it
was my duty also to put an end to all that you felt for me.

_krogstad_ (_wringing his hands_). so that was it. and all this--only
for the sake of money.

_mrs. linde_. you must not forget that i had a helpless mother and two
little brothers. we couldn't wait for you, nils; your prospects seemed
hopeless then.

_krogstad_. that may be so, but you had no right to throw me over for
any one else's sake.

_mrs. linde_. indeed i don't know. many a time did i ask myself if i had
a right to do it.

_krogstad_ (_more gently_). when i lost you, it was as if all the solid
ground went from under my feet. look at me now--i am a shipwrecked man
clinging to a bit of wreckage.

_mrs. linde_. but help may be near.

_krogstad_. it _was_ near; but then you came and stood in my way.

_mrs. linde_. unintentionally, n
 
 ___________________________
 
ils. it was only today that i learnt it
was your place i was going to take in the bank.

_krogstad_. i believe you, if you say so. but now that you know it, are
you not going to give it up to me?

_mrs. linde_. no, because that would not benefit you in the least.

_krogstad_. oh, benefit, benefit--i would have done it whether or no.

_mrs. linde_. i have learnt to act prudently. life, and hard, bitter
necessity have taught me that.

_krogstad_. and life has taught me not to believe in fine speeches.

_mrs. linde_. then life has taught you something very reasonable. but
deeds you must believe in?

_krogstad_. what do you mean by that?

_mrs. linde_. you said you were like a shipwrecked man clinging to some
wreckage.

_krogstad_. i had good reason to say so.

_mrs. linde_. well, i am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some
wreckage--no one to mourn for, no one to care for.

_krogstad_. it was your own choice.

_mrs.
 
 ___________________________
 
 linde_. there was no other choice, then.

_krogstad_. well, what now?

_mrs. linde_. nils, how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could
join forces?

_krogstad_. what are you saying?

_mrs. linde_. two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better
chance than each on their own.

_krogstad_. christine!

_mrs. linde_. what do you suppose brought me to town?

_krogstad_. do you mean that you gave me a thought?

_mrs. linde_. i could not endure life without work. all my life, as long
as i can remember, i have worked, and it has been my greatest and only
pleasure. but now i am quite alone in the world--my life is so dreadfully
empty and i feel so forsaken. there is not the least pleasure in working
for one's self. nils, give me someone and something to work for.

_krogstad_. i don't trust that. it is nothing but a woman's overstrained
sense of generosi
 
 ___________________________
 
ty that prompts you to make such an offer of your self.

_mrs. linde_. have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?

_krogstad_. could you really do it? tell me--do you know all about my
past life?

_mrs. linde_. yes.

_krogstad_. and do you know what they think of me here?

_mrs. linde_. you seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been
quite another man.

_krogstad_. i am certain of it.

_mrs. linde_. is it too late now?

_krogstad_. christine, are you saying this deliberately? yes, i am sure
you are. i see it in your face. have you really the courage, then--?

_mrs. linde_. i want to be a mother to someone, and your children need a
mother. we two need each other. nils, i have faith in your real
character--i can dare anything together with you.

_krogstad_ (_grasps her hands_). thanks, thanks, christine! now i shall
find a way to clear myself in the eyes of the world. ah, but i forgot--

_mrs. linde_ (_listening
 
 ___________________________
 
_). hush! the tarantella! go, go!

_krogstad_. why? what is it?

_mrs. linde_. do you hear them up there? when that is over, we may
expect them back.

_krogstad_. yes, yes--i will go. but it is all no use. of course you are
not aware what steps i have taken in the matter of the helmers.

_mrs. linde_. yes, i know all about that.

_krogstad_. and in spite of that have you the courage to--?

_mrs. linde_. i understand very well to what lengths a man like you
might be driven by despair.

_krogstad_. if i could only undo what i have done!

_mrs. linde_. you cannot. your letter is lying in the letter-box now.

_krogstad_. are you sure of that?

_mrs. linde_. quite sure, but--

_krogstad_ (_with a searching look at her_). is that what it all
means?--that you want to save your friend at any cost? tell me frankly.
is that 
 
 ___________________________
 
it?

_mrs. linde_. nils, a woman who has once sold herself for another's
sake, doesn't do it a second time.

_krogstad_. i will ask for my letter back.

_mrs. linde_. no, no.

_krogstad_. yes, of course i will. i will wait here till helmer comes; i
will tell him he must give me my letter back--that it only concerns my
dismissal--that he is not to read it--

_mrs. linde_. no, nils, you must not recall your letter.

_krogstad._ but, tell me, wasn't it for that very purpose that you asked
me to meet you here?

_mrs. linde_. in my first moment of fright, it was. but twenty-four
hours have elapsed since then, and in that time i have witnessed
incredible things in this house. helmer must know all about it. this
unhappy secret must be enclosed; they must have a complete understanding
between them, which is impossible with all this concealment and
falsehood going on.

_krogstad_. very well, if you will take the 
 
 ___________________________
 
responsibility. but there is
one thing i can do in any case, and i shall do it at once.

_mrs. linde_ (_listening_). you must be quick and go! the dance is over;
we are not safe a moment longer.

_krogstad_. i will wait for you below.

_mrs. linde_. yes, do. you must see me back to my door.

_krogstad_. i have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my
life! (_goes out through the outer door. the door between the room and
the hall remains open_.)

_mrs. linde_ (_tidying up the room and laying her hat and cloak ready_).
what a difference! what a difference! someone to work for and live
for--a home to bring comfort into. that i will do, indeed. i wish they
would be quick and come. (_listens._) ah, there they are now. i must put
on my things. (_takes up her hat and cloak_. he
 
 ___________________________
 
oom is hot. (_throws his domino on a chair,
and opens the door of his room_.) hullo! it's all dark in here. oh, of
course--excuse me--. (_he goes in, and lights some candles_.)

_nora_ (_in a hurried and breathless whisper_). well?

_mrs. linde._ (_in a low voice_). i have had a talk with him.

_nora._ yes, and--

_mrs. linde_. nora, you must tell your husband all about it.

_nora_ (_in an expressionless voice_). i knew it.

_mrs. linde._ you have nothing to be afraid of as far as krogstad is
concerned; but you must tell him.

_nora_. i won't tell him.

_mrs. linde_. then the letter will.

_nora_. thank you, christine. now i know what i must do. hush--!

_helmer_ (_coming in again_). well, mrs. linde, have you admired her?

_mrs. linde_. yes, and now i will say good-night.

_helmer_. what, already? is this yours, this knitting?

_mrs. linde_ (_taking it_). yes, thank you, i had very nearly forgotten
it.

_helmer_. so you knit?

_mrs. linde_. of course.

_hel
 
 ___________________________
 
 to forfeit your love?

_nora_. yes, indeed i can. it was to-night, when the wonderful thing did
not happen; then i saw you were not the man i had thought you.

_helmer_. explain yourself better--i don't understand you.

_nora_. i have waited so patiently for eight years; for, goodness knows,
i knew very well that wonderful things don't happen every day. then this
horrible misfortune came upon me; and then i felt quite certain that the
wonderful thing was going to happen at last. when krogstad's letter was
lying out there, never for a moment did i imagine that you would consent
to accept this man's conditions. i was so absolutely certain that you
would say to him: publish the thing to the whole world. and when that
was done--

_helmer_. yes, what then?--when i had exposed my wife to shame and
disgrace?

_nora_. when that was done, i was so absolutely certain, you would come
forward and take everything upon yourself, and say: i am the guilty one.

_helmer_. nora--!

_nor