 is the custom of the irish to hate villains." while this strange
dialogue continued, i perceived the crowd rapidly increase.  their
faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which annoyed  and in
some degree alarmed me.

i inquired the way to the inn, but no one replied.  i then moved
forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed
and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man approaching tapped me on the
shoulder and said, "come, sir, you must follow me to mr. kirwin's to
give an account of yourself."

"who is mr. kirwin?  why am i to give an account of myself?  is not
this a free country?"

"ay, sir, free enough for honest folks.  mr. kirwin is a magistrate,
and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was
found murdered here last night."

this answer startled me, but i presently recovered myself.  i was
innocent; that could easily be proved; accordingly i followed my
conductor in silence and was led to one of the best houses 
 
 ___________________________
 

that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
was very probable that i had beaten about for many hours and had been
obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which i had departed.
besides, they observed that it appeared that i had brought the body
from another place, and it was likely that as i did not appear to know
the shore, i might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance
of the town of ---- from the place where i had deposited the corpse.

mr. kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that i should be taken
into the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be
observed what effect the sight of it would produce upon me.  this idea
was probably suggested by the extreme agitation i had exhibited when
the mode of the murder had been described.  i was accordingly
conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn.  i
could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken
place during this eventfu
 
 ___________________________
 
e room in strong convulsions.  a fever succeeded
to this.  i lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as i
afterwards heard, were frightful; i called myself the murderer of
william, of justine, and of clerval.  sometimes i entreated my
attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was
tormented; and at others i felt the fingers of the monster already
grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror.
fortunately, as i spoke my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood
me; but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the
other witnesses.  why did i not die?  more miserable than man ever was
before, why did i not sink into forgetfulness and rest?  death snatches
away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doting parents;
how many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of
health and hope, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the
tomb!  of what materials was i made that i could thus re
 
 ___________________________
 
; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed
me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me.  the
physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared
them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the
second.  who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the
hangman who would gain his fee?

these were my first reflections, but i soon learned that mr. kirwin had
shown me extreme kindness.  he had caused the best room in the prison
to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who
had provided a physician and a nurse.  it is true, he seldom came to
see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of
every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and
miserable ravings of a murderer.  he came, therefore, sometimes to see
that i was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long
 
 ___________________________
 
, while i was gradually recovering, i was seated in
a chair, my eyes half open and my cheeks livid like those in death.  i
was overcome by gloom and misery and often reflected i had better seek
death than desire to remain in a world which to me was replete with
wretchedness.  at one time i considered whether i should not declare
myself guilty and suffer the penalty of the law, less innocent than
poor justine had been.  such were my thoughts when the door of my
apartment was opened and mr. kirwin entered.  his countenance expressed
sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me
in french, "i fear that this place is very shocking to you; can i do
anything to make you more comfortable?"

"i thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole
earth there is no comfort which i am capable of receiving."

"i know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to
one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune.  but you will, i
 
 ___________________________
 
 tortured as i am and
have been, can death be any evil to me?"

"nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonizing than the
strange chances that have lately occurred.  you were thrown, by some
surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality,
seized immediately, and charged with murder.  the first sight that was
presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
your path."

as mr. kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation i endured on
this retrospect of my sufferings, i also felt considerable surprise at
the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me.  i suppose some
astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hastened
to say, "immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that
were on your person were brought me, and i examined them that i might
discover some trace by which i could send to your relations an account
of your misfortune and
 
 ___________________________
 
i found several letters, and, among
others, one which i discovered from its commencement to be from your
father.  i instantly wrote to geneva; nearly two months have elapsed
since the departure of my letter.  but you are ill; even now you
tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind."

"this suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event;
tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder i am
now to lament?"

"your family is perfectly well," said mr. kirwin with gentleness; "and
someone, a friend, is come to visit you."

i know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
misery and taunt me with the death of clerval, as a new incitement for
me to comply with his hellish desires.  i put my hand before my eyes,
and cried out in agony, "oh! take him away!  i cannot see him; for
god's sake, do not let him enter!"

mr. kirwin regarded me with a troubled 
 
 ___________________________
 
you.
and poor clerval--"

the name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
great to be endured in my weak state; i shed tears.  "alas!  yes, my
father," replied i; "some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs over
me, and i must live to fulfil it, or surely i should have died on the
coffin of henry."

we were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
could ensure tranquillity.  mr. kirwin came in and insisted that my
strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion.  but the
appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and i
gradually recovered my health.

as my sickness quitted me, i was absorbed by a gloomy and black
melancholy that nothing could dissipate.  the image of clerval was
forever before me, ghastly and murdered.  more than once the agitation
into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous
relapse.  alas!  why di
 
 ___________________________
 
nk to rest.  then the appearance of death was distant, although the
wish was ever present to my thoughts; and i often sat for hours
motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that
might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.

the season of the assizes approached.  i had already been three months
in prison, and although i was still weak and in continual danger of a
relapse, i was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the country
town where the court was held.  mr. kirwin charged himself with every
care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence.  i was spared
the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not
brought before the court that decides on life and death.  the grand
jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that i was on the orkney
islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight
after my removal i was liberated from prison.

my father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a
cr