cient?  i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific
age, to find a disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus.  my dear
sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew."

so saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books
treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and
dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural
philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, a fellow
professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he
omitted.

i returned home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long
considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but i
returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any
shape.  m. krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a
repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in
favour of his pursuits.  in rather a too philosophical and
 
 ___________________________
 
d with the localities and the principal residents in my new
abode.  but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the information
which m. krempe had given me concerning the lectures.  and although i
could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver
sentences out of a pulpit, i recollected what he had said of m.
waldman, whom i had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.

partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the
lecturing room, which m. waldman entered shortly after.  this professor
was very unlike his colleague.  he appeared about fifty years of age,
but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey
hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were
nearly black.  his person was short but remarkably erect and his voice
the sweetest i had ever heard.  he began his lecture by a
recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the various improvements
made by different men of learning, pronouncing
 
 ___________________________
 
the deepest mysteries of creation.

i closed not my eyes that night.  my internal being was in a state of
insurrection and turmoil; i felt that order would thence arise, but i
had no power to produce it.  by degrees, after the morning's dawn,
sleep came.  i awoke, and my yesternight's thoughts were as a dream.
there only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to
devote myself to a science for which i believed myself to possess a
natural talent.  on the same day i paid m. waldman a visit.  his
manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public,
for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in
his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness.  i
gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as i had
given to his fellow professor.  he heard with attention the little
narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of cornelius
agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. k
 
 ___________________________
 
stened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption
or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my
prejudices against modern chemists; i expressed myself in measured
terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his
instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have
made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended
labours.  i requested his advice concerning the books i ought to
procure.

"i am happy," said m. waldman, "to have gained a disciple; and if your
application equals your ability, i have no doubt of your success.
chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest
improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that i
have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, i have not
neglected the other branches of science.  a man would make but a very
sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge
alone.  if your wish is to become really a ma
 
 ___________________________
 
n the
most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
which modern inquirers have written on these subjects.  i attended the
lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
university, and i found even in m. krempe a great deal of sound sense
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive
physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable.  in
m. waldman i found a true friend.  his gentleness was never tinged by
dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and
good nature that banished every idea of pedantry.  in a thousand ways
he smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse
inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension.  my application was at
first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as i proceeded and
soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the
light of m
 
 ___________________________
 
orning whilst i was yet engaged in my laboratory.

as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress
was rapid.  my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and
my proficiency that of the masters.  professor krempe often asked me,
with a sly smile, how cornelius agrippa went on, whilst m. waldman
expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress.  two years
passed in this manner, during which i paid no visit to geneva, but was
engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which i
hoped to make.  none but those who have experienced them can conceive
of the enticements of science.  in other studies you go as far as
others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in
a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
a mind 
 
 ___________________________
 
, i had conceived a violent antipathy even
to the name of natural philosophy.  when i was otherwise quite restored
to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony
of my nervous symptoms.  henry saw this, and had removed all my
apparatus from my view.  he had also changed my apartment; for he
perceived that i had acquired a dislike for the room which had
previously been my laboratory.  but these cares of clerval were made of
no avail when i visited the professors.  m. waldman inflicted torture
when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress i
had made in the sciences.  he soon perceived that i disliked the
subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to
modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science
itself, with a desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing me out.  what
could i do?  he meant to please, and he tormented me.  i felt as if he
had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instrumen
 
 ___________________________
 
d to draw my secret from
me; and although i loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence
that knew no bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in
him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which
i feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.

m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me
even more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman.  "d--n
the fellow!" cried he; "why, m. clerval, i assure you he has outstript
us all.  ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true.  a
youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in cornelius agrippa as
firmly as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the
university; and if he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of
countenance.--ay, ay," continued he, observing my face expressive of
suffering, "m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young
man