s:
he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that
filled his soul.  the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
astonishing:  his conversation was full of imagination; and very often,
in imitation of the persian and arabic writers, he invented tales of
wonderful fancy and passion.  at other times he repeated my favourite
poems, or drew me out into arguments, which he supported with great
ingenuity.  we returned to our college on a sunday afternoon:  the
peasants were dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy.  my
own spirits were high, and i bounded along with feelings of unbridled
joy and hilarity.



chapter 7

on my return, i found the following letter from my father:--


"my dear victor,

"you have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of
your return to us; and i was at first tempted to write only a few
lines, merely mentioning the day on which i should expect you.  but
that would be a cruel kindness, a
 
 ___________________________
 
w and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
of voices as the fishermen called to one another.  i felt the silence,
although i was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
person landed close to my house.

in a few minutes after, i heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
endeavoured to open it softly.  i trembled from head to foot; i felt a
presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but i was overcome by the
sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you
in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to
the spot. presently i heard the sound of footsteps along the passage;
the door opened, and the wretch whom i dreaded appeared.

shutting the door, he approached me and said in a smothered voice, "you
have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you intend?
do you dare t
 
 ___________________________
 
next morning, at daybreak, i summoned sufficient courage and unlocked
the door of my laboratory.  the remains of the half-finished creature,
whom i had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and i almost felt as
if i had mangled the living flesh of a human being.  i paused to
collect myself and then entered the chamber.  with trembling hand i
conveyed the instruments out of the room, but i reflected that i ought
not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion
of the peasants; and i accordingly put them into a basket, with a great
quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into
the sea that very night; and in the meantime i sat upon the beach,
employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.

nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the daemon.  i had
before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with
whatever consequences, mu
 
 ___________________________
 
re than
mortal speed.

i pursued him, and for many months this has been my task.  guided by a
slight clue, i followed the windings of the rhone, but vainly.  the
blue mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, i saw the fiend
enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the black sea.  i
took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, i know not how.

amidst the wilds of tartary and russia, although he still evaded me, i
have ever followed in his track.  sometimes the peasants, scared by
this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself,
who feared that if i lost all trace of him i should despair and die,
left some mark to guide me.  the snows descended on my head, and i saw
the print of his huge step on the white plain.  to you first entering
on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
what i have felt and still feel?  cold, want, and fatigue were the
least pains which i was destined to endure; i was cursed by so
 
 ___________________________
 
me devil
and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good
followed and directed my steps and when i most murmured would suddenly
extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties.  sometimes,
when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast
was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me.  the
fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
i will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that i had
invoked to aid me.  often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and
i was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
few drops that revived me, and vanish.

i followed, when i could, the courses of the rivers; but the daemon
generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
country chiefly collected.  in other places human beings were seldom
seen, and i gen
 
 ___________________________
 
l that period shall arrive."

scoffing devil!  again do i vow vengeance; again do i devote thee,
miserable fiend, to torture and death.  never will i give up my search
until he or i perish; and then with what ecstasy shall i join my
elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the
reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!

as i still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and
the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support.  the
peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy
ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from
their hiding-places to seek for prey.  the rivers were covered with
ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus i was cut off from my
chief article of maintenance.  the triumph of my enemy increased with
the difficulty of my labours.  one inscription that he left was in
these words:  "prepare!  your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs
and provide food, f