ctable
employment in a merchant's house.  the interval was, consequently, spent
in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had
leisure for reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind
that at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable
of any exertion.

his daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw
with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that
there was no other prospect of support.  but caroline beaufort
possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support
her in her adversity.  she procured plain work; she plaited straw and
by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to
support life.

several months passed in this manner.  her father grew worse; her time
was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence
decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving
her an orphan and a beggar.  this last blow overcame 
 
 ___________________________
 

told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
to attend their usual hour of rising.

six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace,
and i stood in the same place where i had last embraced my father
before my departure for ingolstadt.  beloved and venerable parent!  he
still remained to me.  i gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood
over the mantel-piece.  it was an historical subject, painted at my
father's desire, and represented caroline beaufort in an agony of
despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead father.  her garb was
rustic, and her cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty,
that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity.  below this picture was a
miniature of william; and my tears flowed when i looked upon it.  while
i was thus engaged, ernest entered:  he had heard me arrive, and
hastened to welcome me:  "welcome, my dearest victor," said he.  "ah! i
wish you had come three months ago, and then you would have