o shed radiance from her
looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the
hills.  the apparition was soon explained.  with his permission my
mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her.
they were fond of the sweet orphan.  her presence had seemed a blessing
to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want
when providence afforded her such powerful protection.  they consulted
their village priest, and the result was that elizabeth lavenza became
the inmate of my parents' house--my more than sister--the beautiful and
adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.

everyone loved elizabeth.  the passionate and almost reverential
attachment with which all regarded her became, while i shared it, my
pride and my delight.  on the evening previous to her being brought to
my home, my mother had said playfully, "i have a pretty present for my
victor--tomorrow he shall have it."  and when, on the morrow, she
presented e
 
 ___________________________
 
man, madame tavernier.  she is a widow, and much
older than manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with
everybody.

"i have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety
returns upon me as i conclude.  write, dearest victor,--one line--one
word will be a blessing to us.  ten thousand thanks to henry for his
kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely
grateful.  adieu!  my cousin; take care of your self; and, i entreat
you, write!

"elizabeth lavenza.

"geneva, march 18, 17--."


"dear, dear elizabeth!" i exclaimed, when i had read her letter:  "i
will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety they must feel."
i wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but my convalescence
had commenced, and proceeded regularly.  in another fortnight i was
able to leave my chamber.

one of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the
several professors of the university.  in doing this, i underwent a
kind of rough
 
 ___________________________
 
 and if you
obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth
will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.

"do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain.  my uncle
will send me news of your health, and if i see but one smile on your
lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, i
shall need no other happiness.

                                                "elizabeth lavenza


    "geneva, may 18th, 17--"


this letter revived in my memory what i had before forgotten, the
threat of the fiend--"i will be with you on your wedding-night!" such
was my sentence, and on that night would the daemon employ every art to
destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which promised
partly to console my sufferings.  on that night he had determined to
consummate his crimes by my death.  well, be it so; a deadly struggle
would then assuredly take place, in whi