le alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken
place since you left us.  the blue lake and snow-clad mountains--they
never change; and i think our placid home and our contented hearts are
regulated by the same immutable laws.  my trifling occupations take up
my time and amuse me, and i am rewarded for any exertions by seeing
none but happy, kind faces around me.  since you left us, but one
change has taken place in our little household.  do you remember on
what occasion justine moritz entered our family?  probably you do not;
i will relate her history, therefore in a few words.  madame moritz,
her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom justine was the
third.  this girl had always been the favourite of her father, but
through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and
after the death of m. moritz, treated her very ill.  my aunt observed
this, and when justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother
to allow her to live at our house.  t
 
 ___________________________
 
!  good god! how can that be? who could attempt
to pursue him?  it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw.  i saw him too; he
was free last night!"

"i do not know what you mean," replied my brother, in accents of
wonder, "but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery.  no
one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be
convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence.  indeed, who would credit
that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?"

"justine moritz!  poor, poor girl, is she the accused?  but it is
wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, ernest?"

"no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so
confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, i fear,
leaves no hope for doubt.
 
 ___________________________
 
rd the
dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she
should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed.  she was no longer
that happy creature who in earlier youth wandered with me on the banks
of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects.  the first
of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited
her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles.

"when i reflect, my dear cousin," said she, "on the miserable death of
justine moritz, i no longer see the world and its works as they before
appeared to me.  before, i looked upon the accounts of vice and
injustice that i read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other's blood.  yet i am
certainly unjust.  everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
if she could have 