to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing.  at length the
high white steeple of the town met my eyes.  i alighted and was
conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as i pleased.

the next morning i delivered my letters of introduction and paid a
visit to some of the principal professors.  chance--or rather the evil
influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway
over me from the moment i turned my reluctant steps from my father's
door--led me first to m. krempe, professor of natural philosophy.  he
was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. he
asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different
branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy.  i replied
carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my
alchemists as the principal authors i had studied.  the professor
stared.  "have you," he said, "really spent your time in studying such
nonsense?"

i replied in the affirmative.  "eve
 
 ___________________________
 
ry minute," continued m. krempe with
warmth, "every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly
and entirely lost.  you have burdened your memory with exploded systems
and useless names.  good god!  in what desert land have you lived,
where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you
have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they
are ancient?  i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific
age, to find a disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus.  my dear
 
 ___________________________
 
dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural
philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, a fellow
professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he
omitted.

i returned home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long
considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but i
returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any
shape.  m. krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a
repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in
favour of his pursuits.  in rather a too philosophical and connected a
strain, perhaps, i have given an account of the conclusions i had come
to concerning them in my early years.  as a child i had not been
content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural
science.  with a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my
extreme youth and my want of
 
 ___________________________
 
he inquirer seemed to limit
itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in
science was chiefly founded.  i was required to exchange chimeras of
boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.

such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my
residence at ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new
abode.  but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the information
which m. krempe had given me concerning the lectures.  and although i
could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver
sentences out of a pulpit, i recollected what he had said of m.
waldman, whom i had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.

partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the
lecturing room, which m. waldman entered shortly after.  this professor
was very unlike his colleague.  he appeared about fifty years of age,
but with an aspect expressi
 
 ___________________________
 
dman a visit.  his
manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public,
for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in
his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness.  i
gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as i had
given to his fellow professor.  he heard with attention the little
narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of cornelius
agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had
exhibited. he said that "these were men to whose indefatigable zeal
modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
knowledge.  they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names
and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a
great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light.  the
labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever
fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind."  i
listened t
 
 ___________________________
 
d, and i took my leave.

thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.



chapter 4

from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
which modern inquirers have written on these subjects.  i attended the
lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
university, and i found even in m. krempe a great deal of sound sense
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive
physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable.  in
m. waldman i found a true friend.  his gentleness was never tinged by
dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and
good nature that banished every idea of pedantry.  in a thousand ways
he smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse
inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension.  my 
 
 ___________________________
 
cuse, his
total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn.  i
thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak.  i saw plainly
that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from
me; and although i loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence
that knew no bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in
him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which
i feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.

m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me
even more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman.  "d--n
the fellow!" cried he; "why, m. clerval, i assure you he has outstript
us all.  ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true.  a
youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in cornelius agrippa as
firmly as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the
university; and if he 
 
 ___________________________
 
is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of
countenance.--ay, ay," continued he, observing my face expressive of
suffering, "m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young
man.  young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, m.
clerval:  i was myself when young; but that wears out in a very short
time."

m. krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.

clerval had never sympathized in my tastes for natural science; and his
literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me.  he
came to the university with the design of making himself complete
master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for
the plan of life he had marked out for himself.  resolved to pursue no
inglorious career,