ips, they became livid with
the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and i thought that i
held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her
form, and i saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
i started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my
teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and
yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window
shutters, i beheld the wretch--the miserable monster whom i had
created.  he held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
may be called, were fixed on me.  his jaws opened, and he muttered some
inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks.  he might have
spoken, but i did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to
detain me, but i escaped and rushed downstairs.  i took refuge in the
courtyard belonging to the house which i inhabited, where i remained
during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the gr
 
 ___________________________
 
ient rest, as you see;
but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
end and that i am at length free."

i trembled excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to
allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night.  i walked with a
quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college.  i then reflected, and
the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my
apartment might still be there, alive and walking about.  i dreaded to
behold this monster, but i feared still more that henry should see him.
entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the
stairs, i darted up towards my own room.  my hand was already on the
lock of the door before i recollected myself.  i then paused, and a
cold shivering came over me.  i threw the door forcibly open, as
children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in
waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared.  i stepped
fearfully in:  the apartment
 
 ___________________________
 
ed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes
for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
laughter frightened and astonished him.

"my dear victor," cried he, "what, for god's sake, is the matter?  do
not laugh in that manner.  how ill you are!  what is the cause of all
this?"

"do not ask me," cried i, putting my hands before my eyes, for i
thought i saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; "he can tell.
oh, save me!  save me!"  i imagined that the monster seized me; i
struggled furiously and fell down in a fit.

poor clerval!  what must have been his feelings?  a meeting, which he
anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness.  but i
was not the witness of his grief, for i was lifeless and did not
recover my senses for a long, long time.

this was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for
several months.  during all that time henry was my only nurse.  i
afterwards learned that, knowing my father's advance
 
 ___________________________
 
hed my sickness would make
elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
disorder.  he knew that i could not have a more kind and attentive
nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he
did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest
action that he could towards them.

but i was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and
unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life.
the form of the monster on whom i had bestowed existence was forever
before my eyes, and i raved incessantly concerning him.  doubtless my
words surprised henry; he at first believed them to be the wanderings
of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which i
continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder
indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.

by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and
grieved my friend, i recovered.  i remember t
 
 ___________________________
 
lf
declared your guilt.  that report, you say, is false; and be assured,
dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment,
but your own confession."

"i did confess, but i confessed a lie.  i confessed, that i might
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
all my other sins.  the god of heaven forgive me!  ever since i was
condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced,
until i almost began to think that i was the monster that he said i
was.  he threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
i continued obdurate.  dear lady, i had none to support me; all looked
on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition.  what could i do?
in an evil hour i subscribed to a lie; and now only am i truly
miserable."

she paused, weeping, and then continued, "i thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed
aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, w
 
 ___________________________
 
and whose existence was bound up in mine.  i thought also of my
father and surviving brother; should i by my base desertion leave them
exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom i had let loose
among them?

at these moments i wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
mind only that i might afford them consolation and happiness.  but that
could not be.  remorse extinguished every hope.  i had been the author
of unalterable evils, and i lived in daily fear lest the monster whom i
had created should perpetrate some new wickedness.  i had an obscure
feeling that all was not over and that he would still commit some
signal crime, which by its enormity should almost efface the
recollection of the past.  there was always scope for fear so long as
anything i loved remained behind.  my abhorrence of this fiend cannot
be conceived.  when i thought of him i gnashed my teeth, my eyes became
inflamed, and i ardently wished to extinguish that life which i had so
thoug
 
 ___________________________
 
and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles.

"when i reflect, my dear cousin," said she, "on the miserable death of
justine moritz, i no longer see the world and its works as they before
appeared to me.  before, i looked upon the accounts of vice and
injustice that i read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other's blood.  yet i am
certainly unjust.  everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
she would have been the most depraved of human creatures.  for the sake
of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend,
a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
it had been her own!  i could not consent to the death of any human
being, but certainly 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing things!  yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
one of us.  you purpose to kill me.  how dare you sport thus with life?
do your duty towards me, and i will do mine towards you and the rest of
mankind.  if you will comply with my conditions, i will leave them and
you at peace; but if you refuse, i will glut the maw of death, until it
be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends."

"abhorred monster!  fiend that thou art!  the tortures of hell are too
mild a vengeance for thy crimes.  wretched devil!  you reproach me with
your creation, come on, then, that i may extinguish the spark which i
so negligently bestowed."

my rage was without bounds; i sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.

he easily eluded me and said,

"be calm!  i entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred
on my devoted head.  have i no
 
 ___________________________
 
ch knowledge might enable me to make them
overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast
perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.

"i had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers--their grace, beauty,
and delicate complexions; but how was i terrified when i viewed myself
in a transparent pool!  at first i started back, unable to believe that
it was indeed i who was reflected in the mirror; and when i became
fully convinced that i was in reality the monster that i am, i was
filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
alas!  i did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable
deformity.

"as the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow
vanished, and i beheld the bare trees and the black earth.  from this
time felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of
impending famine disappeared.  their food, as i afterwards found, was
coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a
 
 ___________________________
 
!  and what was i? of
my creation and creator i was absolutely ignorant, but i knew that i
possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property.  i was, besides,
endued with a figure hideously deformed and loathsome; i was not even
of the same nature as man.  i was more agile than they and could
subsist upon coarser diet; i bore the extremes of heat and cold with
less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs.  when i looked
around i saw and heard of none like me.  was i, then, a monster, a blot
upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?

"i cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted
upon me; i tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with
knowledge.  oh, that i had forever remained in my native wood, nor
known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!

"of what a strange nature is knowledge!  it clings to the mind when it
has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock.  i wished sometimes to
sha
 
 ___________________________
 
ences.  you doubtless recollect these papers.  here they are.
everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
horrors and rendered mine indelible.  i sickened as i read.  'hateful
day when i received life!' i exclaimed in agony.  'accursed creator!
why did you form a monster so hideous that even you turned from me in
disgust?  god, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
very resemblance.  satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
and encourage him, but i am solitary and abhorred.'

"these were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
but when i contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
benevolent dispositions, i persuaded myse
 
 ___________________________
 
s self-interest, are
full of brotherly love and charity.  rely, therefore, on your hopes;
and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.'

"'they are kind--they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me.  i have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable
monster.'

"'that is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
you undeceive them?'

"'i am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that i
feel so many overwhelming terrors.  i tenderly love these friends; i
have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kindness towards them; but they believe that i wish to injure them, and
it is that prejudice which i wish to overcome.'

"'where do these friends reside?'

"'near this spot.'

"the ol
 
 ___________________________
 
 if, therefore, i could seize him and
educate him as my companion and friend, i should not be so desolate in
this peopled earth.

"urged by this impulse, i seized on the boy as he passed and drew him
towards me.  as soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before
his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; i drew his hand forcibly from his
face and said, 'child, what is the meaning of this?  i do not intend to
hurt you; listen to me.'

"he struggled violently.  'let me go,' he cried; 'monster!  ugly
wretch!  you wish to eat me and tear me to pieces.  you are an ogre.
let me go, or i will tell my papa.'

"'boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.'

"'hideous monster!  let me go.  my papa is a syndic--he is m.
frankenstein--he will punish you.  you dare not keep me.'

"'frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy--to him towards whom i have
sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.'

"the child still struggled and loaded me with epithets w
 
 ___________________________
 
t you are the cause of its excess.  if any being felt
emotions of benevolence towards me, i should return them a hundred and
a hundredfold; for that one creature's sake i would make peace with the
whole kind!  but i now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be
realized.  what i ask of you is reasonable and moderate; i demand a
creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is
small, but it is all that i can receive, and it shall content me.  it
is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that
account we shall be more attached to one another.  our lives will not
be happy, but they will be harmless and free from the misery i now
feel.  oh!  my creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards
you for one benefit!  let me see that i excite the sympathy of some
existing thing; do not deny me my request!"

i was moved.  i shuddered when i thought of the possible consequences
of my consent, but i felt that there was some justice in his
 
 ___________________________
 
n my mind a multitude of
thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion.  alas!  to me
the idea of an immediate union with my elizabeth was one of horror and
dismay.  i was bound by a solemn promise which i had not yet fulfilled
and dared not break, or if i did, what manifold miseries might not
impend over me and my devoted family!  could i enter into a festival
with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the
ground?  i must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
his mate before i allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from
which i expected peace.

i remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to
england or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers
of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
use to me in my present undertaking.  the latter method of obtaining
the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, i
had an insurmountable aversion t
 
 ___________________________
 
rful
accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to
thrill all connected with me with horror.  i was aware also that i
should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my
unearthly occupation.  i must absent myself from all i loved while thus
employed.  once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and i might be
restored to my family in peace and happiness.  my promise fulfilled,
the monster would depart forever.  or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
slavery forever.

these feelings dictated my answer to my father.  i expressed a wish to
visit england, but concealing the true reasons of this request, i
clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while i
urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
comply.  after so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that
resembled
 
 ___________________________
 
 to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to
remonstrate.  he entreated me to write often.  "i had rather be with
you," he said, "in your solitary rambles, than with these scotch
people, whom i do not know; hasten, then, my dear  friend, to return,
that i may again feel myself somewhat at home, which i cannot do in
your absence."

having parted from my friend, i determined to visit some remote spot of
scotland and finish my work in solitude.  i did not doubt but that the
monster followed me and would discover himself to me when i should have
finished, that he might receive his companion.  with this resolution i
traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of the remotest of
the orkneys as the scene of my labours.  it was a place fitted for such
a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high sides were continually
beaten upon by the waves.  the soil was barren, scarcely affording
pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants,
which cons
 
 ___________________________
 
 that the light of
day will be hateful to you.  you are my creator, but i am your master;
obey!"

"the hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
arrived.  your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but
they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in
vice.  shall i, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a daemon whose
delight is in death and wretchedness?  begone!  i am firm, and your
words will only exasperate my rage."

the monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in
the impotence of anger.  "shall each man," cried he, "find a wife for
his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and i be alone?  i had
feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
man!  you may hate, but beware!  your hours will pass in dread and
misery, and soon the bolt  will fall which must ravish from you your
happiness forever.  are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity
of my wretchedness?  
 
 ___________________________
 
or be
swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around
me.  i had already been out many hours and felt the torment of a
burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings.  i looked on the
heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only
to be replaced by others; i looked upon the sea; it was to be my grave.
"fiend," i exclaimed, "your task is already fulfilled!"  i thought of
elizabeth, of my father, and of clerval--all left behind, on whom the
monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions.  this idea
plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now,
when the scene is on the point of closing before me forever, i shudder
to reflect on it.

some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became
free from breakers.  but these gave place to a heavy swell; i felt sick
and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly i saw 
 
 ___________________________
 
 friend, my benefactor--"

the human frame could no longer support the agonies that i endured, and
i was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.  a fever succeeded
to this.  i lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as i
afterwards heard, were frightful; i called myself the murderer of
william, of justine, and of clerval.  sometimes i entreated my
attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was
tormented; and at others i felt the fingers of the monster already
grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror.
fortunately, as i spoke my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood
me; but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the
other witnesses.  why did i not die?  more miserable than man ever was
before, why did i not sink into forgetfulness and rest?  death snatches
away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doting parents;
how many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of

 
 ___________________________
 
a dungeon or a
palace were alike hateful.  the cup of life was poisoned forever, and
although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, i
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me.  sometimes
they were the expressive eyes of henry, languishing in death, the dark
orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as i
first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt.

my father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection.  he talked
of geneva, which i should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but
these words only drew deep groans from me.  sometimes, indeed, i felt a
wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved
cousin or longed, with a devouring maladie du pays, to see once more
the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to me in early
childhood; but my genera
 
 ___________________________
 
g to the dashing of
the waves.  i hailed the darkness that shut ireland from my sight, and
my pulse beat with a feverish joy when i reflected that i should soon
see geneva.  the past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream;
yet the vessel in which i was, the wind that blew me from the detested
shore of ireland, and the sea which surrounded me told me too forcibly
that i was deceived by no vision and that clerval, my friend and
dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my
creation.  i repassed, in my memory, my whole life--my quiet happiness
while residing with my family in geneva, the death of my mother, and my
departure for ingolstadt.  i remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm
that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy, and i called to
mind the night in which he first lived.  i was unable to pursue the
train of thought; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and i wept
bitterly.  ever since my recovery from the fever i had been in th
 
 ___________________________
 
enniless, and alone, but free. such would be my liberty except that in
my elizabeth i possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of
remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.

sweet and beloved elizabeth!  i read and reread her letter, and some
softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal
dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
angel's arm bared to drive me from all hope.  yet i would die to make
her happy.  if the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable;
yet, again, i considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate.  my
destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer
should suspect that i postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would
surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge.

he had vowed to be with me on my wedding-night, yet he did not consider
that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show
me that he was not yet sati
 
 ___________________________
 
even cheerful
countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the
ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as i imagined,
the seal to my fate.

great god!  if for one instant i had thought what might be the hellish
intention of my fiendish adversary, i would rather have banished myself
forever from my native country and wandered a friendless outcast over
the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage.  but, as if
possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real
intentions; and when i thought that i had prepared only my own death, i
hastened that of a far dearer victim.

as the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from
cowardice or a prophetic feeling, i felt my heart sink within me.  but
i concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought
smiles and joy to the countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the
ever-watchful and nicer eye of elizabeth.  she looked forward to our
union with 
 
 ___________________________
 

the fiend's grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue
from her lips.  while i still hung over her in the agony of despair, i
happened to look up.  the windows of the room had before been darkened,
and i felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon
illuminate the chamber.  the shutters had been thrown back, and with a
sensation of horror not to be described, i saw at the open window a
figure the most hideous and abhorred.  a grin was on the face of the
monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed
towards the corpse of my wife.  i rushed towards the window, and
drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me, leaped from
his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into
the lake.

the report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. i pointed to
the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with
boats; nets were cast, but in vain.  after passing several hours, we
returned ho
 
 ___________________________
 
ke and found myself in a
dungeon.  melancholy followed, but by degrees i gained a clear
conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my
prison.  for they had called me mad, and during many months, as i
understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.

liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had i not, as i
awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge.  as the
memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, i began to reflect on their
cause--the monster whom i had created, the miserable daemon whom i had
sent abroad into the world for my destruction.  i was possessed by a
maddening rage when i thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed
that i might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal
revenge on his cursed head.

nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; i began to
reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about
a month after my release, i repaired to a criminal judge in the town
 
 ___________________________
 
w inhabit."

"i do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which i inhabit, and if he
has indeed taken refuge in the alps, he may be hunted like the chamois
and destroyed as a beast of prey.  but i perceive your thoughts; you do
not credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
punishment which is his desert." as i spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes;
the magistrate was intimidated.  "you are mistaken," said he.  "i will
exert myself, and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured
that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes.  but i
fear, from what you have yourself described to be his properties, that
this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is
pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment."

"that cannot be; but all that i can say will be of little avail.  my
revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while i allow it to be a vice, i
confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul.  my rage
 
 ___________________________
 
and by thee, o
night, and the spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the daemon who
caused this misery, until he or i shall perish in mortal conflict.  for
this purpose i will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will
i again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which
otherwise should vanish from my eyes forever.  and i call on you,
spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to
aid and conduct me in my work.  let the cursed and hellish monster
drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now torments me."  i
had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured
me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my
devotion, but the furies possessed me as i concluded, and rage choked
my utterance.

i was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish
laugh.  it rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed
it, and i felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and
 
 ___________________________
 
 not whether the
fiend possessed the same advantages, but i found that, as before i had
daily lost ground in the pursuit, i now gained on him, so much so that
when i first saw the ocean he was but one day's journey in advance, and
i hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach.  with new
courage, therefore, i pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched
hamlet on the seashore.  i inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
fiend and gained accurate information.  a gigantic monster, they said,
had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of
his terrific appearance.  he had carried off their store of winter
food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a
numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same
night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his
journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they
conjec
 
 ___________________________
 
etchedness.  sometimes he commanded his
countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a
tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.

his tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest
truth, yet i own to you that the letters of felix and safie, which he
showed me, and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship,
brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than
his asseverations, however earnest and connected.  such a monster has,
then, really existence!  i cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise
and admiration.  sometimes i endeavoured to gain from frankenstein the
particulars of his creature's formation, but on this point he was
impenetrable. "are you mad, my friend?" said he.  "or whither does your
senseless curiosity lead you?  would you also create
 
 ___________________________
 
estroying all thou lovedst.  alas!  he is cold, he cannot answer
me." his voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had
suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in
destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and
compassion.  i approached this tremendous being; i dared not again
raise my eyes to his face, there was something so scaring and unearthly
in his ugliness.  i attempted to speak, but the words died away on my
lips.  the monster continued to utter wild and incoherent
self-reproaches.  at length i gathered resolution to address him in a
pause of the tempest of his passion.

"your repentance," i said, "is now superfluous. if you had listened to
the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had
urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, frankenstein would
yet have lived."

"and do you dream?" said the daemon.  "do you think that i was then
dead to agony and remorse?  he," he continu