 spoke of her to each other,
and often when they spoke to her.

"you are going to be sent home," basil said to her, "at the end of the
week.  and we're glad of it."

"i am glad of it, too," answered mary.  "where is home?"

"she doesn't know where home is!" said basil, with seven-year-old
scorn.  "it's england, of course.  our grandmama lives there and our
sister mabel was sent to her last year.  you are not going to your
grandmama.  you have none.  you are going to your uncle.  his name is
mr. archibald craven."

"i don't know anything about him," snapped mary.

"i know you don't," basil answered.  "you don't know anything.  girls
never do.  i heard father and mother talking about him.  he lives in a
great, big, desolate old house in the country and no one goes near him.
he's so cross he won't let them, and they wouldn't come if he would let
them.  he's a hunchback, and he's horrid." "i don't believe you," said
mary; and she turned her back and stuck her fingers in her ears,
because she would not lis
 
 ___________________________
 
ten any more.

but she thought over it a great deal afterward; and when mrs. crawford
told her that night that she was going to sail away to england in a few
days and go to her uncle, mr. archibald craven, who lived at
misselthwaite manor, she looked so stony and stubbornly uninterested
that they did not know what to think about her.  they tried to be kind
to her, but she only turned her face away when mrs. crawford attempted
to kiss her, and held herself stiffly when mr. crawford patted her
shoulder.

"she is such a plain child," mrs. crawford said pityingly, afterward.
"and her mother was such a pretty creature.  she had a very pretty
manner, too, and mary has the most unattractive ways i ever
 
 ___________________________
 
ittle thing.  think of the servants running away and leaving her all
alone in that deserted bungalow.  colonel mcgrew said he nearly jumped
out of his skin when he opened the door and found her standing by
herself in the middle of the room."

mary made the long voyage to england under the care of an officer's
wife, who was taking her children to leave them in a boarding-school.
she was very much absorbed in her own little boy and girl, and was
rather glad to hand the child over to the woman mr. archibald craven
sent to meet her, in london.  the woman was his housekeeper at
misselthwaite manor, and her name was mrs. medlock.  she was a stout
woman, with very red cheeks and sharp black eyes.  she wore a very
purple dress, a black silk mantle with jet fringe on it and a black
bonnet with purple velvet flowers which stuck up and trembled when she
moved her head.  mary did not like her at all, but as she very seldom
liked people there was nothing remarkable in that; besides which it was
very evident mrs. m
 
 ___________________________
 
 imagined she was her little girl.

but mrs. medlock was not in the least disturbed by her and her
thoughts.  she was the kind of woman who would "stand no nonsense from
young ones." at least, that is what she would have said if she had been
asked.  she had not wanted to go to london just when her sister maria's
daughter was going to be married, but she had a comfortable, well paid
place as housekeeper at misselthwaite manor and the only way in which
she could keep it was to do at once what mr. archibald craven told her
to do.  she never dared even to ask a question.

"captain lennox and his wife died of the cholera," mr. craven had said
in his short, cold way.  "captain lennox was my wife's brother and i am
their daughter's guardian.  the child is to be brought here.  you must
go to london and bring her yourself."

so she packed her small trunk and made the journey.

mary sat in her corner of the railway carriage and looked plain and
fretful.  she had nothing to read or to look at, and she had folded
 
 ___________________________
 
world over to
get her a blade o' grass she wanted.  nobody thought she'd marry him,
but she did, and people said she married him for his money.  but she
didn't--she didn't," positively.  "when she died--"

mary gave a little involuntary jump.

"oh! did she die!" she exclaimed, quite without meaning to.  she had
just remembered a french fairy story she had once read called "riquet a
la houppe." it had been about a poor hunchback and a beautiful princess
and it had made her suddenly sorry for mr. archibald craven.

"yes, she died," mrs. medlock answered.  "and it made him queerer than
ever.  he cares about nobody.  he won't see people.  most of the time
he goes away, and when he is at misselthwaite he shuts himself up in
the west wing and won't let any one but pitcher see him.  pitcher's an
old fellow, but he took care of him when he was a child and he knows
his ways."

it sounded like something in a book and it did not make mary feel
cheerful.  a house with a hundred rooms, nearly all shut up and with

 
 ___________________________
 
was desolate, and the
bright-breasted little bird brought a look into her sour little face
which was almost a smile.  she listened to him until he flew away.  he
was not like an indian bird and she liked him and wondered if she
should ever see him again.  perhaps he lived in the mysterious garden
and knew all about it.

perhaps it was because she had nothing whatever to do that she thought
so much of the deserted garden.  she was curious about it and wanted to
see what it was like.  why had mr. archibald craven buried the key? if
he had liked his wife so much why did he hate her garden?  she wondered
if she should ever see him, but she knew that if she did she should not
like him, and he would not like her, and that she should only stand and
stare at him and say nothing, though she should be wanting dreadfully
to ask him why he had done such a queer thing.

"people never like me and i never like people," she thought.  "and i
never can talk as the crawford children could.  they were always
talking and 
 
 ___________________________
 
d
obstinately to allow any rift of light to pierce through.  he had
forgotten and deserted his home and his duties.  when he traveled
about, darkness so brooded over him that the sight of him was a wrong
done to other people because it was as if he poisoned the air about him
with gloom.  most strangers thought he must be either half mad or a man
with some hidden crime on his soul.  he, was a tall man with a drawn
face and crooked shoulders and the name he always entered on hotel
registers was, "archibald craven, misselthwaite manor, yorkshire,
england."

he had traveled far and wide since the day he saw mistress mary in his
study and told her she might have her "bit of earth." he had been in
the most beautiful places in europe, though he had remained nowhere
more than a few days.  he had chosen the quietest and remotest spots.
he had been on the tops of mountains whose heads were in the clouds and
had looked down on other mountains when the sun rose and touched them
with such light as made it seem as 
 
 ___________________________
 
t of moss by a stream.  it was a clear little stream
which ran quite merrily along on its narrow way through the luscious
damp greenness.  sometimes it made a sound rather like very low
laughter as it bubbled over and round stones.  he saw birds come and
dip their heads to drink in it and then flick their wings and fly away.
it seemed like a thing alive and yet its tiny voice made the stillness
seem deeper.  the valley was very, very still.

as he sat gazing into the clear running of the water, archibald craven
gradually felt his mind and body both grow quiet, as quiet as the
valley itself.  he wondered if he were going to sleep, but he was not.
he sat and gazed at the sunlit water and his eyes began to see things
growing at its edge.  there was one lovely mass of blue forget-me-nots
growing so close to the stream that its leaves were wet and at these he
found himself looking as he remembered he had looked at such things
years ago.  he was actually thinking tenderly how lovely it was and
what wonders 
 
 ___________________________
 
nd clustered and the sunshine deepening
the hue of the yellowing trees made one feel that one, stood in an
embowered temple of gold.  the newcomer stood silent just as the
children had done when they came into its grayness.  he looked round
and round.

"i thought it would be dead," he said.

"mary thought so at first," said colin.  "but it came alive."

then they sat down under their tree--all but colin, who wanted to stand
while he told the story.

it was the strangest thing he had ever heard, archibald craven thought,
as it was poured forth in headlong boy fashion.  mystery and magic and
wild creatures, the weird midnight meeting--the coming of the
spring--the passion of insulted pride which had dragged the young rajah
to his feet to defy old ben weatherstaff to his face.  the odd
companionship, the play acting, the great secret so carefully kept.
the listener laughed until tears came into his eyes and sometimes tears
came into his eyes when he was not laughing.  the athlete, the
lecturer, the scien