 her to each other,
and often when they spoke to her.

"you are going to be sent home," basil said to her, "at the end of the
week.  and we're glad of it."

"i am glad of it, too," answered mary.  "where is home?"

"she doesn't know where home is!" said basil, with seven-year-old
scorn.  "it's england, of course.  our grandmama lives there and our
sister mabel was sent to her last year.  you are not going to your
grandmama.  you have none.  you are going to your uncle.  his name is
mr. archibald craven."

"i don't know anything about him," snapped mary.

"i know you don't," basil answered.  "you don't know anything.  girls
never do.  i heard father and mother talking about him.  he lives in a
great, big, desolate old house in the country and no one goes near him.
he's so cross he won't let them, and they wouldn't come if he would let
them.  he's a hunchback, and he's horrid." "i don't believe you," said
mary; and she turned her back and stuck her fingers in her ears,
because she would not lis
 
 ___________________________
 
ten any more.

but she thought over it a great deal afterward; and when mrs. crawford
told her that night that she was going to sail away to england in a few
days and go to her uncle, mr. archibald craven, who lived at
misselthwaite manor, she looked so stony and stubbornly uninterested
that they did not know what to think about her.  they tried to be kind
to her, but she only turned her face away when mrs. crawford attempted
to kiss her, and held herself stiffly when mr. crawford patted her
shoulder.

"she is such a plain child," mrs. crawford said pityingly, afterward.
"and her mother was such a pretty creature.  she had a very pretty
manner, too, and mary has the most unattractive ways i ever
 
 ___________________________
 
ng.  think of the servants running away and leaving her all
alone in that deserted bungalow.  colonel mcgrew said he nearly jumped
out of his skin when he opened the door and found her standing by
herself in the middle of the room."

mary made the long voyage to england under the care of an officer's
wife, who was taking her children to leave them in a boarding-school.
she was very much absorbed in her own little boy and girl, and was
rather glad to hand the child over to the woman mr. archibald craven
sent to meet her, in london.  the woman was his housekeeper at
misselthwaite manor, and her name was mrs. medlock.  she was a stout
woman, with very red cheeks and sharp black eyes.  she wore a very
purple dress, a black silk mantle with jet fringe on it and a black
bonnet with purple velvet flowers which stuck up and trembled when she
moved her head.  mary did not like her at all, but as she very seldom
liked people there was nothing remarkable in that; besides which it was
very evident mrs. m
 
 ___________________________
 
 she was her little girl.

but mrs. medlock was not in the least disturbed by her and her
thoughts.  she was the kind of woman who would "stand no nonsense from
young ones." at least, that is what she would have said if she had been
asked.  she had not wanted to go to london just when her sister maria's
daughter was going to be married, but she had a comfortable, well paid
place as housekeeper at misselthwaite manor and the only way in which
she could keep it was to do at once what mr. archibald craven told her
to do.  she never dared even to ask a question.

"captain lennox and his wife died of the cholera," mr. craven had said
in his short, cold way.  "captain lennox was my wife's brother and i am
their daughter's guardian.  the child is to be brought here.  you must
go to london and bring her yourself."

so she packed her small trunk and made the journey.

mary sat in her corner of the railway carriage and looked plain and
fretful.  she had nothing to read or to look at, and she had folded
 
 ___________________________
 
lar.
certainly they had never told her things.

"humph," muttered mrs. medlock, staring at her queer, unresponsive
little face.  she did not say any more for a few moments and then she
began again.

"i suppose you might as well be told something--to prepare you.  you
are going to a queer place."

mary said nothing at all, and mrs. medlock looked rather discomfited by
her apparent indifference, but, after taking a breath, she went on.

"not but that it's a grand big place in a gloomy way, and mr. craven's
proud of it in his way--and that's gloomy enough, too.  the house is
six hundred years old and it's on the edge of the moor, and there's
near a hundred rooms in it, though most of them's shut up and locked.
and there's pictures and fine old furniture and things that's been
there for ages, and there's a big park round it and gardens and trees
with branches trailing to the ground--some of them." she paused and
took another breath.  "but there's nothing else," she ended suddenly.

mary had begun
 
 ___________________________
 
r to
get her a blade o' grass she wanted.  nobody thought she'd marry him,
but she did, and people said she married him for his money.  but she
didn't--she didn't," positively.  "when she died--"

mary gave a little involuntary jump.

"oh! did she die!" she exclaimed, quite without meaning to.  she had
just remembered a french fairy story she had once read called "riquet a
la houppe." it had been about a poor hunchback and a beautiful princess
and it had made her suddenly sorry for mr. archibald craven.

"yes, she died," mrs. medlock answered.  "and it made him queerer than
ever.  he cares about nobody.  he won't see people.  most of the time
he goes away, and when he is at misselthwaite he shuts himself up in
the west wing and won't let any one but pitcher see him.  pitcher's an
old fellow, but he took care of him when he was a child and he knows
his ways."

it sounded like something in a book and it did not make mary feel
cheerful.  a house with a hundred rooms, nearly all shut up and with

 
 ___________________________
 
 and by running in and out and going to
parties as she had done in frocks "full of lace." but she was not there
any more.

"you needn't expect to see him, because ten to one you won't," said
mrs. medlock.  "and you mustn't expect that there will be people to
talk to you.  you'll have to play about and look after yourself.
you'll be told what rooms you can go into and what rooms you're to keep
out of.  there's gardens enough.  but when you're in the house don't go
wandering and poking about.  mr. craven won't have it."

"i shall not want to go poking about," said sour little mary and just
as suddenly as she had begun to be rather sorry for mr. archibald
craven she began to cease to be sorry and to think he was unpleasant
enough to deserve all that had happened to him.

and she turned her face toward the streaming panes of the window of the
railway carriage and gazed out at the gray rain-storm which looked as
if it would go on forever and ever.  she watched it so long and
steadily that the gray
 
 ___________________________
 
thy
clothes if tha'll get out o' bed.  if th' buttons are at th' back tha'
cannot button them up tha'self."

when mary at last decided to get up, the clothes martha took from the
wardrobe were not the ones she had worn when she arrived the night
before with mrs. medlock.

"those are not mine," she said.  "mine are black."

she looked the thick white wool coat and dress over, and added with
cool approval:

"those are nicer than mine."

"these are th' ones tha' must put on," martha answered.  "mr. craven
ordered mrs. medlock to get 'em in london.  he said 'i won't have a
child dressed in black wanderin' about like a lost soul,' he said.
'it'd make the place sadder than it is.  put color on her.' mother she
said she knew what he meant.  mother always knows what a body means.
she doesn't hold with black hersel'."

"i hate black things," said mary.

the dressing process was one which taught them both something.  martha
had "buttoned up" her little sisters and brothers but she had never
seen a chil
 
 ___________________________
 
d a pair of stout little boots
and she showed her her way downstairs.

"if tha' goes round that way tha'll come to th' gardens," she said,
pointing to a gate in a wall of shrubbery.  "there's lots o' flowers in
summer-time, but there's nothin' bloomin' now." she seemed to hesitate
a second before she added, "one of th' gardens is locked up.  no one
has been in it for ten years."

"why?" asked mary in spite of herself.  here was another locked door
added to the hundred in the strange house.

"mr. craven had it shut when his wife died so sudden.  he won't let no
one go inside.  it was her garden.  he locked th' door an' dug a hole
and buried th' key.  there's mrs. medlock's bell ringing--i must run."

after she was gone mary turned down the walk which led to the door in
the shrubbery.  she could not help thinking about the garden which no
one had been into for ten years.  she wondered what it would look like
and whether there were any flowers still alive in it.  when she had
passed through the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ate, and the
bright-breasted little bird brought a look into her sour little face
which was almost a smile.  she listened to him until he flew away.  he
was not like an indian bird and she liked him and wondered if she
should ever see him again.  perhaps he lived in the mysterious garden
and knew all about it.

perhaps it was because she had nothing whatever to do that she thought
so much of the deserted garden.  she was curious about it and wanted to
see what it was like.  why had mr. archibald craven buried the key? if
he had liked his wife so much why did he hate her garden?  she wondered
if she should ever see him, but she knew that if she did she should not
like him, and he would not like her, and that she should only stand and
stare at him and say nothing, though she should be wanting dreadfully
to ask him why he had done such a queer thing.

"people never like me and i never like people," she thought.  "and i
never can talk as the crawford children could.  they were always
talking and 
 
 ___________________________
 
em. watch him peckin' about there an' lookin'
round at us now an' again.  he knows we're talkin' about him."

it was the queerest thing in the world to see the old fellow.  he
looked at the plump little scarlet-waistcoated bird as if he were both
proud and fond of him.

"he's a conceited one," he chuckled.  "he likes to hear folk talk about
him.  an' curious--bless me, there never was his like for curiosity an'
meddlin'. he's always comin' to see what i'm plantin'. he knows all th'
things mester craven never troubles hissel' to find out.  he's th' head
gardener, he is."

the robin hopped about busily pecking the soil and now and then stopped
and looked at them a little.  mary thought his black dewdrop eyes gazed
at her with great curiosity.  it really seemed as if he were finding
out all about her.  the queer feeling in her heart increased.  "where
did the rest of the brood fly to?" she asked.

"there's no knowin'. the old ones turn 'em out o' their nest an' make
'em fly an' they're scattered
 
 ___________________________
 
f the orchard wall,
but she only found what she had found before--that there was no door in
it.  then she ran through the kitchen-gardens again and out into the
walk outside the long ivy-covered wall, and she walked to the end of it
and looked at it, but there was no door; and then she walked to the
other end, looking again, but there was no door.

"it's very queer," she said.  "ben weatherstaff said there was no door
and there is no door.  but there must have been one ten years ago,
because mr. craven buried the key."

this gave her so much to think of that she began to be quite interested
and feel that she was not sorry that she had come to misselthwaite
manor.  in india she had always felt hot and too languid to care much
about anything.  the fact was that the fresh wind from the moor had
begun to blow the cobwebs out of her young brain and to waken her up a
little.

she stayed out of doors nearly all day, and when she sat down to her
supper at night she felt hungry and drowsy and comforta
 
 ___________________________
 
ble.  she did
not feel cross when martha chattered away.  she felt as if she rather
liked to hear her, and at last she thought she would ask her a
question.  she asked it after she had finished her supper and had sat
down on the hearth-rug before the fire.

"why did mr. craven hate the garden?" she said.

she had made martha stay with her and martha had not objected at all.
she was very young, and used to a crowded cottage full of brothers and
sisters, and she found it dull in the great servants' hall downstairs
where the footman and upper-housemaids made fun of her yorkshire speech
and looked upon her as a common little thing, and sat and whispered
among themselves.  martha liked to talk, and the strange child who had
lived in india, and been waited upon by "blacks,
 
 ___________________________
 
o one could see were
buffeting it and beating at the walls and windows to try to break in.
but one knew he could not get in, and somehow it made one feel very
safe and warm inside a room with a red coal fire.

"but why did he hate it so?" she asked, after she had listened.  she
intended to know if martha did.

then martha gave up her store of knowledge.

"mind," she said, "mrs. medlock said it's not to be talked about.
there's lots o' things in this place that's not to be talked over.
that's mr. craven's orders.  his troubles are none servants' business,
he says.  but for th' garden he wouldn't be like he is.  it was mrs.
craven's garden that she had made when first they were married an' she
just loved it, an' they used to 'tend the flowers themselves.  an' none
o' th' gardeners was ever let to go in.  him an' her used to go in an'
shut th' door an' stay there hours an' hours, readin' and talkin'. an'
she was just a bit of a girl an' there was an old tree with a branch
bent like a seat on it.
 
 ___________________________
 
their
heads.  would tha' really do that, miss? it would be same as a wild
beast show like we heard they had in york once."

"india is quite different from yorkshire," mary said slowly, as she
thought the matter over.  "i never thought of that.  did dickon and
your mother like to hear you talk about me?"

"why, our dickon's eyes nearly started out o' his head, they got that
round," answered martha.  "but mother, she was put out about your
seemin' to be all by yourself like.  she said, 'hasn't mr. craven got
no governess for her, nor no nurse?' and i said, 'no, he hasn't, though
mrs. medlock says he will when he thinks of it, but she says he mayn't
think of it for two or three years.'"

"i don't want a governess," said mary sharply.

"but mother says you ought to be learnin' your book by this time an'
you ought to have a woman to look after you, an' she says: 'now,
martha, you just think how you'd feel yourself, in a big place like
that, wanderin' about all alone, an' no mother.  you do your be
 
 ___________________________
 
 the spring was here now," said mary.  "i want to see all the
things that grow in england."

she had finished her dinner and gone to her favorite seat on the
hearth-rug.

"i wish--i wish i had a little spade," she said.  "whatever does tha'
want a spade for?" asked martha, laughing.  "art tha' goin' to take to
diggin'? i must tell mother that, too."

mary looked at the fire and pondered a little.  she must be careful if
she meant to keep her secret kingdom.  she wasn't doing any harm, but
if mr. craven found out about the open door he would be fearfully angry
and get a new key and lock it up forevermore.  she really could not
bear that.

"this is such a big lonely place," she said slowly, as if she were
turning matters over in her mind.  "the house is lonely, and the park
is lonely, and the gardens are lonely.  so many places seem shut up.  i
never did many things in india, but there were more people to look
at--natives and soldiers marching by--and sometimes bands playing, and
my ayah told m
 
 ___________________________
 
 her a b c. children's as good as
'rithmetic to set you findin' out things.'"

"how much would a spade cost--a little one?" mary asked.

"well," was martha's reflective answer, "at thwaite village there's a
shop or so an' i saw little garden sets with a spade an' a rake an' a
fork all tied together for two shillings.  an' they was stout enough to
work with, too."

"i've got more than that in my purse," said mary.  "mrs. morrison gave
me five shillings and mrs. medlock gave me some money from mr. craven."

"did he remember thee that much?" exclaimed martha.

"mrs. medlock said i was to have a shilling a week to spend.  she gives
me one every saturday.  i didn't know what to spend it on."

"my word! that's riches," said martha.  "tha' can buy anything in th'
world tha' wants.  th' rent of our cottage is only one an' threepence
an' it's like pullin' eye-teeth to get it.  now i've just thought of
somethin'," putting her hands on her hips.

"what?" said mary eagerly.

"in the shop at thwaite they 
 
 ___________________________
 
 "has the scullery-maid had the toothache again
today?"

martha certainly started slightly.

"what makes thee ask that?" she said.

"because when i waited so long for you to come back i opened the door
and walked down the corridor to see if you were coming.  and i heard
that far-off crying again, just as we heard it the other night.  there
isn't a wind today, so you see it couldn't have been the wind."

"eh!" said martha restlessly.  "tha' mustn't go walkin' about in
corridors an' listenin'. mr. craven would be that there angry there's
no knowin' what he'd do."

"i wasn't listening," said mary.  "i was just waiting for you--and i
heard it.  that's three times."

"my word! there's mrs. medlock's bell," said martha, and she almost ran
out of the room.

"it's the strangest house any one ever lived in," said mary drowsily,
as she dropped her head on the cushioned seat of the armchair near her.
fresh air, and digging, and skipping-rope had made her feel so
comfortably tired that she fell asleep.


 
 ___________________________
 
 only one moment when mary was frightened.  this
was when she began to ask where the flowers were to be planted.

"who did tha' ask about it?" she inquired.

"i haven't asked anybody yet," said mary, hesitating.  "well, i
wouldn't ask th' head gardener.  he's too grand, mr. roach is."

"i've never seen him," said mary.  "i've only seen undergardeners and
ben weatherstaff."

"if i was you, i'd ask ben weatherstaff," advised martha.  "he's not
half as bad as he looks, for all he's so crabbed.  mr. craven lets him
do what he likes because he was here when mrs. craven was alive, an' he
used to make her laugh.  she liked him.  perhaps he'd find you a corner
somewhere out o' the way."

"if it was out of the way and no one wanted it, no one could mind my
having it, could they?" mary said anxiously.

"there wouldn't be no reason," answered martha.  "you wouldn't do no
harm."

mary ate her dinner as quickly as she could and when she rose from the
table she was going to run to her room to put on her ha
 
 ___________________________
 
t again, but
martha stopped her.

"i've got somethin' to tell you," she said.  "i thought i'd let you eat
your dinner first.  mr. craven came back this mornin' and i think he
wants to see you."

mary turned quite pale.

"oh!" she said.  "why! why! he didn't want to see me when i came.  i
heard pitcher say he didn't." "well," explained martha, "mrs. medlock
says it's because o' mother.  she was walkin' to thwaite village an'
she met him.  she'd never spoke to him before, but mrs. craven had been
to our cottage two or three times.  he'd forgot, but mother hadn't an'
she made bold to stop him.  i don't know what she said to him about you
but she said somethin' as put him in th' mind to see you before he goes
away again, tomorrow."

"oh!" cried mary, "is he going away tomorrow? i am so glad!"

"he's goin' for a long time.  he mayn't come back till autumn or
winter.  he's goin' to travel in foreign places.  he's always doin' it."

"oh! i'm so glad--so glad!" said mary thankfully.

 
 ___________________________
 
hink he will want to see--"

she did not finish the sentence, because the door opened, and mrs.
medlock walked in.  she had on her best black dress and cap, and her
collar was fastened with a large brooch with a picture of a man's face
on it.  it was a colored photograph of mr. medlock who had died years
ago, and she always wore it when she was dressed up.  she looked
nervous and excited.

"your hair's rough," she said quickly.  "go and brush it.  martha, help
her to slip on her best dress.  mr. craven sent me to bring her to him
in his study."

all the pink left mary's cheeks.  her heart began to thump and she felt
herself changing into a stiff, plain, silent child again.  she did not
even answer mrs. medlock, but turned and walked into her bedroom,
followed by martha.  she said nothing while her dress was changed, and
her hair brushed, and after she was quite tidy she followed mrs.
medlock down the corridors, in silence.  what was there for her to say?
she was obliged to go and see mr. crav
 
 ___________________________
 
en and he would not like her, and
she would not like him.  she knew what he would think of her.

she was taken to a part of the house she had not been into before.  at
last mrs. medlock knocked at a door, and when some one said, "come in,"
they entered the room together.  a man was sitting in an armchair
before the fire, and mrs. medlock spoke to him.

"this is miss mary, sir," she said.

"you can go and leave her here.  i will ring for you when i want you to
take her away," said mr. craven.

when she went out and closed the door, mary could only stand waiting, a
plain little thing, twisting her thin hands together.  she could see
that the man in the chair was not so much a hunchback as a man with
high, rather crooked shoulders, and he had black hair streaked with
white.  he turned his head over his high shoulders and spoke to her.

"come here!" he said.

mary went to him.

he was not ugly.  his face would have been handsome if it had not been
so miserable.  he looked as if the si
 
 ___________________________
 
or any child.  i cannot give you
time or attention.  i am too ill, and wretched and distracted; but i
wish you to be happy and comfortable.  i don't know anything about
children, but mrs. medlock is to see that you have all you need.  i
sent for you to-day because mrs. sowerby said i ought to see you.  her
daughter had talked about you.  she thought you needed fresh air and
freedom and running about."

"she knows all about children," mary said again in spite of herself.

"she ought to," said mr. craven.  "i thought her rather bold to stop me
on the moor, but she said--mrs. craven had been kind to her." it seemed
hard for him to speak his dead wife's name.  "she is a respectable
woman.  now i have seen you i think she said sensible things.  play out
of doors as much as you like.  it's a big place and you may go where
you like and amuse yourself as you like.  is there anything you want?"
as if a sudden thought had struck him.  "do you want toys, books,
dolls?"

"might i," quavered mary, "might 
 
 ___________________________
 
i have a bit of earth?"

in her eagerness she did not realize how queer the words would sound
and that they were not the ones she had meant to say.  mr. craven
looked quite startled.

"earth!" he repeated.  "what do you mean?"

"to plant seeds in--to make things grow--to see them come alive," mary
faltered.

he gazed at her a moment and then passed his hand quickly over his eyes.

"do you--care about gardens so much," he said slowly.

"i didn't know about them in india," said mary.  "i was always ill and
tired and it was too hot.  i sometimes made little beds in the sand and
stuck flowers in them.  but here it is different."

mr. craven got up and beg
 
 ___________________________
 
d.  "you remind me of
some one else who loved the earth and things that grow.  when you see a
bit of earth you want," with something like a smile, "take it, child,
and make it come alive."

"may i take it from anywhere--if it's not wanted?"

"anywhere," he answered.  "there! you must go now, i am tired." he
touched the bell to call mrs. medlock.  "good-by. i shall be away all
summer."

mrs. medlock came so quickly that mary thought she must have been
waiting in the corridor.

"mrs. medlock," mr. craven said to her, "now i have seen the child i
understand what mrs. sowerby meant.  she must be less delicate before
she begins lessons.  give her simple, healthy food.  let her run wild
in the garden.  don't look after her too much.  she needs liberty and
fresh air and romping about.  mrs. sowerby is to come and see her now
and then and she may sometimes go to the cottage."

mrs. medlock looked pleased.  she was relieved to hear that she need
not "look after" mary too much.  she had felt her a tire
 
 ___________________________
 
ed.  in addition to this she
was fond of martha's mother.

"thank you, sir," she said.  "susan sowerby and me went to school
together and she's as sensible and good-hearted a woman as you'd find
in a day's walk.  i never had any children myself and she's had twelve,
and there never was healthier or better ones.  miss mary can get no
harm from them.  i'd always take susan sowerby's advice about children
myself.  she's what you might call healthy-minded--if you understand
me."

"i understand," mr. craven answered.  "take miss mary away now and send
pitcher to me."

when mrs. medlock left her at the end of her own corridor mary flew
back to her room.  she found martha waiting there.  martha had, in
fact, hurried back after she had removed the dinner service.

"i can have my garden!" cried mary.  "i may have it where i like! i am
not going to have a governess for a long time! your mother is coming to
see me and i may go to your cottage! he says a little girl like me
could not do any harm and i ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 that they
seemed immense.

"who are you?" he said at last in a half-frightened whisper.  "are you
a ghost?"

"no, i am not," mary answered, her own whisper sounding half
frightened.  "are you one?"

he stared and stared and stared.  mary could not help noticing what
strange eyes he had.  they were agate gray and they looked too big for
his face because they had black lashes all round them.

"no," he replied after waiting a moment or so.  "i am colin."

"who is colin?" she faltered.

"i am colin craven.  who are you?"

"i am mary lennox.  mr. craven is my uncle."

"he is my father," said the boy.

"your father!" gasped mary.  "no one ever told me he had a boy! why
didn't they?"

"come here," he said, still keeping his strange eyes fixed on her with
an anxious expression.

she came close to the bed and he put out his hand and touched her.

"you are real, aren't you?" he said.  "i have such real dreams very
often.  you might be one of them."

mary had slipped on a woolen wrapper before she left
 
 ___________________________
 
d are you?" he asked.

"i am ten," answered mary, forgetting herself for the moment, "and so
are you."

"how do you know that?" he demanded in a surprised voice.

"because when you were born the garden door was locked and the key was
buried.  and it has been locked for ten years."

colin half sat up, turning toward her, leaning on his elbows.

"what garden door was locked? who did it? where was the key buried?" he
exclaimed as if he were suddenly very much interested.

"it--it was the garden mr. craven hates," said mary nervously.  "he
locked the door.  no one--no one knew where he buried the key." "what
sort of a garden is it?" colin persisted eagerly.

"no one has been allowed to go into it for ten years," was mary's
careful answer.

but it was too late to be careful.  he was too much like herself.  he
too had had nothing to think about and the idea of a hidden garden
attracted him as it had attracted her.  he asked question after
question.  where was it? had she never looked for the door? 
 
 ___________________________
 
 him i stood and stared.  and then he turned round and stared at
me.  and he thought i was a ghost or a dream and i thought perhaps he
was.  and it was so queer being there alone together in the middle of
the night and not knowing about each other.  and we began to ask each
other questions.  and when i asked him if i must go away he said i must
not."

"th' world's comin' to a end!" gasped martha.

"what is the matter with him?" asked mary.

"nobody knows for sure and certain," said martha.  "mr. craven went off
his head like when he was born.  th' doctors thought he'd have to be
put in a 'sylum.  it was because mrs. craven died like i told you.  he
wouldn't set eyes on th' baby.  he just raved and said it'd be another
hunchback like him and it'd better die."

"is colin a hunchback?" mary asked.  "he didn't look like one."

"he isn't yet," said martha.  "but he began all wrong.  mother said
that there was enough trouble and raging in th' house to set any child
wrong.  they was afraid his back 
 
 ___________________________
 
martha was shaking in her shoes.
colin was still frowning.

"have you to do what i please or have you not?" he demanded.

"i have to do what you please, sir," martha faltered, turning quite red.

"has medlock to do what i please?"

"everybody has, sir," said martha.

"well, then, if i order you to bring miss mary to me, how can medlock
send you away if she finds it out?"

"please don't let her, sir," pleaded martha.

"i'll send her away if she dares to say a word about such a thing,"
said master craven grandly.  "she wouldn't like that, i can tell you."

"thank you, sir," bobbing a curtsy, "i want to do my duty, sir."

"what i want is your duty" said colin more grandly still.  "i'll take
care of you.  now go away."

when the door closed behind martha, colin found mistress mary gazing at
him as if he had set her wondering.

"why do you look at me like that?" he asked her.  "what are you
thinking about?"

"i am thinking about two things."

"what are they? sit down and tell me."

"this is the fi
 
 ___________________________
 
 mary unsympathetically.  she didn't like the way he had of talking
about dying.  she did not feel very sympathetic.  she felt rather as if
he almost boasted about it.

"oh, i've heard it ever since i remember," he answered crossly.  "they
are always whispering about it and thinking i don't notice.  they wish
i would, too."

mistress mary felt quite contrary.  she pinched her lips together.

"if they wished i would," she said, "i wouldn't. who wishes you would?"

"the servants--and of course dr. craven because he would get
misselthwaite and be rich instead of poor.  he daren't say so, but he
always looks cheerful when i am worse.  when i had typhoid fever his
face got quite fat.  i think my father wishes it, too."

"i don't believe he does," said mary quite obstinately.

that made colin turn and look at her again.

"don't you?" he said.

and then he lay back on his cushion and was still, as if he were
thinking.  and there was quite a long silence.  perhaps they were both
of them thinking stra
 
 ___________________________
 
ite loudly over ben
weatherstaff and his robin, and colin was actually sitting up as if he
had forgotten about his weak back, when he suddenly remembered
something.  "do you know there is one thing we have never once thought
of," he said.  "we are cousins."

it seemed so queer that they had talked so much and never remembered
this simple thing that they laughed more than ever, because they had
got into the humor to laugh at anything.  and in the midst of the fun
the door opened and in walked dr. craven and mrs. medlock.

dr. craven started in actual alarm and mrs. medlock almost fell back
because he had accidentally bumped against her.

"good lord!" exclaimed poor mrs. medlock with her eyes almost starting
out of her head.  "good lord!"

"what is this?" said dr. craven, coming forward.  "what does it mean?"

then mary was reminded of the boy rajah again.  colin answered as if
neither the doctor's alarm nor mrs. medlock's terror were of the
slightest consequence.  he was as little disturbed or
 
 ___________________________
 
 frightened as if
an elderly cat and dog had walked into the room.

"this is my cousin, mary lennox," he said.  "i asked her to come and
talk to me.  i like her.  she must come and talk to me whenever i send
for her."

dr. craven turned reproachfully to mrs. medlock.  "oh, sir" she panted.
"i don't know how it's happened.  there's not a servant on the place
tha'd dare to talk--they all have their orders."

"nobody told her anything," said colin.  "she heard me crying and found
me herself.  i am glad she came.  don't be silly, medlock."

mary saw that dr. craven did not look pleased, but it was quite plain
that he dare not oppose his patient.  he sat down by colin and felt his
pulse.

"i am afraid there has been too much
 
 ___________________________
 
 excitement.  excitement is not
good for you, my boy," he said.

"i should be excited if she kept away," answered colin, his eyes
beginning to look dangerously sparkling.  "i am better.  she makes me
better.  the nurse must bring up her tea with mine.  we will have tea
together."

mrs. medlock and dr. craven looked at each other in a troubled way, but
there was evidently nothing to be done.

"he does look rather better, sir," ventured mrs. medlock.
"but"--thinking the matter over--"he looked better this morning before
she came into the room."

"she came into the room last night.  she stayed with me a long time.
she sang a hindustani song to me and it made me go to sleep," said
colin.  "i was better when i wakened up.  i wanted my breakfast.  i
want my tea now.  tell nurse, medlock."

dr. craven did
 
 ___________________________
 
 not stay very long.  he talked to the nurse for a few
minutes when she came into the room and said a few words of warning to
colin.  he must not talk too much; he must not forget that he was ill;
he must not forget that he was very easily tired.  mary thought that
there seemed to be a number of uncomfortable things he was not to
forget.

colin looked fretful and kept his strange black-lashed eyes fixed on
dr. craven's face.

"i want to forget it," he said at last.  "she makes me forget it.  that
is why i want her."

dr. craven did not look happy when he left the room.  he gave a puzzled
glance at the little girl sitting on the large stool.  she had become a
stiff, silent child again as soon as he entered and he could not see
what the attraction was.  the boy actually did look brighter,
however--and he sighed rather heavily as he went down the corridor.

"they are always wanting me to eat things when i don'
 
 ___________________________
 
 it's no worse than hidin' where a bird's nest is.  tha'
doesn't mind it, does tha'?'"

mary always wanted to hear about mother.

"what did she say?" she asked, not at all afraid to hear.

dickon grinned sweet-temperedly.

"it was just like her, what she said," he answered.  "she give my head
a bit of a rub an' laughed an' she says, 'eh, lad, tha' can have all
th' secrets tha' likes.  i've knowed thee twelve year'.'"

"how did you know about colin?" asked mary.

"everybody as knowed about mester craven knowed there was a little lad
as was like to be a cripple, an' they knowed mester craven didn't like
him to be talked about.  folks is sorry for mester craven because mrs.
craven was such a pretty young lady an' they was so fond of each other.
mrs. medlock stops in our cottage whenever she goes to thwaite an' she
doesn't mind talkin' to mother before us children, because she knows us
has been brought up to be trusty.  how did tha' find out about him?
martha was in fine trouble th' last time she
 
 ___________________________
 
he midnight wuthering of the wind which
had wakened her and about the faint far-off sounds of the complaining
voice which had led her down the dark corridors with her candle and had
ended with her opening of the door of the dimly lighted room with the
carven four-posted bed in the corner.  when she described the small
ivory-white face and the strange black-rimmed eyes dickon shook his
head.

"them's just like his mother's eyes, only hers was always laughin',
they say," he said.  "they say as mr. craven can't bear to see him when
he's awake an' it's because his eyes is so like his mother's an' yet
looks so different in his miserable bit of a face."

"do you think he wants to die?" whispered mary.

"no, but he wishes he'd never been born.  mother she says that's th'
worst thing on earth for a child.  them as is not wanted scarce ever
thrives.  mester craven he'd buy anythin' as money could buy for th'
poor lad but he'd like to forget as he's on earth.  for one thing, he's
afraid he'll look at h
 
 ___________________________
 
ay in his room and
never get any fresh air and die if he liked! it would serve him right!
she felt so sour and unrelenting that for a few minutes she almost
forgot about dickon and the green veil creeping over the world and the
soft wind blowing down from the moor.

martha was waiting for her and the trouble in her face had been
temporarily replaced by interest and curiosity.  there was a wooden box
on the table and its cover had been removed and revealed that it was
full of neat packages.

"mr. craven sent it to you," said martha.  "it looks as if it had
picture-books in it."

mary remembered what he had asked her the day she had gone to his room.
"do you want anything--dolls--toys--books?" she opened the package
wondering if he had sent a doll, and also wondering what she should do
with it if he had.  but he had not sent one.  there were several
beautiful books such as colin had, and two of them were about gardens
and were full of pictures.  there were two or three games and there was
a bea
 
 ___________________________
 
ess were forgotten and he was listening
enraptured.

"it is just what you thought it would be," he said at last.  "it sounds
just as if you had really seen it.  you know i said that when you told
me first."

mary hesitated about two minutes and then boldly spoke the truth.

"i had seen it--and i had been in," she said.  "i found the key and got
in weeks ago.  but i daren't tell you--i daren't because i was so
afraid i couldn't trust you--for sure!"




chapter xix

"it has come!"


of course dr. craven had been sent for the morning after colin had had
his tantrum.  he was always sent for at once when such a thing occurred
and he always found, when he arrived, a white shaken boy lying on his
bed, sulky and still so hysterical that he was ready to break into
fresh sobbing at the least word.  in fact, dr. craven dreaded and
detested the difficulties of these visits.  on this occasion he was
away from misselthwaite manor until afternoon.

"how is he?" he asked mrs. medlock rather irritably when h
 
 ___________________________
 
that plain sour-faced child that's almost as bad as
himself has just bewitched him.  how she's done it there's no telling.
the lord knows she's nothing to look at and you scarcely ever hear her
speak, but she did what none of us dare do.  she just flew at him like
a little cat last night, and stamped her feet and ordered him to stop
screaming, and somehow she startled him so that he actually did stop,
and this afternoon--well just come up and see, sir.  it's past
crediting."

the scene which dr. craven beheld when he entered his patient's room
was indeed rather astonishing to him.  as mrs. medlock opened the door
he heard laughing and chattering.  colin was on his sofa in his
dressing-gown and he was sitting up quite straight looking at a picture
in one of the garden books and talking to the plain child who at that
moment could scarcely be called plain at all because her face was so
glowing with enjoyment.

"those long spires of blue ones--we'll have a lot of those," colin was
announcing.  "t
 
 ___________________________
 
hey're called del-phin-iums."

"dickon says they're larkspurs made big and grand," cried mistress
mary.  "there are clumps there already."

then they saw dr. craven and stopped.  mary became quite still and
colin looked fretful.

"i am sorry to hear you were ill last night, my boy," dr. craven said a
trifle nervously.  he was rather a nervous man.

"i'm better now--much better," colin answered, rather like a rajah.
"i'm going out in my chair in a day or two if it is fine.  i want some
fresh air."

dr. craven sat down by him and felt his pulse and looked at him
curiously.

"it must be a very fine day," he said, "and you must be very careful
not to tire yourself."

"fresh air won't tire me," said the young rajah.

as there had been occasions when this same young gentleman had shrieked

 
 ___________________________
 
aloud with rage and had insisted that fresh air would give him cold and
kill him, it is not to be wondered at that his doctor felt somewhat
startled.

"i thought you did not like fresh air," he said.

"i don't when i am by myself," replied the rajah; "but my cousin is
going out with me."

"and the nurse, of course?" suggested dr. craven.

"no, i will not have the nurse," so magnificently that mary could not
help remembering how the young native prince had looked with his
diamonds and emeralds and pearls stuck all over him and the great
rubies on the small dark hand he had waved to command his servants to
approach with salaams and receive his orders.

"my cousin knows how to take care of me.  i am always better when she
is with me.  she made me better last night.  a very strong boy i know
will push my carriage."

dr. craven fel
 
 ___________________________
 
l boy should
chance to get well he himself would lose all chance of inheriting
misselthwaite; but he was not an unscrupulous man, though he was a weak
one, and he did not intend to let him run into actual danger.

"he must be a strong boy and a steady boy," he said.  "and i must know
something about him.  who is he? what is his name?"

"it's dickon," mary spoke up suddenly.  she felt somehow that everybody
who knew the moor must know dickon.  and she was right, too.  she saw
that in a moment dr. craven's serious face relaxed into a relieved
smile.

"oh, dickon," he said.  "if it is dickon you will be safe enough.  he's
as strong as a moor pony, is dickon."

"and he's trusty," said mary.  "he's th' trustiest lad i' yorkshire."
she had been talking yorkshire to colin and she forgot herself.

"did dickon teach you that?" asked dr. craven, laughing outright.

"i'm learning it as if it was french," said mary rather coldly.  "it's
like a native dialect in india.  very clever people try to learn the
 
 ___________________________
 
m.
i like it and so does colin." "well, well," he said.  "if it amuses you
perhaps it won't do you any harm.  did you take your bromide last
night, colin?"

"no," colin answered.  "i wouldn't take it at first and after mary made
me quiet she talked me to sleep--in a low voice--about the spring
creeping into a garden."

"that sounds soothing," said dr. craven, more perplexed than ever and
glancing sideways at mistress mary sitting on her stool and looking
down silently at the carpet.  "you are evidently better, but you must
remember--"

"i don't want to remember," interrupted the rajah, appearing again.
"when i lie by myself and remember i begin to have pains everywhere and
i think of things that make me begin to scream because i hate them so.
if there was a doctor anywhere who could make you forget you were ill
instead of remembering it i would hav
 
 ___________________________
 
e him brought here." and he waved
a thin hand which ought really to have been covered with royal signet
rings made of rubies.  "it is because my cousin makes me forget that
she makes me better."

dr. craven had never made such a short stay after a "tantrum"; usually
he was obliged to remain a very long time and do a great many things.
this afternoon he did not give any medicine or leave any new orders and
he was spared any disagreeable scenes.  when he went downstairs he
looked very thoughtful and when he talked to mrs. medlock in the
library she felt that he was a much puzzled man.

"well, sir," she ventured, "could you have believed it?"

"it is certainly a new state of affairs," said the doctor
 
 ___________________________
 
.  "and
there's no denying it is better than the old one."

"i believe susan sowerby's right--i do that," said mrs. medlock.  "i
stopped in her cottage on my way to thwaite yesterday and had a bit of
talk with her.  and she says to me, 'well, sarah ann, she mayn't be a
good child, an' she mayn't be a pretty one, but she's a child, an'
children needs children.' we went to school together, susan sowerby and
me."

"she's the best sick nurse i know," said dr. craven.  "when i find her
in a cottage i know the chances are that i shall save my patient."

mrs. medlock smiled.  she was fond of susan sowerby.

"she's got a way with her, has susan," she went on quite volubly.
"i've been thinking all morning of one thing she said yesterday.  she
says, 'once when i was givin' th' children a bit of a preach after
they'd been fightin' i ses to 'em all, "when i was at school my
jography told as th' world was shaped like a orange an' i found out
before i was ten that t
 
 ___________________________
 
y.  no
one owns more than his bit of a quarter an' there's times it seems like
there's not enow quarters to go round.  but don't you--none o'
you--think as you own th' whole orange or you'll find out you're
mistaken, an' you won't find it out without hard knocks."  'what
children learns from children,' she says, 'is that there's no sense in
grabbin' at th' whole orange--peel an' all.  if you do you'll likely
not get even th' pips, an' them's too bitter to eat.'"

"she's a shrewd woman," said dr. craven, putting on his coat.

"well, she's got a way of saying things," ended mrs. medlock, much
pleased.  "sometimes i've said to her, 'eh! susan, if you was a
different woman an' didn't talk such broad yorkshire i've seen the
times when i should have said you was clever.'"


that night colin slept without once awakening and when he opened his
eyes in the morning he lay still and smiled without knowing it--smiled
because he felt so curiously comfortable.  it was actually nice to be
awake, and he turn
 
 ___________________________
 
ed over and stretched his limbs luxuriously.  he felt
as if tight strings which had held him had loosened themselves and let
him go.  he did not know that dr. craven would have said that his
nerves had relaxed and rested themselves.  instead of lying and staring
at the wall and wishing he had not awakened, his mind was full of the
plans he and mary had made yesterday, of pictures of the garden and of
dickon and his wild creatures.  it was so nice to have things to think
about.  and he had not been awake more than ten minutes when he heard
feet running along the corridor and mary was at the door.  the next
minute she was in the room and had run across to his
 
 ___________________________
 
 danced past at once, what a crowd it would be! i'm sure
they'd dance and sing and flute and that would be the wafts of music."

they both laughed but it was not because the idea was laughable but
because they both so liked it.

a little later the nurse made colin ready.  she noticed that instead of
lying like a log while his clothes were put on he sat up and made some
efforts to help himself, and he talked and laughed with mary all the
time.

"this is one of his good days, sir," she said to dr. craven, who
dropped in to inspect him.  "he's in such good spirits that it makes
him stronger."

"i'll call in again later in the afternoon, after he has come in," said
dr. craven.  "i must see how the going out agrees with him.  i wish,"
in a very low voice, "that he would let you go with him."

"i'd rather give up the case this moment, sir, than even stay here
while it's suggested," answered the nurse.  with sudden firmness.

"i hadn't really decided to suggest it," said the doctor, with his
slight 
 
 ___________________________
 
her trees," he had
said.  "we couldn't never tell him how it broke, poor lad.  if he says
anything about it we mun--we mun try to look cheerful."

"aye, that we mun," had answered mary.

but she had not felt as if she looked cheerful when she gazed at the
tree.  she wondered and wondered in those few moments if there was any
reality in that other thing dickon had said.  he had gone on rubbing
his rust-red hair in a puzzled way, but a nice comforted look had begun
to grow in his blue eyes.

"mrs. craven was a very lovely young lady," he had gone on rather
hesitatingly.  "an' mother she thinks maybe she's about misselthwaite
many a time lookin' after mester colin, same as all mothers do when
they're took out o' th' world.  they have to come back, tha' sees.
happen she's been in the garden an' happen it was her set us to work,
an' told us to bring him here."

mary had thought he meant something about magic.  she was a great
believer in magic.  secretly she quite believed that dickon worked
magic
 
 ___________________________
 
d to see what was being done.  nut and shell chattered
about it from a cherry-tree.

"it's planted!" said colin at last.  "and the sun is only slipping over
the edge.  help me up, dickon.  i want to be standing when it goes.
that's part of the magic."

and dickon helped him, and the magic--or whatever it was--so gave him
strength that when the sun did slip over the edge and end the strange
lovely afternoon for them there he actually stood on his two
feet--laughing.




chapter xxiii

magic


dr. craven had been waiting some time at the house when they returned
to it.  he had indeed begun to wonder if it might not be wise to send
some one out to explore the garden paths.  when colin was brought back
to his room the poor man looked him over seriously.

"you should not have stayed so long," he said.  "you must not overexert
yourself."

"i am not tired at all," said colin.  "it has made me well.  tomorrow i
am going out in the morning as well as in the afternoon."

"i am not sure that i can allow
 
 ___________________________
 
 it," answered dr. craven.  "i am afraid
it would not be wise."

"it would not be wise to try to stop me," said colin quite seriously.
"i am going."

even mary had found out that one of colin's chief peculiarities was
that he did not know in the least what a rude little brute he was with
his way of ordering people about.  he had lived on a sort of desert
island all his life and as he had been the king of it he had made his
own manners and had had no one to compare himself with.  mary had
indeed been rather like him hers
 
 ___________________________
 
elf and since she had been at
misselthwaite had gradually discovered that her own manners had not
been of the kind which is usual or popular.  having made this discovery
she naturally thought it of enough interest to communicate to colin.
so she sat and looked at him curiously for a few minutes after dr.
craven had gone.  she wanted to make him ask her why she was doing it
and of course she did.

"what are you looking at me for?" he said.

"i'm thinking that i am rather sorry for dr. craven."

"so am i," said colin calmly, but not without an air of some
satisfaction.  "he won't get misselthwaite at all now i'm not going to
die."

"i'm sorry for him because of that, of course," said mary, "but i was
thinking just then that it must have been very horrid to have had to be
polite for ten years to a boy who was always rude.  i would never have
done it."

"am i rude?" colin inquired undisturbedly.

"if you had been his own boy and he had been a slapping sort of man,"
said mary, "he woul
 
 ___________________________
 
ong!
i can feel it! i can feel it!"

it seemed very certain that something was upholding and uplifting him.
he sat on the seats in the alcoves, and once or twice he sat down on
the grass and several times he paused in the path and leaned on dickon,
but he would not give up until he had gone all round the garden.  when
he returned to the canopy tree his cheeks were flushed and he looked
triumphant.

"i did it! the magic worked!" he cried.  "that is my first scientific
discovery.".

"what will dr. craven say?" broke out mary.

"he won't say anything," colin answered, "because he will not be told.
this is to be the biggest secret of all.  no one is to know anything
about it until i have grown so strong that i can walk and run like any
other boy.  i shall come here every day in my chair and i shall be
taken back in it.  i won't have people whispering and asking questions
and i won't let my father hear about it until the experiment has quite
succeeded.  then sometime when he comes back to misselth
 
 ___________________________
 
ainin'?" she inquired.  "they don't know what to make of
it," answered dickon.  "every day as comes round his face looks
different.  it's fillin' out and doesn't look so sharp an' th' waxy
color is goin'.  but he has to do his bit o' complainin'," with a
highly entertained grin.

"what for, i' mercy's name?" asked mrs. sowerby.

dickon chuckled.

"he does it to keep them from guessin' what's happened.  if the doctor
knew he'd found out he could stand on his feet he'd likely write and
tell mester craven.  mester colin's savin' th' secret to tell himself.
he's goin' to practise his magic on his legs every day till his father
comes back an' then he's goin' to march into his room an' show him he's
as straight as other lads.  but him an' miss mary thinks it's best plan
to do a bit o' groanin' an' frettin' now an' then to throw folk off th'
scent."

mrs. sowerby was laughing a low comfortable laugh long before he had
finished his last sentence.

"eh!" she said, "that pair's enjoyin' their-selves i'
 
 ___________________________
 
to 'em," said mrs. sowerby.  then she smiled dickon's own curving
smile.  "eh! but they're enjoyin' theirselves for sure," she said.

she was quite right, the comfortable wonderful mother creature--and she
had never been more so than when she said their "play actin'" would be
their joy.  colin and mary found it one of their most thrilling sources
of entertainment.  the idea of protecting themselves from suspicion had
been unconsciously suggested to them first by the puzzled nurse and
then by dr. craven himself.

"your appetite.  is improving very much, master colin," the nurse had
said one day.  "you used to eat nothing, and so many things disagreed
with you."

"nothing disagrees with me now" replied colin, and then seeing the
nurse looking at him curiously he suddenly remembered that perhaps he
ought not to appear too well just yet.  "at least things don't so often
disagree with me.  it's the fresh air."

"perhaps it is," said the nurse, still looking at him with a mystified
expression.  "bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t i must talk to dr. craven about it."

"how she stared at you!" said mary when she went away.  "as if she
thought there must be something to find out."

"i won't have her finding out things," said colin.  "no one must begin
to find out yet." when dr. craven came that morning he seemed puzzled,
also.  he asked a number of questions, to colin's great annoyance.

"you stay out in the garden a great deal," he suggested.  "where do you
go?"

colin put on his favorite air of dignified indifference to opinion.

"i will not let any one know where i go," he answered.  "i go to a
place i like.  every one has orders to keep out of the way.  i won't be
watched and stared at.  you know that!"

"you seem to be out all day but i do not think it has done you harm
 
 ___________________________
 
--i
do not think so.  the nurse says that you eat much more than you have
ever done before."

"perhaps," said colin, prompted by a sudden inspiration, "perhaps it is
an unnatural appetite."

"i do not think so, as your food seems to agree with you," said dr.
craven.  "you are gaining flesh rapidly and your color is better."

"perhaps--perhaps i am bloated and feverish," said colin, assuming a
discouraging air of gloom.  "people who are not going to live are
often--different." dr. craven shook his head.  he was holding colin's
wrist and he pushed up his sleeve and felt his arm.

"you are not feverish," he said thoughtfully, "and such flesh as you
have gained is healthy.  if you can keep this up, my boy, we need not
talk of dying.  your father will be happy to hear of this remarkable
improvement."

"i won't have him told!" colin broke forth fiercely.  "it will only
disappoint him if i get worse again--and i may get worse this very
night.  i might have a raging fever.  i feel as 
 
 ___________________________
 
if i might be beginning
to have one now.  i won't have letters written to my father--i won't--i
won't!  you are making me angry and you know that is bad for me.  i
feel hot already.  i hate being written about and being talked over as
much as i hate being stared at!"

"hush-h! my boy," dr. craven soothed him.  "nothing shall be written
without your permission.  you are too sensitive about things.  you must
not undo the good which has been done."

he said no more about writing to mr. craven and when he saw the nurse
he privately warned her that such a possibility must not be mentioned
to the patient.

"the boy is extraordinarily better," he said.  "his advance seems
almost abnormal.  but of course he is doing now of his own free will
what we could not make him do before.  still, he excites himself very
easily and nothing must be said to irritate him." mary and colin were
much alarmed and talked together anxiously.  from this time dated their
plan of "play actin'."

"i may be oblig
 
 ___________________________
 
d hopped about
restlessly because he could not do them too.

from that time the exercises were part of the day's duties as much as
the magic was.  it became possible for both colin and mary to do more
of them each time they tried, and such appetites were the results that
but for the basket dickon put down behind the bush each morning when he
arrived they would have been lost.  but the little oven in the hollow
and mrs. sowerby's bounties were so satisfying that mrs. medlock and
the nurse and dr. craven became mystified again.  you can trifle with
your breakfast and seem to disdain your dinner if you are full to the
brim with roasted eggs and potatoes and richly frothed new milk and
oatcakes and buns and heather honey and clotted cream.

"they are eating next to nothing," said the nurse.  "they'll die of
starvation if they can't be persuaded to take some nourishment.  and
yet see how they look."

"look!" exclaimed mrs. medlock indignantly.  "eh! i'm moithered to
death with them.  they're a pai
 
 ___________________________
 
r of young satans.  bursting their
jackets one day and the next turning up their noses at the best meals
cook can tempt them with.  not a mouthful of that lovely young fowl and
bread sauce did they set a fork into yesterday--and the poor woman fair
invented a pudding for them--and back it's sent.  she almost cried.
she's afraid she'll be blamed if they starve themselves into their
graves."

dr. craven came and looked at colin long and carefully, he wore an
extremely worried expression when the nurse talked with him and showed
him the almost untouched tray of breakfast she had saved for him to
look at--but it was even more worried when he sat down by colin's sofa
and examined him.  he had been called to london on business and had not
seen the boy for nearly two weeks.  when young things begin to gain
health they gain it rapidly.  the waxen tinge had left, colins skin and
a warm rose showed th
 
 ___________________________
 
rough it; his beautiful eyes were clear and the
hollows under them and in his cheeks and temples had filled out.  his
once dark, heavy locks had begun to look as if they sprang healthily
from his forehead and were soft and warm with life.  his lips were
fuller and of a normal color.  in fact as an imitation of a boy who was
a confirmed invalid he was a disgraceful sight.  dr. craven held his
chin in his hand and thought him over.

"i am sorry to hear that you do not eat anything," he said.  "that will
not do.  you will lose all you have gained--and you have gained
amazingly.  you ate so well a short time ago."

"i told you it was an unnatural appetite," answered colin.

mary was sitting on her stool nearby and she suddenly made a very queer
sound which she tried so violently to repress that she ended by almost
choking.

"what is the matter?" said dr. craven, turning to loo
 
 ___________________________
 
 way your mouth stretched when you bit through
that thick lovely crust with jam and clotted cream on it."

"is there any way in which those children can get food secretly?" dr.
craven inquired of mrs. medlock.

"there's no way unless they dig it out of the earth or pick it off the
trees," mrs. medlock answered.  "they stay out in the grounds all day
and see no one but each other.  and if they want anything different to
eat from what's sent up to them they need only ask for it."

"well," said dr. craven, "so long as going without food agrees with
them we need not disturb ourselves.  the boy is a new creature."

"so is the girl," said mrs. medlock.  "she's begun to be downright
pretty since she's filled out and lost her ugly little sour look.  her
hair's grown thick and healthy looking and she's got a bright color.
the glummest, ill-natured little thing she used to be and now her and
master colin laugh together like a pair of crazy young ones.  perhaps
they're growing fat on that."

"perhaps th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey are," said dr. craven.  "let them laugh."




chapter xxv

the curtain


and the secret garden bloomed and bloomed and every morning revealed
new miracles.  in the robin's nest there were eggs and the robin's mate
sat upon them keeping them warm with her feathery little breast and
careful wings.  at first she was very nervous and the robin himself was
indignantly watchful.  even dickon did not go near the close-grown
corner in those days, but waited until by the quiet working of some
mysterious spell he seemed to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
 worse than ever."

"there's one thing that comes into my mind so often," said mary, "and i
can scarcely ever hold in when i think of it suddenly.  i keep thinking
suppose colin's face should get to look like a full moon.  it isn't
like one yet but he gets a tiny bit fatter every day--and suppose some
morning it should look like one--what should we do!"

"bless us all, i can see tha' has a good bit o' play actin' to do,"
said susan sowerby.  "but tha' won't have to keep it up much longer.
mester craven'll come home."

"do you think he will?" asked colin.  "why?"

susan sowerby chuckled softly.

"i suppose it 'ud nigh break thy heart if he found out before tha' told
him in tha' own way," she said.  "tha's laid awake nights plannin' it."

"i couldn't bear any one else to tell him," said colin.  "i think about
different ways every day, i think now i just want to run into his
room." "that'd be a fine start for him," said susan sowerby.  "i'd like
to see his face, lad.  i would that! he mun come b
 
 ___________________________
 
tely to allow any rift of light to pierce through.  he had
forgotten and deserted his home and his duties.  when he traveled
about, darkness so brooded over him that the sight of him was a wrong
done to other people because it was as if he poisoned the air about him
with gloom.  most strangers thought he must be either half mad or a man
with some hidden crime on his soul.  he, was a tall man with a drawn
face and crooked shoulders and the name he always entered on hotel
registers was, "archibald craven, misselthwaite manor, yorkshire,
england."

he had traveled far and wide since the day he saw mistress mary in his
study and told her she might have her "bit of earth." he had been in
the most beautiful places in europe, though he had remained nowhere
more than a few days.  he had chosen the quietest and remotest spots.
he had been on the tops of mountains whose heads were in the clouds and
had looked down on other mountains when the sun rose and touched them
with such light as made it seem as 
 
 ___________________________
 
 by a stream.  it was a clear little stream
which ran quite merrily along on its narrow way through the luscious
damp greenness.  sometimes it made a sound rather like very low
laughter as it bubbled over and round stones.  he saw birds come and
dip their heads to drink in it and then flick their wings and fly away.
it seemed like a thing alive and yet its tiny voice made the stillness
seem deeper.  the valley was very, very still.

as he sat gazing into the clear running of the water, archibald craven
gradually felt his mind and body both grow quiet, as quiet as the
valley itself.  he wondered if he were going to sleep, but he was not.
he sat and gazed at the sunlit water and his eyes began to see things
growing at its edge.  there was one lovely mass of blue forget-me-nots
growing so close to the stream that its leaves were wet and at these he
found himself looking as he remembered he had looked at such things
years ago.  he was actually thinking tenderly how lovely it was and
what wonders 
 
 ___________________________
 
  when he did awake at last it was
brilliant morning and a servant was standing staring at him.  he was an
italian servant and was accustomed, as all the servants of the villa
were, to accepting without question any strange thing his foreign
master might do.  no one ever knew when he would go out or come in or
where he would choose to sleep or if he would roam about the garden or
lie in the boat on the lake all night.  the man held a salver with some
letters on it and he waited quietly until mr. craven took them.  when
he had gone away mr. craven sat a few moments holding them in his hand
and looking at the lake.  his strange calm was still upon him and
something more--a lightness as if the cruel thing which had been done
had not happened as he thought--as if something had changed.  he was
remembering the dream--the real--real dream.

"in the garden!" he said, wondering at himself.  "in the garden! but
the door is locked and the key is buried deep."

when he glanced at the letters a few minut
 
 ___________________________
 
 it, scarcely thinking of the writer, but the
first words attracted his attention at once.


"dear sir:

i am susan sowerby that made bold to speak to you once on the moor.  it
was about miss mary i spoke.  i will make bold to speak again.  please,
sir, i would come home if i was you.  i think you would be glad to come
and--if you will excuse me, sir--i think your lady would ask you to
come if she was here.

                      your obedient servant,
                      susan sowerby."


mr. craven read the letter twice before he put it back in its envelope.
he kept thinking about the dream.

"i will go back to misselthwaite," he said.  "yes, i'll go at once."

and he went through the garden to the villa and ordered pitcher to
prepare for his return to england.


in a few days he was in yorkshire again, and on his long railroad
journey he found himself thinking of his boy as he had never thought in
all the ten years past.  during those years he had only wished to
forget him.  now, though 
 
 ___________________________
 
 will go and see her on my way to
misselthwaite."

but when on his way across the moor he stopped the carriage at the
cottage, seven or eight children who were playing about gathered in a
group and bobbing seven or eight friendly and polite curtsies told him
that their mother had gone to the other side of the moor early in the
morning to help a woman who had a new baby.  "our dickon," they
volunteered, was over at the manor working in one of the gardens where
he went several days each week.

mr. craven looked over the collection of sturdy little bodies and round
red-cheeked faces, each one grinning in its own particular way, and he
awoke to the fact that they were a healthy likable lot.  he smiled at
their friendly grins and took a golden sovereign from his pocket and
gave it to "our 'lizabeth ellen" who was the oldest.

"if you divide that into eight parts there will be half a crown for
each of, you," he said.

then amid grins and chuckles and bobbing of curtsies he drove away,
leaving ecsta
 
 ___________________________
 
th the
usual ceremony noticed that he looked better and that he did not go to
the remote rooms where he usually lived attended by pitcher.  he went
into the library and sent for mrs. medlock.  she came to him somewhat
excited and curious and flustered.

"how is master colin, medlock?" he inquired.  "well, sir," mrs. medlock
answered, "he's--he's different, in a manner of speaking."

"worse?" he suggested.

mrs. medlock really was flushed.

"well, you see, sir," she tried to explain, "neither dr. craven, nor
the nurse, nor me can exactly make him out."

"why is that?"

"to tell the truth, sir, master colin might be better and he might be
changing for the worse.  his appetite, sir, is past understanding--and
his ways--"

"has he become more--more peculiar?" her master, asked, knitting his
brows anxiously.

"that's it, sir.  he's growing very peculiar--when you compare him with
what he used to be.  he used to eat nothing and then suddenly he began
to eat something enormous--and then he stopped a
 
 ___________________________
 
gain all at once and
the meals were sent back just as they used to be.  you never knew, sir,
perhaps, that out of doors he never would let himself be taken.  the
things we've gone through to get him to go out in his chair would leave
a body trembling like a leaf.  he'd throw himself into such a state
that dr. craven said he couldn't be responsible for forcing him.  well,
sir, just without warning--not long after one of his worst tantrums he
suddenly insisted on being taken out every day by miss mary and susan
sowerby's boy dickon that could push his chair.  he took a fancy to
both miss mary and dickon, and dickon brought his tame animals, and, if
you'll credit it, sir, out of doors he will stay from morning until
night."

"how does he look?" was the next question.

"if he took his food natural, sir, you'd 
 
 ___________________________
 
think he was putting on
flesh--but we're afraid it may be a sort of bloat.  he laughs sometimes
in a queer way when he's alone with miss mary.  he never used to laugh
at all.  dr. craven is coming to see you at once, if you'll allow him.
he never was as puzzled in his life."

"where is master colin now?" mr. craven asked.

"in the garden, sir.  he's always in the garden--though not a human
creature is allowed to go near for fear they'll look at him."

mr. craven scarcely heard her last words.

"in the garden," he said, and after he had sent mrs. medlock away he
stood and repeated it again and again.  "in the garden!"

he had to make an effort to bring himself back to the place he was
standing in and when he felt he was on earth again he turned and went
out of the room.  he took his way, as mary had done, through the door
in the shrubbery and among the laurels and the fountain beds.  the
fountain was playing now and was encircled by beds of brilliant au
 
 ___________________________
 
was it that the far clear
voice had meant?

and then the moment came, the uncontrollable moment when the sounds
forgot to hush themselves.  the feet ran faster and faster--they were
nearing the garden door--there was quick strong young breathing and a
wild outbreak of laughing shows which could not be contained--and the
door in the wall was flung wide open, the sheet of ivy swinging back,
and a boy burst through it at full speed and, without seeing the
outsider, dashed almost into his arms.

mr. craven had extended them just in time to save him from falling as a
result of his unseeing dash against him, and when he held him away to
look at him in amazement at his being there he truly gasped for breath.

he was a tall boy and a handsome one.  he was glowing with life and his
running had sent splendid color leaping to his face.  he threw the
thick hair back from his forehead and lifted a pair of strange gray
eyes--eyes full of boyish laughter and rimmed with black lashes like a
fringe.  it was t
 
 ___________________________
 
he eyes which made mr. craven gasp for breath.
"who--what? who!" he stammered.

this was not what colin had expected--this was not what he had planned.
he had never thought of such a meeting.  and yet to come dashing
out--winning a race--perhaps it was even better.  he drew himself up to
his very tallest.  mary, who had been running with him and had dashed
through the door too, believed that he managed to make himself look
taller than he had ever looked before--inches taller.

"father," he said, "i'm colin.  you can't belie
 
 ___________________________
 
 can
myself.  i'm colin."

like mrs. medlock, he did not understand what his father meant when he
said hurriedly:

"in the garden! in the garden!"

"yes," hurried on colin.  "it was the garden that did it--and mary and
dickon and the creatures--and the magic.  no one knows.  we kept it to
tell you when you came.  i'm well, i can beat mary in a race.  i'm
going to be an athlete."

he said it all so like a healthy boy--his face flushed, his words
tumbling over each other in his eagerness--that mr. craven's soul shook
with unbelieving joy.

colin put out his hand and laid it on his father's arm.

"aren't you glad, father?" he ended.  "aren't you glad?  i'm going to
live forever and ever and ever!"

mr. craven put his hands on both the boy's shoulders and held him
still.  he knew he dared not even try to speak for a moment.

"take me into the garden, my boy," he said at last.  "and tell me all
about it."

and so they led him in.

the place was a wilderness of autumn gold and purple and violet blu
 
 ___________________________
 
red and the sunshine deepening
the hue of the yellowing trees made one feel that one, stood in an
embowered temple of gold.  the newcomer stood silent just as the
children had done when they came into its grayness.  he looked round
and round.

"i thought it would be dead," he said.

"mary thought so at first," said colin.  "but it came alive."

then they sat down under their tree--all but colin, who wanted to stand
while he told the story.

it was the strangest thing he had ever heard, archibald craven thought,
as it was poured forth in headlong boy fashion.  mystery and magic and
wild creatures, the weird midnight meeting--the coming of the
spring--the passion of insulted pride which had dragged the young rajah
to his feet to defy old ben weatherstaff to his face.  the odd
companionship, the play acting, the great secret so carefully kept.
the listener laughed until tears came into his eyes and sometimes tears
came into his eyes when he was not laughing.  the athlete, the
lecturer, the scien