 he nearly jumped
out of his skin when he opened the door and found her standing by
herself in the middle of the room."

mary made the long voyage to england under the care of an officer's
wife, who was taking her children to leave them in a boarding-school.
she was very much absorbed in her own little boy and girl, and was
rather glad to hand the child over to the woman mr. archibald craven
sent to meet her, in london.  the woman was his housekeeper at
misselthwaite manor, and her name was mrs. medlock.  she was a stout
woman, with very red cheeks and sharp black eyes.  she wore a very
purple dress, a black silk mantle with jet fringe on it and a black
bonnet with purple velvet flowers which stuck up and trembled when she
moved her head.  mary did not like her at all, but as she very seldom
liked people there was nothing remarkable in that; besides which it was
very evident mrs. medlock did not think much of her.

"my word! she's a plain little piece of goods!" she said.  "and we'd
heard that
 
 ___________________________
 
 her mother was a beauty.  she hasn't handed much of it down,
has she, ma'am?" "perhaps she will improve as she grows older," the
officer's wife said good-naturedly. "if she were not so sallow and had
a nicer expression, her features are rather good.  children alter so
much."

"she'll have to alter a good deal," answered mrs. medlock.  "and,
there's nothing likely to improve children at misselthwaite--if you ask
me!" they thought mary was not listening because she was standing a
little apart from them at the window of the private hotel they had gone
to.  she was watching the passing buses and cabs and people, but she
heard quite well and was made very curious about her uncle and the
place he lived in.  what sort of a place was it, and what would he be
like? what was a hunchback?  she had never seen one.  perhaps there
were 
 
 ___________________________
 

anyone even when her father and mother had been alive.  other children
seemed to belong to their fathers and mothers, but she had never seemed
to really be anyone's little girl.  she had had servants, and food and
clothes, but no one had taken any notice of her.  she did not know that
this was because she was a disagreeable child; but then, of course, she
did not know she was disagreeable.  she often thought that other people
were, but she did not know that she was so herself.

she thought mrs. medlock the most disagreeable person she had ever
seen, with her common, highly colored face and her common fine bonnet.
when the next day they set out on their journey to yorkshire, she
walked through the station to the railway carriage with her head up and
trying to keep as far away from her as she could, because she did not
want to seem to belong to her.  it would have made her angry to think
people imagined she was her little girl.

but mrs. medlock was not in the least disturbed by her and her
tho
 
 ___________________________
 
  the child is to be brought here.  you must
go to london and bring her yourself."

so she packed her small trunk and made the journey.

mary sat in her corner of the railway carriage and looked plain and
fretful.  she had nothing to read or to look at, and she had folded her
thin little black-gloved hands in her lap.  her black dress made her
look yellower than ever, and her limp light hair straggled from under
her black crepe hat.

"a more marred-looking young one i never saw in my life," mrs. medlock
thought.  (marred is a yorkshire word and means spoiled and pettish.)
she had never seen a child who sat so still without doing anything; and
at last she got tired of watching her and began to talk in a brisk,
hard voice.

"i suppose i may as well tell you something about where you are going
to," she said.  "do you know anything about your uncle?"

"no," said mary.

"never heard your father and mother talk about him?"

"no," said mary frowning.  she frowned because she remembered that her
fathe
 
 ___________________________
 
r and mother had never talked to her about anything in particular.
certainly they had never told her things.

"humph," muttered mrs. medlock, staring at her queer, unresponsive
little face.  she did not say any more for a few moments and then she
began again.

"i suppose you might as well be told something--to prepare you.  you
are going to a queer place."

mary said nothing at all, and mrs. medlock looked rather discomfited by
her apparent indifference, but, after taking a breath, she went on.

"not but that it's a grand big place in a gloomy way, and mr. craven's
proud of it in his way--and that's gloomy enough, too.  the house is
six hundred years old and it's on the edge of the moor, and there's
near a hundred rooms in it, though most of them's shut up and locked.
and there's pictures and fine old furniture and things that's been
there for ages, and there's a big park round it and gard
 
 ___________________________
 
ens and trees
with branches trailing to the ground--some of them." she paused and
took another breath.  "but there's nothing else," she ended suddenly.

mary had begun to listen in spite of herself.  it all sounded so unlike
india, and anything new rather attracted her.  but she did not intend
to look as if she were interested.  that was one of her unhappy,
disagreeable ways.  so she sat still.

"well," said mrs. medlock.  "what do you think of it?"

"nothing," she answered.  "i know nothing about such places."

that made mrs. medlock laugh a short sort of laugh.

"eh!" she said, "but you are like an old woman.  don't you care?"

"it doesn't matter" said mary, "whether i care or not."

"you are right enough there," said mrs. medlock.  "it doesn't. what
you're to be kept at misselthwaite manor for i don't know, unless
because it's the easiest way.  he's not going to trouble himself about
you, that's sure and cer
 
 ___________________________
 
tain.  he never troubles himself about no one."

she stopped herself as if she had just remembered something in time.

"he's got a crooked back," she said.  "that set him wrong.  he was a
sour young man and got no good of all his money and big place till he
was married."

mary's eyes turned toward her in spite of her intention not to seem to
care.  she had never thought of the hunchback's being married and she
was a trifle surprised.  mrs. medlock saw this, and as she was a
talkative woman she continued with more interest.  this was one way of
passing some of the time, at any rate.

"she was a sweet, pretty thing and he'd have walked the world over to
get her a blade o' grass she wanted.  nobody thought she'd marry him,
but she did, and people said she married him for his money.  but she
didn't--she didn't," positively.  "when she died--"

mary gave a little involuntary jump.

"oh! did she die!" she exclaimed, quite without meaning to.  
 
 ___________________________
 
she had
just remembered a french fairy story she had once read called "riquet a
la houppe." it had been about a poor hunchback and a beautiful princess
and it had made her suddenly sorry for mr. archibald craven.

"yes, she died," mrs. medlock answered.  "and it made him queerer than
ever.  he cares about nobody.  he won't see people.  most of the time
he goes away, and when he is at misselthwaite he shuts himself up in
the west wing and won't let any one but pitcher see him.  pitcher's an
old fellow, but he took care of him when he was a child and he knows
his ways."

it sounded like something in a book and it did not make mary feel
cheerful.  a house with a hundred rooms, nearly all shut up and with
their doors locked--a house on t
 
 ___________________________
 
tared out of the window with her lips pinched together, and
it seemed quite natural that the rain should have begun to pour down in
gray slanting lines and splash and stream down the window-panes. if the
pretty wife had been alive she might have made things cheerful by being
something like her own mother and by running in and out and going to
parties as she had done in frocks "full of lace." but she was not there
any more.

"you needn't expect to see him, because ten to one you won't," said
mrs. medlock.  "and you mustn't expect that there will be people to
talk to you.  you'll have to play about and look after yourself.
you'll be told what rooms you can go into and what rooms you're to keep
out of.  there's gardens enough.  but when you're in the house don't go
wandering and poking about.  mr. craven won't have it."

"i shall not want to go poking about," said sour little mary and just
as suddenly as she had begun to be rather sorry for mr. archibald
craven she began to cease to be sorry and 
 
 ___________________________
 
to think he was unpleasant
enough to deserve all that had happened to him.

and she turned her face toward the streaming panes of the window of the
railway carriage and gazed out at the gray rain-storm which looked as
if it would go on forever and ever.  she watched it so long and
steadily that the grayness grew heavier and heavier before her eyes and
she fell asleep.




chapter iii

across the moor


she slept a long time, and when she awakened mrs. medlock had bought a
lunchbasket at one of the stations and they had some chicken and cold
beef and bread and butter and some hot tea.  the rain seemed to be
streaming down more heavily than ever and everybody in the station wore
wet and glistening waterproofs.  the guard lighted the lamps in the
carriage, and mrs. medlock cheered up very much over her tea and
chicken and beef.  she ate a great deal and afterward fell asleep
herself, and mary sat and stared at her and watched her fine bonnet
slip on on
 
 ___________________________
 
e side until she herself fell asleep once more in the corner
of the carriage, lulled by the splashing of the rain against the
windows.  it was quite dark when she awakened again.  the train had
stopped at a station and mrs. medlock was shaking her.

"you have had a sleep!" she said.  "it's time to open your eyes! we're
at thwaite station and we've got a long drive before us."

mary stood up and tried to keep her eyes open while mrs. medlock
collected her parcels.  the little girl did not offer to help her,
because in india native servants always picked up or carried things and
it seemed quite proper that other people should wait on one.

the station was a small one and nobody but themselves seemed to be
getting out of the train.  the station-master spoke to mrs. medlock in
a rough, good-natured way, pronouncing his words in a queer broad
fashion which mary found out afterward was yorkshire.

"i see tha's got back," he said.  "an' 
 
 ___________________________
 
tha's browt th' young 'un with
thee."

"aye, that's her," answered mrs. medlock, speaking with a yorkshire
accent herself and jerking her head over her shoulder toward mary.
"how's thy missus?"

"well enow.  th' carriage is waitin' outside for thee."

a brougham stood on the road before the little outside platform.  mary
saw that it was a smart carriage and that it was a smart footman who
helped her in.  his long waterproof coat and the waterproof covering of
his hat were shining and dripping with rain as everything was, the
burly station-master included.

when he shut the
 
 ___________________________
 
 door, mounted the box with the coachman, and they
drove off, the little girl found herself seated in a comfortably
cushioned corner, but she was not inclined to go to sleep again.  she
sat and looked out of the window, curious to see something of the road
over which she was being driven to the queer place mrs. medlock had
spoken of.  she was not at all a timid child and she was not exactly
frightened, but she felt that there was no knowing what might happen in
a house with a hundred rooms nearly all shut up--a house standing on
the edge of a moor.

"what is a moor?" she said suddenly to mrs. medlock.

"look out of the window in about ten minutes and you'll see," the woman
answered.  "we've got to drive five miles across missel moor before we
get to the manor.  you won't see much because it's a dark night, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
ad and she saw
hedges and trees.  after that there seemed nothing different for a long
time--or at least it seemed a long time to her.

at last the horses began to go more slowly, as if they were climbing
up-hill, and presently there seemed to be no more hedges and no more
trees.  she could see nothing, in fact, but a dense darkness on either
side.  she leaned forward and pressed her face against the window just
as the carriage gave a big jolt.

"eh! we're on the moor now sure enough," said mrs. medlock.

the carriage lamps shed a yellow light on a rough-looking road which
seemed to be cut through bushes and low-growing things which ended in
the great expanse of dark apparently spread out before and around them.
a wind was rising and making a singular, wild, low, rushing sound.

"it's--it's not the sea, is it?" said mary, looking round at her
companion.

"no, not it," answered mrs. medlock.  "nor it isn't fields nor
mountains, it's just miles and miles and miles of wild land that
nothing grows
 
 ___________________________
 
 on but heather and gorse and broom, and nothing lives on
but wild ponies and sheep."

"i feel as if it might be the sea, if there were water on it," said
mary.  "it sounds like the sea just now."

"that's the wind blowing through the bushes," mrs. medlock said.  "it's
a wild, dreary enough place to my mind, though there's plenty that
likes it--particularly when the heather's in bloom."

on and on they drove through the darkness, and though the rain stopped,
the wind rushed by and whistled and made strange sounds.  the road went
up and down, and several times the carriage passed over a little bridge
beneath which water rushed very fast with a great deal of noise.  mary
felt as if the drive would never come to an end and that the wide,
bleak moor 
 
 ___________________________
 
was a wide expanse of black ocean through which she was
passing on a strip of dry land.

"i don't like it," she said to herself.  "i don't like it," and she
pinched her thin lips more tightly together.

the horses were climbing up a hilly piece of road when she first caught
sight of a light.  mrs. medlock saw it as soon as she did and drew a
long sigh of relief.

"eh, i am glad to see that bit o' light twinkling," she exclaimed.
"it's the light in the lodge window.  we shall get a good cup of tea
after a bit, at all events."

it was "after a bit," as she said, for when the carriage passed through
the park gates there was still two miles of avenue to drive through and
the trees (which nearly met overhead) made it seem as if they were
driving through a long dark vault.

they drove out of the vault
 
 ___________________________
 
 in the portraits on the walls and the figures in the suits of
armor made mary feel that she did not want to look at them.  as she
stood on the stone floor she looked a very small, odd little black
figure, and she felt as small and lost and odd as she looked.

a neat, thin old man stood near the manservant who opened the door for
them.

"you are to take her to her room," he said in a husky voice.  "he
doesn't want to see her.  he's going to london in the morning."

"very well, mr. pitcher," mrs. medlock answered.  "so long as i know
what's expected of me, i can manage."

"what's expected of you, mrs. medlock," mr. pitcher said, "is that you
make sure that he's not disturbed and that he doesn't see what he
doesn't want to see."

and then mary lennox was led up a broad staircase and down a long
corridor and up a short flight of steps and through another corridor
and another, until a door opened in a wall and she found herself in a
room with a fire in it and a supper on a table.

mrs. medlock sai
 
 ___________________________
 
 sat up on her heels, with her blacking-brush in her hand, and
laughed, without seeming the least out of temper.

"eh! i know that," she said.  "if there was a grand missus at
misselthwaite i should never have been even one of th' under
house-maids. i might have been let to be scullerymaid but i'd never
have been let upstairs.  i'm too common an' i talk too much yorkshire.
but this is a funny house for all it's so grand.  seems like there's
neither master nor mistress except mr. pitcher an' mrs. medlock.  mr.
craven, he won't be troubled about anythin' when he's here, an' he's
nearly always away.  mrs. medlock gave me th' place out o' kindness.
she told me she could never have done it if misselthwaite had been like
other big houses." "are you going to be my servant?" mary asked, still
in her imperious little indian way.

martha began to rub her grate again.

"i'm mrs. medlock's servant," she said stoutly.  "an' she's mr.
craven's--but i'm to do the housemaid's work up here an' wait on you a
bi
 
 ___________________________
 
t.  but you won't need much waitin' on."

"who is going to dress me?" demanded mary.

martha sat up on her heels again and stared.  she spoke in broad
yorkshire in her amazement.

"canna' tha' dress thysen!" she said.

"what do you mean? i don't understand your language," said mary.

"eh! i forgot," martha said.  "mrs. medlock told me i'd have to be
careful or you wouldn't know what i was sayin'.  i mean can't you put
on your own clothes?"

"no," answered mary, quite indignantly.  "i never did in my life.  my
ayah dressed me, of course."

"well," said martha, evidently not in the least aware that she was
impudent, "it's time tha' should learn.  tha' cannot begin younger.
it'll do thee good to wait on thysen a bit.  my mother always said she
couldn't see why grand people's children didn't turn out fair
fools--what wit
 
 ___________________________
 
 went to the bed and
bent over her.

"eh! you mustn't cry like that there!" she begged.  "you mustn't for
sure.  i didn't know you'd be vexed.  i don't know anythin' about
anythin'--just like you said.  i beg your pardon, miss. do stop cryin'."

there was something comforting and really friendly in her queer
yorkshire speech and sturdy way which had a good effect on mary.  she
gradually ceased crying and became quiet.  martha looked relieved.

"it's time for thee to get up now," she said.  "mrs. medlock said i was
to carry tha' breakfast an' tea an' dinner into th' room next to this.
it's been made into a nursery for thee.  i'll help thee on with thy
clothes if tha'll get out o' bed.  if th' buttons are at th' back tha'
cannot button them up tha'self."

when mary at last decided to get up, the clothes martha took from the
wardrobe were not the ones she had worn when she arrived the night
before with mrs. medlock.

"those are not mine," she said.  "mine are black."

she looked the thick white w
 
 ___________________________
 
ool coat and dress over, and added with
cool approval:

"those are nicer than mine."

"these are th' ones tha' must put on," martha answered.  "mr. craven
ordered mrs. medlock to get 'em in london.  he said 'i won't have a
child dressed in black wanderin' about like a lost soul,' he said.
'it'd make the place sadder than it is.  put color on her.' mother she
said she knew what he meant.  mother always knows what a body means.
she doesn't hold with black hersel'."

"i hate black things," said mary.

the dressing process was one which taught them both something.  martha
had "buttoned up" her little sisters and brothers but she had never
seen a child who stood still and
 
 ___________________________
 
ay's rest."

mary drank some tea and ate a little toast and some marmalade.

"you wrap up warm an' run out an' play you," said martha.  "it'll do
you good and give you some stomach for your meat."

mary went to the window.  there were gardens and paths and big trees,
but everything looked dull and wintry.

"out? why should i go out on a day like this?" "well, if tha' doesn't
go out tha'lt have to stay in, an' what has tha' got to do?"

mary glanced about her.  there was nothing to do.  when mrs. medlock
had prepared the nursery she had not thought of amusement.  perhaps it
would be better to go and see what the gardens were like.

"who will go with me?" she inquired.

martha stared.

"you'll go by yourself," she answered.  "you'll have to learn to play
like other children does when they haven't got sisters and brothers.
our dickon goes off on th' moor by himself an' plays for hours.  that's
how he made friends with th' pony.  he's got sheep on th' moor that
knows him, an' birds as comes an' ea
 
 ___________________________
 
 shrubbery.  "there's lots o' flowers in
summer-time, but there's nothin' bloomin' now." she seemed to hesitate
a second before she added, "one of th' gardens is locked up.  no one
has been in it for ten years."

"why?" asked mary in spite of herself.  here was another locked door
added to the hundred in the strange house.

"mr. craven had it shut when his wife died so sudden.  he won't let no
one go inside.  it was her garden.  he locked th' door an' dug a hole
and buried th' key.  there's mrs. medlock's bell ringing--i must run."

after she was gone mary turned down the walk which led to the door in
the shrubbery.  she could not help thinking about the garden which no
one had been into for ten years.  she wondered what it would look like
and whether there were any flowers still alive in it.  when she had
passed through the shrubbery gate she found herself in great gardens,
with wide lawns and winding walks with clipped borders.  there were
trees, and flower-beds, and evergreens clipped into 
 
 ___________________________
 
e understood.  it must mean that hollow shuddering sort of roar which
rushed round and round the house as if the giant no one could see were
buffeting it and beating at the walls and windows to try to break in.
but one knew he could not get in, and somehow it made one feel very
safe and warm inside a room with a red coal fire.

"but why did he hate it so?" she asked, after she had listened.  she
intended to know if martha did.

then martha gave up her store of knowledge.

"mind," she said, "mrs. medlock said it's not to be talked about.
there's lots o' things in this place that's not to be talked over.
that's mr. craven's orders.  his troubles are none servants' business,
he says.  but for th' garden he wouldn't be like he is.  it was mrs.
craven's garden that she had made when first they were married an' she
just loved it, an' they used to 'tend the flowers themselves.  an' none
o' th' gardeners was ever let to go in.  him an' her used to go in an'
shut th' door an' stay there hours an' hours
 
 ___________________________
 
" said or did they always
sounded comfortable.

"if i had a raven or a fox cub i could play with it," said mary.  "but
i have nothing."

martha looked perplexed.

"can tha' knit?" she asked.

"no," answered mary.

"can tha' sew?"

"no."

"can tha' read?"

"yes."

"then why doesn't tha, read somethin', or learn a bit o' spellin'?
tha'st old enough to be learnin' thy book a good bit now."

"i haven't any books," said mary.  "those i had were left in india."

"that's a pity," said martha.  "if mrs. medlock'd let thee go into th'
library, there's thousands o' books there."

mary did not ask where the library was, because she was suddenly
inspired by a new idea.  she made up her mind to go and find it
herself.  she was not troubled about mrs. medlock.  mrs. medlock seemed
always to be in her comfortable housekeeper's sitting-room downstairs.
in this queer place one scarcely ever saw any one at all.  in fact,
there was no one to see but the servants, and when their master was
away they lived a luxur
 
 ___________________________
 
ious life below stairs, where there was a huge
kitchen hung about with shining brass and pewter, and a large servants'
hall where there were four or five abundant meals eaten every day, and
where a great deal of lively romping went on when mrs. medlock was out
of the way.

mary's meals were served regularly, and martha waited on her, but no
one troubled themselves about her in the least.  mrs. medlock came and
looked at her every day or two, but no one inquired what she did or
told her what to do.  she supposed that perhaps this was the english
way of treating children.  in india she had always been attended by her
ayah, who had followed her about and waited on her, hand and foot.  she
had often been tired of her company.  now she was followed by nobody
and was learning to dress herself because martha looked as though she
thought she was silly and stupid when she wanted to have things handed
 
 ___________________________
 
to hear of it brought back to her mind
the hundred rooms with closed doors.  she wondered if they were all
really locked and what she would find if she could get into any of
them.  were there a hundred really? why shouldn't she go and see how
many doors she could count? it would be something to do on this morning
when she could not go out.  she had never been taught to ask permission
to do things, and she knew nothing at all about authority, so she would
not have thought it necessary to ask mrs. medlock if she might walk
about the house, even if she had seen her.

she opened the door of the room and went into the corridor, and then
she began her wanderings.  it was a long corridor and it branched into
other corridors and it led her up short flights of steps which mounted
to others again.  there were doors and doors, and there were pictures
on the walls.  sometimes they were pictures of dark, curious
landscapes, but oftenest they were portraits of men and women in queer,
grand costumes made of 
 
 ___________________________
 
.  it seemed
as if there was no one in all the huge rambling house but her own small
self, wandering about upstairs and down, through narrow passages and
wide ones, where it seemed to her that no one but herself had ever
walked.  since so many rooms had been built, people must have lived in
them, but it all seemed so empty that she could not quite believe it
true.

it was not until she climbed to the second floor that she thought of
turning the handle of a door.  all the doors were shut, as mrs. medlock
had said they were, but at last she put her hand on the handle of one
of them and turned it.  she was almost frightened for a moment when she
felt that it turned without difficulty and that when she pushed upon
the door itself it slowly and heavily opened.  it was a massive door
and opened into a big bedroom.  there were embroidered hangings on the
wall, and inlaid furniture such as she had seen in india stood about
the room.  a broad window with leaded panes looked out upon the moor;
and over 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a sound.  it was another cry, but not
quite like the one she had heard last night; it was only a short one, a
fretful childish whine muffled by passing through walls.

"it's nearer than it was," said mary, her heart beating rather faster.
"and it is crying."

she put her hand accidentally upon the tapestry near her, and then
sprang back, feeling quite startled.  the tapestry was the covering of
a door which fell open and showed her that there was another part of
the corridor behind it, and mrs. medlock was coming up it with her
bunch of keys in her hand and a very cross look on her face.

"what are you doing here?" she said, and she took mary by the arm and
pulled her away.  "what did i tell you?"

"i turned round the wrong corner," explained mary.  "i didn't know
which way to go and i heard some one crying." she quite hated mrs.
medlock at the moment, but she hated her more the next.

"you didn't hear anything of the sort," said the housekeeper.  "you
come along back to your own nursery or i
 
 ___________________________
 
martha stared at her a moment curiously before she took up her
polishing brush and began to rub the grate again.  she was thinking
that the small plain face did not look quite as sour at this moment as
it had done the first morning she saw it.  it looked just a trifle like
little susan ann's when she wanted something very much.

"i'll ask my mother about it," she said.  "she's one o' them that
nearly always sees a way to do things.  it's my day out today an' i'm
goin' home.  eh! i am glad.  mrs. medlock thinks a lot o' mother.
perhaps she could talk to her."

"i like your mother," said mary.

"i should think tha' did," agreed martha, polishing away.

"i've never seen her," said mary.

"no, tha' hasn't," replied martha.

she sat up on her heels again and rubbed the end of her nose with the
back of her hand as if puzzled for a moment, but she ended quite
positively.

"well, she's that sensible an' hard workin' an' goodnatured an' clean
that no one could help likin' her whether they'd seen her or
 
 ___________________________
 
but thickly growing, glossy, dark green leaves.  she was very
much disappointed.  something of her contrariness came back to her as
she paced the walk and looked over it at the tree-tops inside.  it
seemed so silly, she said to herself, to be near it and not be able to
get in.  she took the key in her pocket when she went back to the
house, and she made up her mind that she would always carry it with her
when she went out, so that if she ever should find the hidden door she
would be ready.

mrs. medlock had allowed martha to sleep all night at the cottage, but
she was back at her work in the morning with cheeks redder than ever
and in the best of spirits.

"i got up at four o'clock," she said.  "eh! it was pretty on th' moor
with th' birds gettin' up an' th' rabbits scamperin' about an' th' sun
risin'. i didn't walk all th' way.  a man gave me a ride in his cart
an' i did enjoy myself."

she was full of stories of the delights of her day out.  her mother had
been glad to see her and they had g
 
 ___________________________
 
e we heard they had in york once."

"india is quite different from yorkshire," mary said slowly, as she
thought the matter over.  "i never thought of that.  did dickon and
your mother like to hear you talk about me?"

"why, our dickon's eyes nearly started out o' his head, they got that
round," answered martha.  "but mother, she was put out about your
seemin' to be all by yourself like.  she said, 'hasn't mr. craven got
no governess for her, nor no nurse?' and i said, 'no, he hasn't, though
mrs. medlock says he will when he thinks of it, but she says he mayn't
think of it for two or three years.'"

"i don't want a governess," said mary sharply.

"but mother says you ought to be learnin' your book by this time an'
you ought to have a woman to look after you, an' she says: 'now,
martha, you just think how you'd feel yourself, in a big place like
that, wanderin' about all alone, an' no mother.  you do your best to
cheer her up,' she says, an' i said i would."

mary gave her a long, steady look.


 
 ___________________________
 
ve
children learns something besides her a b c. children's as good as
'rithmetic to set you findin' out things.'"

"how much would a spade cost--a little one?" mary asked.

"well," was martha's reflective answer, "at thwaite village there's a
shop or so an' i saw little garden sets with a spade an' a rake an' a
fork all tied together for two shillings.  an' they was stout enough to
work with, too."

"i've got more than that in my purse," said mary.  "mrs. morrison gave
me five shillings and mrs. medlock gave me some money from mr. craven."

"did he remember thee that much?" exclaimed martha.

"mrs. medlock said i was to have a shilling a week to spend.  she gives
me one every saturday.  i didn't know what to spend it on."

"my word! that's riches," said martha.  "tha' can buy anything in th'
world tha' wants.  th' rent of our cottage is only one an' threepence
an' it's like pullin' eye-teeth to get it.  now i've just thought of
somethin'," putting her hands on her hips.

"what?" said mary eage
 
 ___________________________
 
om, and mary stood by the fire and twisted her thin little
hands together with sheer pleasure.

"if i have a spade," she whispered, "i can make the earth nice and soft
and dig up weeds.  if i have seeds and can make flowers grow the garden
won't be dead at all--it will come alive."

she did not go out again that afternoon because when martha returned
with her pen and ink and paper she was obliged to clear the table and
carry the plates and dishes downstairs and when she got into the
kitchen mrs. medlock was there and told her to do something, so mary
waited for what seemed to her a long time before she came back.  then
it was a serious piece of work to write to dickon.  mary had been
taught very little because her governesses had disliked her too much to
stay with her.  she could not spell particularly well but she found
that she could print letters when she tried.  this was the letter
martha dictated to her: "my dear dickon:

this comes hoping to find you well as it leaves me at present.  mis
 
 ___________________________
 
way."

"oh!" exclaimed mary, "then i shall see him! i never thought i should
see dickon."

"does tha' want to see him?" asked martha suddenly, for mary had looked
so pleased.

"yes, i do.  i never saw a boy foxes and crows loved.  i want to see
him very much."

martha gave a little start, as if she remembered something.  "now to
think," she broke out, "to think o' me forgettin' that there; an' i
thought i was goin' to tell you first thing this mornin'. i asked
mother--and she said she'd ask mrs. medlock her own self."

"do you mean--" mary began.

"what i said tuesday.  ask her if you might be driven over to our
cottage some day and have a bit o' mother's hot oat cake, an' butter,
an' a glass o' milk."

it seemed as if all the interesting things were happening in one day.
to think of going over the moor in the daylight and when the sky was
blue! to think of going into the cottage which held twelve children!

"does she think mrs. medlock would let me go?" she asked, quite
anxiously.

"aye, she 
 
 ___________________________
 
the door
and walked down the corridor to see if you were coming.  and i heard
that far-off crying again, just as we heard it the other night.  there
isn't a wind today, so you see it couldn't have been the wind."

"eh!" said martha restlessly.  "tha' mustn't go walkin' about in
corridors an' listenin'. mr. craven would be that there angry there's
no knowin' what he'd do."

"i wasn't listening," said mary.  "i was just waiting for you--and i
heard it.  that's three times."

"my word! there's mrs. medlock's bell," said martha, and she almost ran
out of the room.

"it's the strangest house any one ever lived in," said mary drowsily,
as she dropped her head on the cushioned seat of the armchair near her.
fresh air, and digging, and skipping-rope had made her feel so
comfortably tired that she fell asleep.




chapter x

dickon


the sun shone down for nearly a week on the secret garden.  the secret
garden was what mary called it when she was thinking of it.  she liked
the name, and she liked still
 
 ___________________________
 
 wouldn't do no
harm."

mary ate her dinner as quickly as she could and when she rose from the
table she was going to run to her room to put on her hat again, but
martha stopped her.

"i've got somethin' to tell you," she said.  "i thought i'd let you eat
your dinner first.  mr. craven came back this mornin' and i think he
wants to see you."

mary turned quite pale.

"oh!" she said.  "why! why! he didn't want to see me when i came.  i
heard pitcher say he didn't." "well," explained martha, "mrs. medlock
says it's because o' mother.  she was walkin' to thwaite village an'
she met him.  she'd never spoke to him before, but mrs. craven had been
to our cottage two or three times.  he'd forgot, but mother hadn't an'
she made bold to stop him.  i don't know what she said to him about you
but she said somethin' as put him in th' mind to see you before he goes
away again, tomorrow."

"oh!" cried mary, "is he going away tomorrow? i am so glad!"

"he's goin' for a long time.  he mayn't come back till au
 
 ___________________________
 


if he did not come back until winter, or even autumn, there would be
time to watch the secret garden come alive.  even if he found out then
and took it away from her she would have had that much at least.

"when do you think he will want to see--"

she did not finish the sentence, because the door opened, and mrs.
medlock walked in.  she had on her best black dress and cap, and her
collar was fastened with a large brooch with a picture of a man's face
on it.  it was a colored photograph of mr. medlock who had died years
ago, and she always wore it when she was dressed up.  she looked
nervous and excited.

"your hair's rough," she said quickly.  "go and brush it.  martha, help
her to slip on her best dress.  mr. craven sent me to bring her to him
in his study."

all the pink left mary's cheeks.  her heart began to thump and she felt
herself changing into a stiff, plain, silent child again.  she did not
even answer mrs. medlock, but turned and walked into her bedroom,
followed by martha.  she 
 
 ___________________________
 
said nothing while her dress was changed, and
her hair brushed, and after she was quite tidy she followed mrs.
medlock down the corridors, in silence.  what was there for her to say?
she was obliged to go and see mr. craven and he would not like her, and
she would not like him.  she knew what he would think of her.

she was taken to a part of the house she had not been into before.  at
last mrs. medlock knocked at a door, and when some one said, "come in,"
they entered the room together.  a man was sitting in an armchair
before the fire, and mrs. medlock spoke to him.

"this is miss mary, sir," she said.

"you can go and leave her here.  i will ring for you when i want you to
take her away," said mr. craven.

when she went out and closed the door, mary could only stand waiting, a
plain little thing, twisting her thin hands together.  she could see
that the man in the chair was not so much a hu
 
 ___________________________
 
ause she was afraid he might see
the excited lump which she felt jump into it.  she came a step nearer
to him.

"may i?" she said tremulously.

her anxious little face seemed to worry him more than ever.

"don't look so frightened," he exclaimed.  "of course you may.  i am
your guardian, though i am a poor one for any child.  i cannot give you
time or attention.  i am too ill, and wretched and distracted; but i
wish you to be happy and comfortable.  i don't know anything about
children, but mrs. medlock is to see that you have all you need.  i
sent for you to-day because mrs. sowerby said i ought to see you.  her
daughter had talked about you.  she thought you needed fresh air and
freedom and running about."

"she knows all about children," mary said again in spite of herself.

"she ought to," said mr. craven.  "i thought her rather bold to stop me
on the moor, but she said--mrs. craven had been kind to her." it seemed
hard for him to speak his dead wife's name.  "she is a respectable
woman.  
 
 ___________________________
 
ust have reminded him of something.  when he stopped and spoke to her
his dark eyes looked almost soft and kind.

"you can have as much earth as you want," he said.  "you remind me of
some one else who loved the earth and things that grow.  when you see a
bit of earth you want," with something like a smile, "take it, child,
and make it come alive."

"may i take it from anywhere--if it's not wanted?"

"anywhere," he answered.  "there! you must go now, i am tired." he
touched the bell to call mrs. medlock.  "good-by. i shall be away all
summer."

mrs. medlock came so quickly that mary thought she must have been
waiting in the corridor.

"mrs. medlock," mr. craven said to her, "now i have seen the child i
understand what mrs. sowerby meant.  she must be less delicate before
she begins lessons.  give her simple, healthy food.  let her run wild
in the garden.  don't look after her too much.  she needs liberty and
fresh air and romping about.  mrs. sowerby is to come and see her now
and then and she
 
 ___________________________
 
 may sometimes go to the cottage."

mrs. medlock looked pleased.  she was relieved to hear that she need
not "look after" mary too much.  she had felt her a tiresome charge and
had indeed seen as little of her as she dared.  in addition to this she
was fond of martha's mother.

"thank you, sir," she said.  "susan sowerby and me went to school
together and she's as sensible and good-hearted a woman as you'd find
in a day's walk.  i never had any children myself and she's had twelve,
and there never was healthier or better ones.  miss mary can 
 
 ___________________________
 
get no
harm from them.  i'd always take susan sowerby's advice about children
myself.  she's what you might call healthy-minded--if you understand
me."

"i understand," mr. craven answered.  "take miss mary away now and send
pitcher to me."

when mrs. medlock left her at the end of her own corridor mary flew
back to her room.  she found martha waiting there.  martha had, in
fact, hurried back after she had removed the dinner service.

"i can have my garden!" cried mary.  "i may have it where i like! i am
not going to have a governess for a long time! your mother is coming to
see me and i may go to your cottage! he says a little girl like me
could not do any harm and i may do what i like--anywhere!"

"eh!" said martha delightedly, "that was nice of h
 
 ___________________________
 
 was ajar and the sound came down the corridor, a
far-off faint sound of fretful crying.  she listened for a few minutes
and each minute she became more and more sure.  she felt as if she must
find out what it was.  it seemed even stranger than the secret garden
and the buried key.  perhaps the fact that she was in a rebellious mood
made her bold.  she put her foot out of bed and stood on the floor.

"i am going to find out what it is," she said.  "everybody is in bed
and i don't care about mrs. medlock--i don't care!"

there was a candle by her bedside and she took it up and went softly
out of the room.  the corridor looked very long and dark, but she was
too excited to mind that.  she thought she remembered the corners she
must turn to find the short corridor with the door covered with
tapestry--the one mrs. medlock had come through the day she lost
herself.  the sound had come up that passage.  so she went on with her
dim light, almost feeling her way, her heart beating so loud that she
fan
 
 ___________________________
 
d as she was told and returned to her footstool.

"she is much prettier than you," she said, "but her eyes are just like
yours--at least they are the same shape and color.  why is the curtain
drawn over her?"

he moved uncomfortably.

"i made them do it," he said.  "sometimes i don't like to see her
looking at me.  she smiles too much when i am ill and miserable.
besides, she is mine and i don't want everyone to see her." there were
a few moments of silence and then mary spoke.

"what would mrs. medlock do if she found out that i had been here?" she
inquired.

"she would do as i told her to do," he answered.  "and i should tell
her that i wanted you to come here and talk to me every day.  i am glad
you came."

"so am i," said mary.  "i will come as often as i can, but"--she
hesitated--"i shall have to look every day for the garden door."

"yes, you must," said colin, "and you can tell me about it afterward."

he lay thinking a few minutes, as he had done before, and then he spoke
again.

"i th
 
 ___________________________
 
r's picture.  before i left him i
sang him to sleep."

martha fairly gasped with amazement.

"i can scarcely believe thee!" she protested.  "it's as if tha'd walked
straight into a lion's den.  if he'd been like he is most times he'd
have throwed himself into one of his tantrums and roused th' house.  he
won't let strangers look at him."

"he let me look at him.  i looked at him all the time and he looked at
me.  we stared!" said mary.

"i don't know what to do!" cried agitated martha.  "if mrs. medlock
finds out, she'll think i broke orders and told thee and i shall be
packed back to mother."

"he is not going to tell mrs. medlock anything about it yet.  it's to
be a sort of secret just at first," said mary firmly.  "and he says
everybody is obliged to do as he pleases."

"aye, that's true enough--th' bad lad!" sighed martha, wiping her
forehead with her apron.

"he says mrs. medlock must.  and he wants me to come and talk to him
every day.  and you are to tell me when he wants me."

"me!" sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ght ill.
then a big doctor came to see him an' made them take it off.  he talked
to th' other doctor quite rough--in a polite way.  he said there'd been
too much medicine and too much lettin' him have his own way."

"i think he's a very spoiled boy," said mary.

"he's th' worst young nowt as ever was!" said martha.  "i won't say as
he hasn't been ill a good bit.  he's had coughs an' colds that's nearly
killed him two or three times.  once he had rheumatic fever an' once he
had typhoid.  eh! mrs. medlock did get a fright then.  he'd been out of
his head an' she was talkin' to th' nurse, thinkin' he didn't know
nothin', an' she said, 'he'll die this time sure enough, an' best thing
for him an' for everybody.' an' she looked at him an' there he was with
his big eyes open, starin' at her as sensible as she was herself.  she
didn't know wha'd happen but he just stared at her an' says, 'you give
me some water an' stop talkin'.'"

"do you think he will die?" asked mary.

"mother says there's no reaso
 
 ___________________________
 
rich colors in the rugs and hangings and pictures and books on the
walls which made it look glowing and comfortable even in spite of the
gray sky and falling rain.  colin looked rather like a picture himself.
he was wrapped in a velvet dressing-gown and sat against a big brocaded
cushion.  he had a red spot on each cheek.

"come in," he said.  "i've been thinking about you all morning."

"i've been thinking about you, too," answered mary.  "you don't know
how frightened martha is.  she says mrs. medlock will think she told me
about you and then she will be sent away."

he frowned.

"go and tell her to come here," he said.  "she is in the next room."

mary went and brought her back.  poor martha was shaking in her shoes.
colin was still frowning.

"have you to do what i please or have you not?" he demanded.

"i have to do what you please, sir," martha faltered, turning quite red.

"has medlock to do what i please?"

"everybody has, sir," said martha.

"well, then, if i order you to bring miss m
 
 ___________________________
 
ary to me, how can medlock
send you away if she finds it out?"

"please don't let her, sir," pleaded martha.

"i'll send her away if she dares to say a word about such a thing,"
said master craven grandly.  "she wouldn't like that, i can tell you."

"thank you, sir," bobbing a curtsy, "i want to do my duty, sir."

"what i want is your duty" said colin more grandly still.  "i'll take
care of you.  now go away."

when the door closed behind martha, colin found mistress mary gazing at
him as if he had set her wondering.

"w
 
 ___________________________
 
ben
weatherstaff and his robin, and colin was actually sitting up as if he
had forgotten about his weak back, when he suddenly remembered
something.  "do you know there is one thing we have never once thought
of," he said.  "we are cousins."

it seemed so queer that they had talked so much and never remembered
this simple thing that they laughed more than ever, because they had
got into the humor to laugh at anything.  and in the midst of the fun
the door opened and in walked dr. craven and mrs. medlock.

dr. craven started in actual alarm and mrs. medlock almost fell back
because he had accidentally bumped against her.

"good lord!" exclaimed poor mrs. medlock with her eyes almost starting
out of her head.  "good lord!"

"what is this?" said dr. craven, coming forward.  "what does it mean?"

then mary was reminded of the boy rajah again.  colin answered as if
neither the doctor's alarm nor mrs. medlock's terror were of the
slightest consequence.  he was as little disturbed or frightened as if
 
 ___________________________
 

an elderly cat and dog had walked into the room.

"this is my cousin, mary lennox," he said.  "i asked her to come and
talk to me.  i like her.  she must come and talk to me whenever i send
for her."

dr. craven turned reproachfully to mrs. medlock.  "oh, sir" she panted.
"i don't know how it's happened.  there's not a servant on the place
tha'd dare to talk--they all have their orders."

"nobody told her anything," said colin.  "she heard me crying and found
me herself.  i am glad she came.  don't be silly, medlock."

mary saw that dr. craven did not look pleased, but it was quite plain
that he dare not oppose his patient.  he sat down by colin and felt his
pulse.

"i am afraid there has been too much excitement.  excitement is not
good 
 
 ___________________________
 
for you, my boy," he said.

"i should be excited if she kept away," answered colin, his eyes
beginning to look dangerously sparkling.  "i am better.  she makes me
better.  the nurse must bring up her tea with mine.  we will have tea
together."

mrs. medlock and dr. craven looked at each other in a troubled way, but
there was evidently nothing to be done.

"he does look rather better, sir," ventured mrs. medlock.
"but"--thinking the matter over--"he looked better this morning before
she came into the room."

"she came into the room last night.  she stayed with me a long time.
she sang a hindustani song to me and it made me go to sleep," said
colin.  "i was better when i wakened up.  i wanted my breakfast.  i
want my tea now.  tell nurse, medlock."

dr. craven did not stay very long.  he talked to the nurse for a few
minutes when she came into the room and said a few words of warning to
colin.  he must 
 
 ___________________________
 
 in his room, talking about rajahs
or gardens or dickon and the cottage on the moor.  they had looked at
the splendid books and pictures and sometimes mary had read things to
colin, and sometimes he had read a little to her.  when he was amused
and interested she thought he scarcely looked like an invalid at all,
except that his face was so colorless and he was always on the sofa.

"you are a sly young one to listen and get out of your bed to go
following things up like you did that night," mrs. medlock said once.
"but there's no saying it's not been a sort of blessing to the lot of
us.  he's not had a tantrum or a whining fit since you made friends.
the nurse was just going to give up the case because she was so sick of
him, but she says she doesn't mind staying now you've gone on duty with
her," laughing a little.

in her talks with colin, mary had tried to be very cautious about the
secret garden.  there were certain things she wanted to find out from
him, but she felt that she must find th
 
 ___________________________
 
aid," he answered.  "she give my head
a bit of a rub an' laughed an' she says, 'eh, lad, tha' can have all
th' secrets tha' likes.  i've knowed thee twelve year'.'"

"how did you know about colin?" asked mary.

"everybody as knowed about mester craven knowed there was a little lad
as was like to be a cripple, an' they knowed mester craven didn't like
him to be talked about.  folks is sorry for mester craven because mrs.
craven was such a pretty young lady an' they was so fond of each other.
mrs. medlock stops in our cottage whenever she goes to thwaite an' she
doesn't mind talkin' to mother before us children, because she knows us
has been brought up to be trusty.  how did tha' find out about him?
martha was in fine trouble th' last time she came home.  she said tha'd
heard him frettin' an' tha' was askin' questions an' she didn't know
what to say."

mary told him her story about the midnight wuthering of the wind which
had wakened her and about the faint far-off sounds of the complaining
voic
 
 ___________________________
 
large beak.  when mary wanted to rest a little dickon sat down with
her under a tree and once he took his pipe out of his pocket and played
the soft strange little notes and two squirrels appeared on the wall
and looked and listened.

"tha's a good bit stronger than tha' was," dickon said, looking at her
as she was digging.  "tha's beginning to look different, for sure."

mary was glowing with exercise and good spirits.

"i'm getting fatter and fatter every day," she said quite exultantly.
"mrs. medlock will have to get me some bigger dresses.  martha says my
hair is growing thicker.  it isn't so flat and stringy."

the sun was beginning to set and sending deep gold-colored rays
slanting under the trees when they parted.

"it'll be fine tomorrow," said dickon.  "i'll be at work by sunrise."

"so will i," said mary.


she ran back to the house as quickly as her feet would carry her.  she
wanted to tell colin about dickon's fox cub and the rook and about what
the springtime had been doing.  she 
 
 ___________________________
 
he gardening books and perhaps tried playing the games, and he
would have enjoyed himself so much he would never once have thought he
was going to die or have put his hand on his spine to see if there was
a lump coming.  he had a way of doing that which she could not bear.
it gave her an uncomfortable frightened feeling because he always
looked so frightened himself.  he said that if he felt even quite a
little lump some day he should know his hunch had begun to grow.
something he had heard mrs. medlock whispering to the nurse had given
him the idea and he had thought over it in secret until it was quite
firmly fixed in his mind.  mrs. medlock had said his father's back had
begun to show its crookedness in that way when he was a child.  he had
never told any one but mary that most of his "tantrums" as they called
them grew out of his hysterical hidden fear.  mary had been sorry for
him when he had told her.

"he always began to think about it when he was cross or tired," she
said to herself.  
 
 ___________________________
 
 sobbed and wailed but he didn't
scream.

"you didn't feel a lump!" contradicted mary fiercely.  "if you did it
was only a hysterical lump.  hysterics makes lumps.  there's nothing
the matter with your horrid back--nothing but hysterics! turn over and
let me look at it!"

she liked the word "hysterics" and felt somehow as if it had an effect
on him.  he was probably like herself and had never heard it before.

"nurse," she commanded, "come here and show me his back this minute!"

the nurse, mrs. medlock and martha had been standing huddled together
near the door staring at her, their mouths half open.  all three had
gasped with fright more than once.  the nurse came forward as if she
were half afraid.  colin was heaving with great breathless sobs.

"perhaps he--he won't let me," she hesitated in a low voice.

colin heard her, however, and he gasped out between two sobs:

"sh-show her! she-she'll see then!"

it was a poor thin back to look at when it was bared.  every rib could
be counted and e
 
 ___________________________
 
with you, mary," he said.  "i shan't hate fresh air
if we can find--" he remembered just in time to stop himself from
saying "if we can find the secret garden" and he ended, "i shall like
to go out with you if dickon will come and push my chair.  i do so want
to see dickon and the fox and the crow."

the nurse remade the tumbled bed and shook and straightened the
pillows.  then she made colin a cup of beef tea and gave a cup to mary,
who really was very glad to get it after her excitement.  mrs. medlock
and martha gladly slipped away, and after everything was neat and calm
and in order the nurse looked as if she would very gladly slip away
also.  she was a healthy young woman who resented being robbed of her
sleep and she yawned quite openly as she looked at mary, who had pushed
her big footstool close to the four-posted bed and was holding colin's
hand.

"you must go back and get your sleep out," she said.  "he'll drop off
after a while--if he's not too upset.  then i'll lie down myself in th
 
 ___________________________
 
as come!"


of course dr. craven had been sent for the morning after colin had had
his tantrum.  he was always sent for at once when such a thing occurred
and he always found, when he arrived, a white shaken boy lying on his
bed, sulky and still so hysterical that he was ready to break into
fresh sobbing at the least word.  in fact, dr. craven dreaded and
detested the difficulties of these visits.  on this occasion he was
away from misselthwaite manor until afternoon.

"how is he?" he asked mrs. medlock rather irritably when he arrived.
"he will break a blood-vessel in one of those fits some day.  the boy
is half insane with hysteria and self-indulgence."

"well, sir," answered mrs. medlock, "you'll scarcely believe your eyes
when you see him.  that plain sour-faced child that's almost as bad as
himself has just bewitched him.  how she's done it there's no telling.
the lord knows she's nothing to look at and you scarcely ever hear her
speak, but she did what none of us dare do.  she just flew 
 
 ___________________________
 
at him like
a little cat last night, and stamped her feet and ordered him to stop
screaming, and somehow she startled him so that he actually did stop,
and this afternoon--well just come up and see, sir.  it's past
crediting."

the scene which dr. craven beheld when he entered his patient's room
was indeed rather astonishing to him.  as mrs. medlock opened the door
he heard laughing and chattering.  colin was on his sofa in his
dressing-gown and he was sitting up quite straight looking at a picture
in one of the garden books and talking to the plain child who at that
moment could scarcely be called plain at all because her face was so
glowing with enjoyment.

"those long spires of blue ones--we'll have a lot of those," colin was
announcing.  "they're called del-phin-iums."

"dickon says they're larkspurs made big and grand," cried mistress
 
 ___________________________
 
he waved
a thin hand which ought really to have been covered with royal signet
rings made of rubies.  "it is because my cousin makes me forget that
she makes me better."

dr. craven had never made such a short stay after a "tantrum"; usually
he was obliged to remain a very long time and do a great many things.
this afternoon he did not give any medicine or leave any new orders and
he was spared any disagreeable scenes.  when he went downstairs he
looked very thoughtful and when he talked to mrs. medlock in the
library she felt that he was a much puzzled man.

"well, sir," she ventured, "could you have believed it?"

"it is certainly a new state of affairs," said the doctor.  "and
there's no denying it is better than the old one."

"i believe susan sowerby's right--i do that," said mrs. medlock.  "i
stopped in her cottage on my way to thwaite yesterday and had a bit of
talk with her.  and she says to me, 'well, sarah ann, she mayn't be a
good child, an' she mayn't be a pretty one, but she's a c
 
 ___________________________
 
hild, an'
children needs children.' we went to school together, susan sowerby and
me."

"she's the best sick nurse i know," said dr. craven.  "when i find her
in a cottage i know the chances are that i shall save my patient."

mrs. medlock smiled.  she was fond of susan sowerby.

"she's got a way with her, has susan," she went on quite volubly.
"i've been thinking all morning of one thing she said yesterday.  she
says, 'once when i was givin' th' children a bit of a preach after
they'd been fightin' i ses to 'em all, "when i was at school my
jography told as th' world was shaped like a orange an' i found out
before i was ten that th' whole orange doesn't belong to nobody.  no
one owns more than his bit of a quarter an' there's ti
 
 ___________________________
 
e's not enow quarters to go round.  but don't you--none o'
you--think as you own th' whole orange or you'll find out you're
mistaken, an' you won't find it out without hard knocks."  'what
children learns from children,' she says, 'is that there's no sense in
grabbin' at th' whole orange--peel an' all.  if you do you'll likely
not get even th' pips, an' them's too bitter to eat.'"

"she's a shrewd woman," said dr. craven, putting on his coat.

"well, she's got a way of saying things," ended mrs. medlock, much
pleased.  "sometimes i've said to her, 'eh! susan, if you was a
different woman an' didn't talk such broad yorkshire i've seen the
times when i should have said you was clever.'"


that night colin slept without once awakening and when he opened his
eyes in the morning he lay still and smiled without knowing it--smiled
because he felt so curiously comfortable.  it was actually nice to be
awake, and he turned over and stretched his limbs luxuriously.  he felt
as if tight strings which had 
 
 ___________________________
 
n't to be looked at
calling up a man he's never set eyes on."

mr. roach was not without curiosity.  he had never caught even a
glimpse of the boy and had heard a dozen exaggerated stories about his
uncanny looks and ways and his insane tempers.  the thing he had heard
oftenest was that he might die at any moment and there had been
numerous fanciful descriptions of a humped back and helpless limbs,
given by people who had never seen him.

"things are changing in this house, mr. roach," said mrs. medlock, as
she led him up the back staircase to the corridor on to which opened
the hitherto mysterious chamber.

"let's hope they're changing for the better, mrs. medlock," he answered.

"they couldn't well change for the worse," she continued; "and queer as
it all is there's them as finds their duties made a lot easier to stand
up under.  don't you be surprised, mr. roach, if you find yourself in
the middle of a menagerie and martha sowerby's dickon more at home than
you or me could ever be."

there
 
 ___________________________
 
believed.  when mr. roach heard his name he smiled quite leniently.

"he'd be at home in buckingham palace or at the bottom of a coal mine,"
he said.  "and yet it's not impudence, either.  he's just fine, is that
lad."

it was perhaps well he had been prepared or he might have been
startled.  when the bedroom door was opened a large crow, which seemed
quite at home perched on the high back of a carven chair, announced the
entrance of a visitor by saying "caw--caw" quite loudly.  in spite of
mrs. medlock's warning, mr. roach only just escaped being sufficiently
undignified to jump backward.

the young rajah was neither in bed nor on his sofa.  he was sitting in
an armchair and a young lamb was standing by him shaking its tail in
feeding-lamb fashion as dickon knelt giving it milk from its bottle.  a
squirrel was perched on dickon's bent back attentively nibbling a nut.
the little girl from india was sitting on a big footstool looking on.

"here is mr. roach, master colin," said mrs. medlock.

t
 
 ___________________________
 
ieved to hear that the
oaks might remain and that the orchards were safe.  "mary," said colin,
turning to her, "what is that thing you say in india when you have
finished talking and want people to go?"

"you say, 'you have my permission to go,'" answered mary.

the rajah waved his hand.

"you have my permission to go, roach," he said.  "but, remember, this
is very important."

"caw--caw!" remarked the crow hoarsely but not impolitely.

"very good, sir.  thank you, sir," said mr. roach, and mrs. medlock
took him out of the room.

outside in the corridor, being a rather good-natured man, he smiled
until he almost laughed.

"my word!" he said, "he's got a fine lordly way with him, hasn't he?
you'd think he was a whole royal family rolled into one--prince consort
and all.".

"eh!" protested mrs. medlock, "we've had to let him trample all over
every one of us ever since he had feet and he thinks that's what folks
was born for."

"perhaps he'll grow out of it, if he lives," suggested mr. roach.

"w
 
 ___________________________
 
ell, there's one thing pretty sure," said mrs. medlock.  "if he does
live and that indian child stays here i'll warrant she teaches him that
the whole orange does not belong to him, as susan sowerby says.  and
he'll be likely to find out the size of his own quarter."

inside the room colin was leaning back on his cushions.

"it's all safe now," he said.  "and this afternoon i shall see it--this
afternoon i shall be in it!"

dickon went back to the garden with his creatures and mary stayed with
colin.  she did not think he looked tired but he was ve
 
 ___________________________
 
sturbed and left his branch and hopped about
restlessly because he could not do them too.

from that time the exercises were part of the day's duties as much as
the magic was.  it became possible for both colin and mary to do more
of them each time they tried, and such appetites were the results that
but for the basket dickon put down behind the bush each morning when he
arrived they would have been lost.  but the little oven in the hollow
and mrs. sowerby's bounties were so satisfying that mrs. medlock and
the nurse and dr. craven became mystified again.  you can trifle with
your breakfast and seem to disdain your dinner if you are full to the
brim with roasted eggs and potatoes and richly frothed new milk and
oatcakes and buns and heather honey and clotted cream.

"they are eating next to nothing," said the nurse.  "they'll die of
starvation if they can't be persuaded to take some nourishment.  and
yet see how they look."

"look!" exclaimed mrs. medlock indignantly.  "eh! i'm moithered to
de
 
 ___________________________
 
re in her manner.

"it was something between a sneeze and a cough," she replied with
reproachful dignity, "and it got into my throat."

"but," she said afterward to colin, "i couldn't stop myself.  it just
burst out because all at once i couldn't help remembering that last big
potato you ate and the way your mouth stretched when you bit through
that thick lovely crust with jam and clotted cream on it."

"is there any way in which those children can get food secretly?" dr.
craven inquired of mrs. medlock.

"there's no way unless they dig it out of the earth or pick it off the
trees," mrs. medlock answered.  "they stay out in the grounds all day
and see no one but each other.  and if they want anything different to
eat from what's sent up to them they need only ask for it."

"well," said dr. craven, "so long as going without food agrees with
them we need not disturb ourselves.  the boy is a new creature."

"so is the girl," said mrs. medlock.  "she's begun to be downright
pretty since she's fill
 
 ___________________________
 
y legs and arms and all
my body are so full of magic that i can't keep them still.  they want
to be doing things all the time.  do you know that when i waken in the
morning, mary, when it's quite early and the birds are just shouting
outside and everything seems just shouting for joy--even the trees and
things we can't really hear--i feel as if i must jump out of bed and
shout myself.  if i did it, just think what would happen!"

mary giggled inordinately.

"the nurse would come running and mrs. medlock would come running and
they would be sure you had gone crazy and they'd send for the doctor,"
she said.

colin giggled himself.  he could see how they would all look--how
horrified by his outbreak and how amazed to see him standing upright.

"i wish my father would come home," he said.  "i want to tell him
myself.  i'm always thinking about it--but we couldn't go on like this
much longer.  i can't stand lying still and pretending, and besides i
look too different.  i wish it wasn't raining toda
 
 ___________________________
 
y."

it was then mistress mary had her inspiration.

"colin," she began mysteriously, "do you know how many rooms there are
in this house?"

"about a thousand, i suppose," he answered.

"there's about a hundred no one ever goes into," said mary.  "and one
rainy day i went and looked into ever so many of them.  no one ever
knew, though mrs. medlock nearly found me out.  i lost my way when i
was coming back and i stopped at the end of your corridor.  that was
the second time i heard you crying."

colin started up on his sofa.

"a hundred rooms no one goes into," he said.  "it sounds almost like a
secret garden.  suppose we go and look at them.  wheel me in my chair
and nobody would know we went."

"that's what i was thinking," said mary.  "no one would dare to follow
us.  there are galleries where you could run.  we could do our
exercises.
 
 ___________________________
 
augh.

"they're goin' to be fine strong lad's legs in a bit," she said.  "let
him go on playin' an' workin' in the garden an' eatin' hearty an'
drinkin' plenty o' good sweet milk an' there'll not be a finer pair i'
yorkshire, thank god for it."

she put both hands on mistress mary's shoulders and looked her little
face over in a motherly fashion.

"an' thee, too!" she said.  "tha'rt grown near as hearty as our
'lisabeth ellen.  i'll warrant tha'rt like thy mother too.  our martha
told me as mrs. medlock heard she was a pretty woman.  tha'lt be like a
blush rose when tha' grows up, my little lass, bless thee."

she did not mention that when martha came home on her "day out" and
described the plain sallow child she had said that she had no
confidence whatever in what mrs. medlock had heard.  "it doesn't stand
to reason that a pretty woman could be th' mother o' such a fou' little
lass," she had added obstinately.

mary had not had time to pay much attention to her changing face.  she
had only kn
 
 ___________________________
 
n into his
room." "that'd be a fine start for him," said susan sowerby.  "i'd like
to see his face, lad.  i would that! he mun come back--that he mun."

one of the things they talked of was the visit they were to make to her
cottage.  they planned it all.  they were to drive over the moor and
lunch out of doors among the heather.  they would see all the twelve
children and dickon's garden and would not come back until they were
tired.

susan sowerby got up at last to return to the house and mrs. medlock.
it was time for colin to be wheeled back also.  but before he got into
his chair he stood quite close to susan and fixed his eyes on her with
a kind of bewildered adoration and he suddenly caught hold of the fold
of her blue cloak and held it fast.

"you are just what i--what i wanted," he said.  "i wish you were my
mother--as well as dickon's!"

all at once susan sowerby bent down and drew him with her warm arms
close against the bosom under the blue cloak--as if he had been
dickon's brother.
 
 ___________________________
 
ome his
shrinking from him?  how real that dream had been--how wonderful and
clear the voice which called back to him, "in the garden--in the
garden!"

"i will try to find the key," he said.  "i will try to open the door.
i must--though i don't know why."

when he arrived at the manor the servants who received him with the
usual ceremony noticed that he looked better and that he did not go to
the remote rooms where he usually lived attended by pitcher.  he went
into the library and sent for mrs. medlock.  she came to him somewhat
excited and curious and flustered.

"how is master colin, medlock?" he inquired.  "well, sir," mrs. medlock
answered, "he's--he's different, in a manner of speaking."

"worse?" he suggested.

mrs. medlock really was flushed.

"well, you see, sir," she tried to explain, "neither dr. craven, nor
the nurse, nor me can exactly make him out."

"why is that?"

"to tell the truth, sir, master colin might be better and he might be
changing for the worse.  his appetite, sir, i
 
 ___________________________
 
may be a sort of bloat.  he laughs sometimes
in a queer way when he's alone with miss mary.  he never used to laugh
at all.  dr. craven is coming to see you at once, if you'll allow him.
he never was as puzzled in his life."

"where is master colin now?" mr. craven asked.

"in the garden, sir.  he's always in the garden--though not a human
creature is allowed to go near for fear they'll look at him."

mr. craven scarcely heard her last words.

"in the garden," he said, and after he had sent mrs. medlock away he
stood and repeated it again and again.  "in the garden!"

he had to make an effort to bring himself back to the place he was
standing in and when he felt he was on earth again he turned and went
out of the room.  he took his way, as mary had done, through the door
in the shrubbery and among the laurels and the fountain beds.  the
fountain was playing now and was encircled by beds of brilliant autumn
flowers.  he crossed the lawn and turned into the long walk by the
ivied walls.  he did 
 
 ___________________________
 
s was not what colin had expected--this was not what he had planned.
he had never thought of such a meeting.  and yet to come dashing
out--winning a race--perhaps it was even better.  he drew himself up to
his very tallest.  mary, who had been running with him and had dashed
through the door too, believed that he managed to make himself look
taller than he had ever looked before--inches taller.

"father," he said, "i'm colin.  you can't believe it.  i scarcely can
myself.  i'm colin."

like mrs. medlock, he did not understand what his father meant when he
said hurriedly:

"in the garden! in the garden!"

"yes," hurried on colin.  "it was the garden that did it--and mary and
dickon and the creatures--and the magic.  no one knows.  we kept it to
tell you when you came.  i'm well, i can beat mary in a race.  i'm
going to be an athlete."

he said it all so like a healthy boy--his face flushed, his words
tumbling over each other in his eagerness--that mr. craven's soul shook
with unbelieving joy.


 
 ___________________________
 
erer was a laughable, lovable, healthy
young human thing.

"now," he said at the end of the story, "it need not be a secret any
more.  i dare say it will frighten them nearly into fits when they see
me--but i am never going to get into the chair again.  i shall walk
back with you, father--to the house."


ben weatherstaff's duties rarely took him away from the gardens, but on
this occasion he made an excuse to carry some vegetables to the kitchen
and being invited into the servants' hall by mrs. medlock to drink a
glass of beer he was on the spot--as he had hoped to be--when the most
dramatic event misselthwaite manor had seen during the present
generation actually took place.  one of the windows looking upon the
courtyard gave also a glimpse of the lawn.  mrs. medlock, knowing ben
had come from the gardens, hoped that he might have caught sight of his
master and even by chance of his meeting with master colin.

"did you see either of them, weatherstaff?" she asked.

ben took his beer-mug from
 
 ___________________________
 
 his mouth and wiped his lips with the back
of his hand.

"aye, that i did," he answered with a shrewdly significant air.

"both of them?" suggested mrs. medlock.

"both of 'em," returned ben weatherstaff.  "thank ye kindly, ma'am, i
could sup up another mug of it."

"together?" said mrs. medlock, hastily overfilling his beer-mug in her
excitement.

"together, ma'am," and ben gulped down half of his new mug at one gulp.

"where was master colin? how did he look? what did they say to each
other?"

"i didna' hear that," said ben, "along o' only bein' on th' stepladder
lookin, over th' wall.  but i'll tell thee this.  there's been things
goin' on outside as you house people knows nowt about.  an' what tha'll
find out tha'll find out soon."

and it was not two minutes before he swallowed th
 
 ___________________________
 
e last of his beer and
waved his mug solemnly toward the window which took in through the
shrubbery a piece of the lawn.

"look there," he said, "if tha's curious.  look what's comin' across
th' grass."

when mrs. medlock looked she threw up her hands and gave a little
shriek and every man and woman servant within hearing bolted across the
servants' hall and stood looking through the window with their eyes
almost starting out of their heads.

across the lawn came the master of misselthwaite and he looked as many
of them had never seen him.  and by his, side with his head up in the
air and his eyes full of laughter walked as strongly and steadily as
any boy in yorkshire--master colin.
