d to find it out when the robin looked
at her and she looked at the robin.

the old gardener pushed his cap back on his bald head and stared at her
a minute.

"art tha' th' little wench from india?" he asked.

mary nodded.

"then no wonder tha'rt lonely.  tha'lt be lonlier before tha's done,"
he said.

he began to dig again, driving his spade deep into the rich black
garden soil while the robin hopped about very busily employed.

"what is your name?" mary inquired.

he stood up to answer her.

"ben weatherstaff," he answered, and then he added with a surly
chuckle, "i'm lonely mysel' except when he's with me," and he jerked
his thumb toward the robin.  "he's th' only friend i've got."

"i have no friends at all," said mary.  "i never had.  my ayah didn't
like me and i never played with any one."

it is a yorkshire habit to say what you think with blunt frankness, and
old ben weatherstaff was a yorkshire moor man.

"tha' an' me are a good bit alike," he said.  "we was wove out of th'
same cloth.  we're
 
 ___________________________
 
 never thought much about
her looks, but she wondered if she was as unattractive as ben
weatherstaff and she also wondered if she looked as sour as he had
looked before the robin came.  she actually began to wonder also if she
was "nasty tempered." she felt uncomfortable.

suddenly a clear rippling little sound broke out near her and she
turned round.  she was standing a few feet from a young apple-tree and
the robin had flown on to one of its branches and had burst out into a
scrap of a song.  ben weatherstaff laughed outright.

"what did he do that for?" asked mary.

"he's made up his mind to make friends with thee," replied ben.  "dang
me if he hasn't took a fancy to thee."

"to me?" said mary, and she moved toward the little tree softly and
looked up.

"would you make friends with me?" she said to the robin just as if she
was speaking to a person.  "would you?" and she did not say it either
in her hard little voice or in her imperious indian voice, but in a
tone so soft and eager and coaxing that 
 
 ___________________________
 
ben weatherstaff was as
surprised as she had been when she heard him whistle.

"why," he cried out, "tha' said that as nice an' human as if tha' was a
real child instead of a sharp old woman.  tha' said it almost like
dickon talks to his wild things on th' moor."

"do you know dickon?" mary asked, turning round rather in a hurry.

"everybody knows him.  dickon's wanderin' about everywhere.  th' very
blackberries an' heather-bells knows him.  i warrant th' foxes shows
him where their cubs lies an' th' skylarks d
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle shake of
his wings, spread them and flew away.  he had made his visit and had
other things to do.

"he has flown over the wall!" mary cried out, watching him.  "he has
flown into the orchard--he has flown across the other wall--into the
garden where there is no door!"

"he lives there," said old ben.  "he came out o' th' egg there.  if
he's courtin', he's makin' up to some young madam of a robin that lives
among th' old rose-trees there."

"rose-trees," said mary.  "are there rose-trees?"

ben weatherstaff took up his spade again and began to dig.

"there was ten year' ago," he mumbled.

"i should like to see them," said mary.  "where is the green door?
there must be a door somewhere."

ben drove his spade deep and looked as uncompanionable as he had looked
when she first saw him.

"there was ten year' ago, but there isn't now," he said.

"no door!" cried mary.  "there must be." "none as any one can find, an'
none as is any one's business.  don't you be a meddlesome wench an'
poke your nose where
 
 ___________________________
 
than to any other.  it was the long walk
outside the gardens with the walls round them.  there were bare
flower-beds on either side of it and against the walls ivy grew
thickly.  there was one part of the wall where the creeping dark green
leaves were more bushy than elsewhere.  it seemed as if for a long time
that part had been neglected.  the rest of it had been clipped and made
to look neat, but at this lower end of the walk it had not been trimmed
at all.

a few days after she had talked to ben weatherstaff, mary stopped to
notice this and wondered why it was so.  she had just paused and was
looking up at a long spray of ivy swinging in the wind when she saw a
gleam of scarlet and heard a brilliant chirp, and there, on the top of
the wall, forward perched ben weatherstaff's robin redbreast, tilting
forward to look at her with his small head on one side.

"oh!" she cried out, "is it you--is it you?" and it did not seem at all
queer to her that she spoke to him as if she were sure that he would
unde
 
 ___________________________
 
 with his beak.

"it is the garden," she said.  "i am sure it is."

she walked round and looked closely at that side of the orchard wall,
but she only found what she had found before--that there was no door in
it.  then she ran through the kitchen-gardens again and out into the
walk outside the long ivy-covered wall, and she walked to the end of it
and looked at it, but there was no door; and then she walked to the
other end, looking again, but there was no door.

"it's very queer," she said.  "ben weatherstaff said there was no door
and there is no door.  but there must have been one ten years ago,
because mr. craven buried the key."

this gave her so much to think of that she began to be quite interested
and feel that she was not sorry that she had come to misselthwaite
manor.  in india she had always felt hot and too languid to care much
about anything.  the fact was that the fresh wind from the moor had
begun to blow the cobwebs out of her young brain and to waken her up a
little.

she stayed out 
 
 ___________________________
 
he did was to run round and round the fountain flower
garden ten times.  she counted the times carefully and when she had
finished she felt in better spirits.  the sunshine made the whole place
look different.  the high, deep, blue sky arched over misselthwaite as
well as over the moor, and she kept lifting her face and looking up
into it, trying to imagine what it would be like to lie down on one of
the little snow-white clouds and float about.  she went into the first
kitchen-garden and found ben weatherstaff working there with two other
gardeners.  the change in the weather seemed to have done him good.  he
spoke to her of his own accord.  "springtime's comin,'" he said.
"cannot tha' smell it?"

mary sniffed and thought she could.

"i smell something nice and fresh and damp," she said.

"that's th' good rich earth," he answered, digging away.  "it's in a
good humor makin' ready to grow things.  it's glad when plantin' time
comes.  it's dull in th' winter when it's got nowt to do.  in th'
flower gar
 
 ___________________________
 
"these won't grow up in a night," said weatherstaff.  "tha'll have to
wait for 'em. they'll poke up a bit higher here, an' push out a spike
more there, an' uncurl a leaf this day an' another that.  you watch
'em."

"i am going to," answered mary.

very soon she heard the soft rustling flight of wings again and she
knew at once that the robin had come again.  he was very pert and
lively, and hopped about so close to her feet, and put his head on one
side and looked at her so slyly that she asked ben weatherstaff a
question.

"do you think he remembers me?" she said.

"remembers thee!" said weatherstaff indignantly.  "he knows every
cabbage stump in th' gardens, let alone th' people.  he's never seen a
little wench here before, an' he's bent on findin' out all about thee.
tha's no need to try to hide anything from him."

"are things stirring down below in the dark in that garden where he
lives?" mary inquired.

"what garden?" grunted weatherstaff, becoming surly again.

"the one where the old rose-trees
 
 ___________________________
 
 are." she could not help asking,
because she wanted so much to know.  "are all the flowers dead, or do
some of them come again in the summer? are there ever any roses?"

"ask him," said ben weatherstaff, hunching his shoulders toward the
robin.  "he's the only one as knows.  no one else has seen inside it
for ten year'."

ten years was a long time, mary thought.  she had been born ten years
ago.

she walked away, slowly thinking.  she had begun to like the garden
just as she had begun to like the robin and dickon and martha's mother.
she was beginning to like martha, too.  that seemed a good many people
to like--when you were not used to liking.  she thought of the robin as
one of the people. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 she went to her walk outside the long, ivy-covered
wall over which she could see the tree-tops; and the second time she
walked up and down the most interesting and exciting thing happened to
her, and it was all through ben weatherstaff's robin.

she heard a chirp and a twitter, and when she looked at the bare
flower-bed at her left side there he was hopping about and pretending
to peck things out of the earth to persuade her that he had not
followed her.  but she knew he had followed her and the surprise so
filled her with delight that she almost trembled a little.

"you do remember me!" she cried out.  "you do! you are prettier than
anything else in the world!"

she chirped, and talked, and coaxed and he hopped, and flirted 
 
 ___________________________
 
ot.
the skipping-rope was a wonderful thing.  she counted and skipped, and
skipped and counted, until her cheeks were quite red, and she was more
interested than she had ever been since she was born.  the sun was
shining and a little wind was blowing--not a rough wind, but one which
came in delightful little gusts and brought a fresh scent of newly
turned earth with it.  she skipped round the fountain garden, and up
one walk and down another.  she skipped at last into the kitchen-garden
and saw ben weatherstaff digging and talking to his robin, which was
hopping about him.  she skipped down the walk toward him and he lifted
his head and looked at her with a curious expression.  she had wondered
if he would notice her.  she wanted him to see her skip.

"well!" he exclaimed.  "upon my word.  p'raps tha' art a young 'un,
after all, an' p'raps tha's got child's blood in thy veins instead of
sour buttermilk.  tha's skipped red into thy cheeks as sure as my
name's ben weatherstaff.  i wouldn't have believed
 
 ___________________________
 
 again.  "i am the first person
who has spoken in here for ten years."

she moved away from the door, stepping as softly as if she were afraid
of awakening some one.  she was glad that there was grass under her
feet and that her steps made no sounds.  she walked under one of the
fairy-like gray arches between the trees and looked up at the sprays
and tendrils which formed them.  "i wonder if they are all quite dead,"
she said.  "is it all a quite dead garden? i wish it wasn't."

if she had been ben weatherstaff she could have told whether the wood
was alive by looking at it, but she could only see that there were only
gray or brown sprays and branches and none showed any signs of even a
tiny leaf-bud anywhere.

but she was inside the wonderful garden and she could come through the
door under the ivy any time and she felt as if she had found a world
all her own.

the sun was shining inside the four walls and the high arch of blue sky
over this particular piece of misselthwaite seemed even more brillian
 
 ___________________________
 
 she thought she would skip round the whole
garden, stopping when she wanted to look at things.  there seemed to
have been grass paths here and there, and in one or two corners there
were alcoves of evergreen with stone seats or tall moss-covered flower
urns in them.

as she came near the second of these alcoves she stopped skipping.
there had once been a flowerbed in it, and she thought she saw
something sticking out of the black earth--some sharp little pale green
points.  she remembered what ben weatherstaff had said and she knelt
down to look at them.

"yes, they are tiny growing things and they might be crocuses or
snowdrops or daffodils," she whispered.

she bent very close to them and sniffed the fresh scent of the damp
earth.  she liked it very much.

"perhaps there are some other ones coming up in other places," she
said.  "i will go all over the garden and look."

she did not skip, but walked.  she went slowly and kept her eyes on the
ground.  she looked in the old border beds and among the 
 
 ___________________________
 
and get a new key and lock it up forevermore.  she really could not
bear that.

"this is such a big lonely place," she said slowly, as if she were
turning matters over in her mind.  "the house is lonely, and the park
is lonely, and the gardens are lonely.  so many places seem shut up.  i
never did many things in india, but there were more people to look
at--natives and soldiers marching by--and sometimes bands playing, and
my ayah told me stories.  there is no one to talk to here except you
and ben weatherstaff.  and you have to do your work and ben
weatherstaff won't speak to me often.  i thought if i had a little
spade i could dig somewhere as he does, and i might make a little
garden if he would give me some seeds."

martha's face quite lighted up.

"there now!" she exclaimed, "if that wasn't one of th' things mother
said.  she says, 'there's such a lot o' room in that big place, why
don't they give her a bit for herself, even if she doesn't plant
nothin' but parsley an' radishes? she'd dig an' rak
 
 ___________________________
 
 been.  he
did not know that when she first saw him she spoke to him as she would
have spoken to a native, and had not known that a cross, sturdy old
yorkshire man was not accustomed to salaam to his masters, and be
merely commanded by them to do things.

"tha'rt like th' robin," he said to her one morning when he lifted his
head and saw her standing by him.  "i never knows when i shall see thee
or which side tha'll come from."

"he's friends with me now," said mary.

"that's like him," snapped ben weatherstaff.  "makin' up to th' women
folk just for vanity an' flightiness.  there's nothin' he wouldn't do
for th' sake o' showin' off an' flirtin' his tail-feathers. he's as
full o' pride as an egg's full o' meat."

he very seldom talked much and sometimes did not even answer mary's
questions except by a grunt, but this morning he said more than usual.
he stood up and rested one hobnailed boot on the top of his spade while
he looked her over.

"how long has tha' been here?" he jerked out.

"i think it's 
 
 ___________________________
 
 answered.

"tha's beginnin' to do misselthwaite credit," he said.  "tha's a bit
fatter than tha' was an' tha's not quite so yeller.  tha' looked like a
young plucked crow when tha' first came into this garden.  thinks i to
myself i never set eyes on an uglier, sourer faced young 'un."

mary was not vain and as she had never thought much of her looks she
was not greatly disturbed.

"i know i'm fatter," she said.  "my stockings are getting tighter.
they used to make wrinkles.  there's the robin, ben weatherstaff."

there, indeed, was the robin, and she thought he looked nicer than
ever.  his red waistcoat was as glossy as satin and he flirted his
wings and tail and tilted his head and hopped about with all sorts of
lively graces.  he seemed determined to make ben weatherstaff admire
him.  but ben was sarcastic.

"aye, there tha' art!" he said.  "tha' can put up with me for a bit
sometimes when tha's got no one better.  tha's been reddenin' up thy
waistcoat an' polishin' thy feathers this two weeks.  i 
 
 ___________________________
 
know what tha's
up to.  tha's courtin' some bold young madam somewhere tellin' thy lies
to her about bein' th' finest cock robin on missel moor an' ready to
fight all th' rest of 'em."

"oh! look at him!" exclaimed mary.

the robin was evidently in a fascinating, bold mood.  he hopped closer
and closer and looked at ben weatherstaff more and more engagingly.  he
flew on to the nearest currant bush and tilted his head and sang a
little song right at him.

"tha' thinks tha'll get over me by doin' that," said ben, wrinkling his
face up in such a way that mary felt sure he was trying not to look
pleased.  "tha' thinks no one can stand out against thee--that's what
tha' thinks."

the robin spread his wings--mary could scarcely believe her eyes.  he
flew right up to the handle of ben weatherstaff's spade and alighted on
the top 
 
 ___________________________
 
eral minutes.

but because he kept breaking into a slow grin now and then, mary was
not afraid to talk to him.

"have you a garden of your own?" she asked.

"no. i'm bachelder an' lodge with martin at th' gate."

"if you had one," said mary, "what would you plant?"

"cabbages an' 'taters an' onions."

"but if you wanted to make a flower garden," persisted mary, "what
would you plant?"

"bulbs an' sweet-smellin' things--but mostly roses."

mary's face lighted up.

"do you like roses?" she said.

ben weatherstaff rooted up a weed and threw it aside before he answered.

"well, yes, i do.  i was learned that by a young lady i was gardener
to.  she had a lot in a place she was fond of, an' she loved 'em like
they was children--or robins.  i've seen her bend over an' kiss 'em."
he dragged out another weed and scowled at it.  "that were as much as
ten year' ago."

"where is she now?" asked mary, much interested.

"heaven," he answered, and drove his spade deep into the soil,
"'cording to what parson says."


 
 ___________________________
 
gs an' branches an' if tha' see a bit of a brown lump swelling here
an' there, watch it after th' warm rain an' see what happens." he
stopped suddenly and looked curiously at her eager face.  "why does
tha' care so much about roses an' such, all of a sudden?" he demanded.

mistress mary felt her face grow red.  she was almost afraid to answer.

"i--i want to play that--that i have a garden of my own," she
stammered.  "i--there is nothing for me to do.  i have nothing--and no
one."

"well," said ben weatherstaff slowly, as he watched her, "that's true.
tha' hasn't."

he said it in such an odd way that mary wondered if he was actually a
little sorry for her.  she had never felt sorry for herself; she had
only felt tired and cross, because she disliked people and things so
much.  but now the world seemed to be changing and getting nicer.  if
no one found out about the secret garden, she should enjoy herself
always.

she stayed with him for ten or fifteen minutes longer and asked him as
many questions as 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he should.

"now look here!" he said sharply.  "don't tha' ask so many questions.
tha'rt th' worst wench for askin' questions i've ever come a cross.
get thee gone an' play thee.  i've done talkin' for today."

and he said it so crossly that she knew there was not the least use in
staying another minute.  she went skipping slowly down the outside
walk, thinking him over and saying to herself that, queer as it was,
here was another person whom she liked in spite of his crossness.  she
liked old ben weatherstaff.  yes, she did like him.  she always wanted
to try to make him talk to her.  also she began to believe that he knew
everything in the world about flowers.

there was a laurel-hedged walk which curved round the secret garden and
ended at a gate which opened into a wood, in the park.  she thought she
would slip round this walk and look into the wood and see if there were
any rabbits hopping about.  she enjoyed the skipping very much and when
she reached the little gate she opened it and went thro
 
 ___________________________
 
ed and turned his head
quickly, his poppy-cheeked face lighting up.

"where's that robin as is callin' us?" he said.

the chirp came from a thick holly bush, bright with scarlet berries,
and mary thought she knew whose it was.

"is it really calling us?" she asked.

"aye," said dickon, as if it was the most natural thing in the world,
"he's callin' some one he's friends with.  that's same as sayin' 'here
i am.  look at me.  i wants a bit of a chat.' there he is in the bush.
whose is he?"

"he's ben weatherstaff's, but i think he knows me a little," answered
mary.

"aye, he knows thee," said dickon in his low voice again.  "an' he
likes thee.  he's took thee on.  he'll tell me all about thee in a
minute."

he moved quite close to the bush with the slow movement mary had
noticed before, and then he made a sound almost like the robin's own
twitter.  the robin listened a few seconds, intently, and then answered
quite as if he were replying to a question.

"aye, he's a friend o' yours," chuckled dickon.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
ickon," she said, "you are as nice as martha said you were.  i like
you, and you make the fifth person.  i never thought i should like five
people."

dickon sat up on his heels as martha did when she was polishing the
grate.  he did look funny and delightful, mary thought, with his round
blue eyes and red cheeks and happy looking turned-up nose.

"only five folk as tha' likes?" he said.  "who is th' other four?"

"your mother and martha," mary checked them off on her fingers, "and
the robin and ben weatherstaff."

dickon laughed so that he was obliged to stifle the sound by putting
his arm over his mouth.

"i know tha' thinks i'm a queer lad," he said, "but i think tha' art
th' queerest little lass i ever saw."

then mary did a strange thing.  she leaned forward and asked him a
question she had never dreamed of asking any one before.  and she tried
to ask it in yorkshire because that was his language, and in india a
native was always pleased if you knew his speech.

"does tha' like me?" she said.

"eh
 
 ___________________________
 
that she might begin to ask difficult questions, but
she did not.  she was very much interested in the seeds and gardening
tools, and there was only one moment when mary was frightened.  this
was when she began to ask where the flowers were to be planted.

"who did tha' ask about it?" she inquired.

"i haven't asked anybody yet," said mary, hesitating.  "well, i
wouldn't ask th' head gardener.  he's too grand, mr. roach is."

"i've never seen him," said mary.  "i've only seen undergardeners and
ben weatherstaff."

"if i was you, i'd ask ben weatherstaff," advised martha.  "he's not
half as bad as he looks, for all he's so crabbed.  mr. craven lets him
do what he likes because he was here when mrs. craven was alive, an' he
used to make her laugh.  she liked him.  perhaps he'd find you a corner
somewhere out o' the way."

"if it was out of the way and no one wanted it, no one could mind my
having it, could they?" mary said anxiously.

"there wouldn't be no reason," answered martha.  "you wouldn't do no

 
 ___________________________
 
t he could not bear to
think that everybody might tramp in to it when they chose.

"i'll tell you what i think it would be like, if we could go into it,"
she said.  "it has been shut up so long things have grown into a tangle
perhaps."

he lay quite still and listened while she went on talking about the
roses which might have clambered from tree to tree and hung down--about
the many birds which might have built their nests there because it was
so safe.  and then she told him about the robin and ben weatherstaff,
and there was so much to tell about the robin and it was so easy and
safe to talk about it that she ceased to be afraid.  the robin pleased
him so much that he smiled until he looked almost beautiful, and at
first mary had thought that he was even plainer than herself, with his
big eyes and heavy locks of hair.

"i did not know birds could be like that," he said.  "but if you stay
in a room you never see things.  what a lot of things you know.  i feel
as if you had been inside that garden."

s
 
 ___________________________
 
ren't tell him much but he said he wanted to see
it."

"us'll have him out here sometime for sure," said dickon.  "i could
push his carriage well enough.  has tha' noticed how th' robin an' his
mate has been workin' while we've been sittin' here? look at him
perched on that branch wonderin' where it'd be best to put that twig
he's got in his beak."

he made one of his low whistling calls and the robin turned his head
and looked at him inquiringly, still holding his twig.  dickon spoke to
him as ben weatherstaff did, but dickon's tone was one of friendly
advice.

"wheres'ever tha' puts it," he said, "it'll be all right.  tha' knew
how to build tha' nest before tha' came out o' th' egg.  get on with
thee, lad.  tha'st got no time to lose."

"oh, i do like to hear you talk to him!" mary said, laughing
delightedly.  "ben weatherstaff scolds him and makes fun of him, and he
hops about and looks as if he understood every word, and i know he
likes it.  ben weatherstaff says he is so conceited he would rather
 
 ___________________________
 
s if he does," answered mary.  "dickon says anything will
understand if you're friends with it for sure, but you have to be
friends for sure."

colin lay quiet a little while and his strange gray eyes seemed to be
staring at the wall, but mary saw he was thinking.

"i wish i was friends with things," he said at last, "but i'm not.  i
never had anything to be friends with, and i can't bear people."

"can't you bear me?" asked mary.

"yes, i can," he answered.  "it's funny but i even like you."

"ben weatherstaff said i was like him," said mary.  "he said he'd
warrant we'd both got the same nasty tempers.  i think you are like him
too.  we are all three alike--you and i and ben weatherstaff.  he said
we were neither of us much to look at and we were as sour as we looked.
but i don't feel as sour as i used to before i knew the robin and
dickon."

"did you feel as if you hated people?"

"yes," answered mary without any affectation.  "i should have detested
you if i had seen you before i saw the robin and 
 
 ___________________________
 
sense of an approaching thrill made
them, for some curious reason they could not have explained, begin to
speak in whispers.

"this is it," breathed mary.  "this is where i used to walk up and down
and wonder and wonder." "is it?" cried colin, and his eyes began to
search the ivy with eager curiousness.  "but i can see nothing," he
whispered.  "there is no door."

"that's what i thought," said mary.

then there was a lovely breathless silence and the chair wheeled on.

"that is the garden where ben weatherstaff works," said mary.

"is it?" said colin.

a few yards more and mary whispered again.

"this is where the robin flew over the wall," she said.

"is it?" cried colin.  "oh! i wish he'd come again!"

"and that," said mary with solemn delight, pointing under a big lilac
bush, "is where he perched on the little heap of earth and showed me
the key."

then colin sat up.

"where? where? there?" he cried, and his eyes were as big as the wolf's
in red riding-hood, when red riding-hood felt called upon to
 
 ___________________________
 
 there
were fluttering of wings and faint sweet pipes and humming and scents
and scents.  and the sun fell warm upon his face like a hand with a
lovely touch.  and in wonder mary and dickon stood and stared at him.
he looked so strange and different because a pink glow of color had
actually crept all over him--ivory face and neck and hands and all.

"i shall get well! i shall get well!" he cried out.  "mary! dickon! i
shall get well! and i shall live forever and ever and ever!"




chapter xxi

ben weatherstaff


one of the strange things about living in the world is that it is only
now and then one is quite sure one is going to live forever and ever
and ever.  one knows it sometimes when one gets up at the tender solemn
dawn-time and goes out and stands alone and throws one's head far back
and looks up and up and watches the pale sky slowly changing and
flushing and marvelous unknown things happening until the east almost
makes one cry out and one's heart stands still at the strange
unchanging majest
 
 ___________________________
 
leg and dropped the gray film drowsily over
his eyes.  mary privately thought he looked as if he might snore in a
minute.

in the midst of this stillness it was rather startling when colin half
lifted his head and exclaimed in a loud suddenly alarmed whisper:

"who is that man?" dickon and mary scrambled to their feet.

"man!" they both cried in low quick voices.

colin pointed to the high wall.  "look!" he whispered excitedly.  "just
look!"

mary and dickon wheeled about and looked.  there was ben weatherstaff's
indignant face glaring at them over the wall from the top of a ladder!
he actually shook his fist at mary.

"if i wasn't a bachelder, an' tha' was a wench o' mine," he cried, "i'd
give thee a hidin'!"

he mounted another step threateningly as if it were his energetic
intention to jump down and deal with her; but as she came toward him he
evidently thought better of it and stood on the top step of his ladder
shaking his fist down at her.

"i never thowt much o' thee!" he harangued.  "i couldna
 
 ___________________________
 
' abide thee th'
first time i set eyes on thee.  a scrawny buttermilk-faced young besom,
allus askin' questions an' pokin' tha' nose where it wasna, wanted.  i
never knowed how tha' got so thick wi' me.  if it hadna' been for th'
robin--  drat him--"

"ben weatherstaff," called out mary, finding her breath.  she stood
below him and called up to him with a sort of gasp.  "ben weatherstaff,
it was the robin who showed me the way!"

then it did seem as if ben really would scramble down on her side of
the wall, he was so outraged.

"tha' young bad 'un!" he called down at her.  "layin' tha' badness on a
robin--not but what he's impidint enow for anythin'. him showin' thee
th' way! him! eh! tha' young nowt"--she could see his next words burst
out because he was overpowered by curiosity--"however i' this world did
tha' get in?"

"it was the robin who showed me the way," she protested 
 
 ___________________________
 
st very suddenly at that very moment and his
jaw actually dropped as he stared over her head at something he saw
coming over the grass toward him.

at the first sound of his torrent of words colin had been so surprised
that he had only sat up and listened as if he were spellbound.  but in
the midst of it he had recovered himself and beckoned imperiously to
dickon.

"wheel me over there!" he commanded.  "wheel me quite close and stop
right in front of him!"

and this, if you please, this is what ben weatherstaff beheld and which
made his jaw drop.  a wheeled chair with luxurious cushions and robes
which came toward him looking rather like some sort of state coach
because a young rajah leaned back in it with royal command in his great
black-rimmed eyes and a thin white hand extended haughtily toward him.
and it stopped right under ben weatherstaff's nose.  it was really no
wonder his mouth dropped open.

"do you know who i am?" demanded the rajah.

how ben weatherstaff stared! his red old eyes fixed the
 
 ___________________________
 
mselves on what
was before him as if he were seeing a ghost.  he gazed and gazed and
gulped a lump down his throat and did not say a word.  "do you know who
i am?" demanded colin still more imperiously.  "answer!"

ben weatherstaff put his gnarled hand up and passed it over his eyes
and over his forehead and then he did answer in a queer shaky voice.

"who tha' art?" he said.  "aye, that i do--wi' tha' mother's eyes
starin' at me out o' tha' face.  lord knows how tha' come here.  but
tha'rt th' poor cripple."

colin forgot that he had ever had a back.  his face flushed scarlet and
he sat bolt upright.

"i'm not a cripple!" he cried out furiously.  "i'm not!"

"he's not!" cried mary, almost shouting up the wall in her fier
 
 ___________________________
 
ce
indignation.  "he's not got a lump as big as a pin! i looked and there
was none there--not one!"

ben weatherstaff passed his hand over his forehead again and gazed as
if he could never gaze enough.  his hand shook and his mouth shook and
his voice shook.  he was an ignorant old man and a tactless old man and
he could only remember the things he had heard.

"tha'--tha' hasn't got a crooked back?" he said hoarsely.

"no!" shouted colin.

"tha'--tha' hasn't got crooked legs?" quavered ben more hoarsely yet.
it was too much.  the strength which colin usually threw into his
tantrums rushed through him now in a 
 
 ___________________________
 
new way.  never yet had he been
accused of crooked legs--even in whispers--and the perfectly simple
belief in their existence which was revealed by ben weatherstaff's
voice was more than rajah flesh and blood could endure.  his anger and
insulted pride made him forget everything but this one moment and
filled him with a power he had never known before, an almost unnatural
strength.

"come here!" he shouted to dickon, and he actually began to tear the
coverings off his lower limbs and disentangle himself.  "come here!
come here! this minute!"

dickon was by his side in a second.  mary caught her breath in a short
gasp and felt herself turn pale.

"he can do
 
 ___________________________
 
e could.

there was a brief fierce scramble, the rugs were tossed on the ground,
dickon held colin's arm, the thin legs were out, the thin feet were on
the grass.  colin was standing upright--upright--as straight as an
arrow and looking strangely tall--his head thrown back and his strange
eyes flashing lightning.  "look at me!" he flung up at ben
weatherstaff.  "just look at me--you!  just look at me!"

"he's as straight as i am!" cried dickon.  "he's as straight as any lad
i' yorkshire!"

what ben weatherstaff did mary thought queer beyond measure.  he choked
and gulped and suddenly tears ran down his weather-wrinkled cheeks as
he struck his old hands together.

"eh!" he burst forth, "th' lies folk tells! tha'rt as thin as a lath
an' as white as a wraith, but there's not a knob on thee.  tha'lt make
a mon yet.  god bless thee!"

dickon held colin's arm strongly but the boy had not begun to falter.
he stood straighter and straighter and looked ben weatherstaff in the
face.

"i'm your master," he said,
 
 ___________________________
 
 "when my father is away.  and you are to
obey me.  this is my garden.  don't dare to say a word about it! you
get down from that ladder and go out to the long walk and miss mary
will meet you and bring you here.  i want to talk to you.  we did not
want you, but now you will have to be in the secret.  be quick!"

ben weatherstaff's crabbed old face was still wet with that one queer
rush of tears.  it seemed as if he could not take his eyes from thin
straight colin standing on his feet with his head thrown back.

"eh! lad," he almost whispered.  "eh! my lad!" and then remembering
himself he suddenly touched his hat gardener fashion and said, "yes,
sir! yes, sir!" and obediently disappeared as he descended the ladder.




chapter xxii

when the sun went down


when his head was out of sight colin turned to mary.

"go and 
 
 ___________________________
 
o walk to that tree," he said, pointing to one a few feet
away from him.  "i'm going to be standing when weatherstaff comes here.
i can rest against the tree if i like.  when i want to sit down i will
sit down, but not before.  bring a rug from the chair."

he walked to the tree and though dickon held his arm he was wonderfully
steady.  when he stood against the tree trunk it was not too plain that
he supported himself against it, and he still held himself so straight
that he looked tall.

when ben weatherstaff came through the door in the wall he saw him
standing there and he heard mary muttering something under her breath.

"what art sayin'?" he asked rather testily because he did not want his
attention distracted from the long thin straight boy figure and proud
face.

but she did not tell him.  what she was saying was this:

"you can do it! you can do it! i told you you could!  you can do it!
you can do it! you can!" she was saying it to colin because she wanted
to make magic and keep him on his fe
 
 ___________________________
 
et looking like that.  she could
not bear that he should give in before ben weatherstaff.  he did not
give in.  she was uplifted by a sudden feeling that he looked quite
beautiful in spite of his thinness.  he fixed his eyes on ben
weatherstaff in his funny imperious way.

"look at me!" he commanded.  "look at me all over! am i a hunchback?
have i got crooked legs?"

ben weatherstaff had not quite got over his emotion, but he had
recovered a little and answered almost in his usual way.

"not tha'," he said.  "nowt o' th' sort.  what's tha' been doin' with
thysel'--hidin' out o' sight an' lettin' folk think tha' was cripple
an' half-witted?"

"half-witted!" said colin angrily.  "who thought that?"

"lots o' fools," said ben.  "th' world's full o' jackasses brayin' an'
they never bray nowt but lies.  what did tha' shut thysel' up for?"

"everyone thought i was going to die," 
 
 ___________________________
 
said colin shortly.  "i'm not!"

and he said it with such decision ben weatherstaff looked him over, up
and down, down and up.

"tha' die!" he said with dry exultation.  "nowt o' th' sort! tha's got
too much pluck in thee.  when i seed thee put tha' legs on th' ground
in such a hurry i knowed tha' was all right.  sit thee down on th' rug
a bit young mester an' give me thy orders."

there was a queer mixture of crabbed tenderness and shrewd
understanding in his manner.  mary had poured out speech as rapidly as
she could as they had come down the long walk.  the chief thing to b
 
 ___________________________
 
e
remembered, she had told him, was that colin was getting well--getting
well.  the garden was doing it.  no one must let him remember about
having humps and dying.

the rajah condescended to seat himself on a rug under the tree.

"what work do you do in the gardens, weatherstaff?" he inquired.

"anythin' i'm told to do," answered old ben.  "i'm kep' on by
favor--because she liked me."

"she?" said colin.

"tha' mother," answered ben weatherstaff.

"my mother?" said colin, and he looked about him quietly.  "this was
her garden, wasn't it?"

"aye, it was that!" and ben weatherstaff looked about him too.  "she
were main fond of it."

"it is my garden now.  i am fond of it.  i shall come here every day,"
announced colin.  "but it is to be a secret.  my orders are that no one
is to know that we come here.  dickon and my cousin have worked and
made it come alive.  i shall send for you sometimes to help--but you
must come when no one can see 
 
 ___________________________
 
you."

ben weatherstaff's face twisted itself in a dry old smile.

"i've come here before when no one saw me," he said.

"what!" exclaimed colin.

"when?"

"th' last time i was here," rubbing his chin and looking round, "was
about two year' ago."

"but no one has been in it for ten years!" cried colin.

"there was no door!"

"i'm no one," said old ben dryly.  "an' i didn't come through th' door.
i come over th' wall.  th' rheumatics held me back th' last two year'."

"tha' come an' did a bit o' prunin'!" cried dickon.
 
 ___________________________
 
  "i couldn't make
out how it had been done."

"she was so fond of it--she was!" said ben weatherstaff slowly.  "an'
she was such a pretty young thing.  she says to me once, 'ben,' says
she laughin', 'if ever i'm ill or if i go away you must take care of my
roses.' when she did go away th' orders was no one was ever to come
nigh.  but i come," with grumpy obstinacy.  "over th' wall i
come--until th' rheumatics stopped me--an' i did a bit o' work once a
year.  she'd gave her order first."

"it wouldn't have been as wick as it is if tha' hadn't done it," said
dickon.  "i did wonder."

"i'm glad yo
 
 ___________________________
 
he grass near the tree mary had dropped her trowel.  colin
stretched out his hand and took it up.  an odd expression came into his
face and he began to scratch at the earth.  his thin hand was weak
enough but presently as they watched him--mary with quite breathless
interest--he drove the end of the trowel into the soil and turned some
over.

"you can do it! you can do it!" said mary to herself.  "i tell you, you
can!"

dickon's round eyes were full of eager curiousness but he said not a
word.  ben weatherstaff looked on with interested face.

colin persevered.  after he had turned a few trowelfuls of soil he
spoke exultantly to dickon in his best yorkshire.

"tha' said as tha'd have me walkin' about here same as other folk--an'
tha' said tha'd have me diggin'. i thowt tha' was just leein' to please
me.  this is only th' first day an' i've walked--an' here i am diggin'."

ben weatherstaff's mouth fell open again when he heard him, but he
ended by chuckling.

"eh!" he said, "that sounds as if tha'd got
 
 ___________________________
 
 wits enow.  tha'rt a
yorkshire lad for sure.  an' tha'rt diggin', too.  how'd tha' like to
plant a bit o' somethin'? i can get thee a rose in a pot."

"go and get it!" said colin, digging excitedly.  "quick! quick!"

it was done quickly enough indeed.  ben weatherstaff went his way
forgetting rheumatics.  dickon took his spade and dug the hole deeper
and wider than a new digger with thin white hands could make it.  mary
slipped out to run and bring back a watering-can. when dickon had
deepened the hole colin went on turning the soft earth over and over.
he looked up at the sky, flushed and glowing with the strangely new
exercise, slight as it was.

"i want to do it before the sun goes quite--quite down," he said.

mary thought that perhaps the sun held back a
 
 ___________________________
 
 few minutes just on
purpose.  ben weatherstaff brought the rose in its pot from the
greenhouse.  he hobbled over the grass as fast as he could.  he had
begun to be excited, too.  he knelt down by the hole and broke the pot
from the mould.

"here, lad," he said, handing the plant to colin.  "set it in the earth
thysel' same as th' king does when he goes to a new place."

the thin white hands shook a little and colin's flush grew deeper as he
set the rose in the mould and held it while old ben made firm the
earth.  it was filled in and presse
 
 ___________________________
 
ike--because you were going to die and things like that.  you were
such a poor thing."

"but," announced colin stubbornly, "i am not going to be a poor thing.
i won't let people think i'm one.  i stood on my feet this afternoon."

"it is always having your own way that has made you so queer," mary
went on, thinking aloud.

colin turned his head, frowning.

"am i queer?" he demanded.

"yes," answered mary, "very. but you needn't be cross," she added
impartially, "because so am i queer--and so is ben weatherstaff.  but i
am not as queer as i was before i began to like people and before i
found the garden."

"i don't want to be queer," said colin.  "i am not going to be," and he
frowned again with determination.

he was a very proud boy.  he lay thinking for a while and then mary saw
his beautiful smile begin and gradually change his whole face.

"i shall stop being queer," he said, "if i go every day to the garden.
there is magic in there--good magic, you know, mary.  i am sure there
is." "so am i," sai
 
 ___________________________
 
n.  in its happy days
flowers had been tucked away into every inch and hole and corner.  ben
weatherstaff had seen it done and had himself scraped out mortar from
between the bricks of the wall and made pockets of earth for lovely
clinging things to grow on.  iris and white lilies rose out of the
grass in sheaves, and the green alcoves filled themselves with amazing
armies of the blue and white flower lances of tall delphiniums or
columbines or campanulas.

"she was main fond o' them--she was," ben weatherstaff said.  "she
liked them things as was allus pointin' up to th' blue sky, she used to
tell.  not as she was one o' them as looked down on th' earth--not her.
she just loved it but she said as th' blue sky allus looked so joyful."

the seeds dickon and mary had planted grew as if fairies had tended
them.  satiny poppies of all tints danced in the breeze by the score,
gaily defying flowers which had lived in the garden for years and which
it might be confessed seemed rather to wonder how such new p
 
 ___________________________
 
 set colin thinking tremendously and when
mary told him of the spell she had worked he was excited and approved
of it greatly.  he talked of it constantly.

"of course there must be lots of magic in the world," he said wisely
one day, "but people don't know what it is like or how to make it.
perhaps the beginning is just to say nice things are going to happen
until you make them happen.  i am going to try and experiment."

the next morning when they went to the secret garden he sent at once
for ben weatherstaff.  ben came as quickly as he could and found the
rajah standing on his feet under a tree and looking very grand but also
very beautifully smiling.

"good morning, ben weatherstaff," he said.  "i want you and dickon and
miss mary to stand in a row and listen to me because i am going to tell
you something very important."

"aye, aye, sir!" answered ben weatherstaff, touching his forehead.
(one of the long concealed charms of ben weatherstaff was that in his
boyhood he had once run away to sea and 
 
 ___________________________
 
had made voyages.  so he could
reply like a sailor.)

"i am going to try a scientific experiment," explained the rajah.
"when i grow up i am going to make great scientific discoveries and i
am going to begin now with this experiment."

"aye, aye, sir!" said ben weatherstaff promptly, though this was the
first time he had heard of great scientific discoveries.

it was the first time mary had heard of them, either, but even at this
stage she had begun to realize that, queer as he was, colin had read
about a great many singular things and was somehow a very convincing
sort of boy.  when he held up his head and fixed his strange eyes on
you it seemed as if you believed him almost in spite of yourself though
he was only ten years old--going on eleven.  at this moment h
 
 ___________________________
 
a
little, because she was born in india where there are fakirs.  i
believe dickon knows some magic, but perhaps he doesn't know he knows
it.  he charms animals and people.  i would never have let him come to
see me if he had not been an animal charmer--which is a boy charmer,
too, because a boy is an animal.  i am sure there is magic in
everything, only we have not sense enough to get hold of it and make it
do things for us--like electricity and horses and steam."

this sounded so imposing that ben weatherstaff became quite excited and
really could not keep still.  "aye, aye, sir," he said and he began to
stand up quite straight.

"when mary found this garden it looked quite dead," the orator
proceeded.  "then something began pushing things up out of the soil and
making things out of nothing.  one day things weren't there and another
they were.  i had never watched things before and it made me feel very
curious.  scientific people are always curious and i am going to be
scientific.  i keep saying to m
 
 ___________________________
 
  when i was going to try to stand that
first time mary kept saying to herself as fast as she could, 'you can
do it! you can do it!' and i did.  i had to try myself at the same
time, of course, but her magic helped me--and so did dickon's. every
morning and evening and as often in the daytime as i can remember i am
going to say, 'magic is in me! magic is making me well! i am going to
be as strong as dickon, as strong as dickon!' and you must all do it,
too.  that is my experiment will you help, ben weatherstaff?"

"aye, aye, sir!" said ben weatherstaff.  "aye, aye!"

"if you keep doing it every day as regularly as soldiers go through
drill we shall see what will happen and find out if the experiment
succeeds.  you learn things by saying them over and over and thinking
about them until they stay in your mind forever and i think it will be
the same with magic.  if you keep calling it to come to you and help
you it will get to be part of you and it will stay and do things." "i
once heard an officer in in
 
 ___________________________
 
dia tell my mother that there were fakirs
who said words over and over thousands of times," said mary.

"i've heard jem fettleworth's wife say th' same thing over thousands o'
times--callin' jem a drunken brute," said ben weatherstaff dryly.
"summat allus come o' that, sure enough.  he gave her a good hidin' an'
went to th' blue lion an' got as drunk as a lord."

colin drew his brows together and thought a few minutes.  then he
cheered up.

"well," he said, "you see something did come of it.  she used the wrong
magic until she made him beat her.  if she'd used the right magic and
had said something nice perhaps he wouldn't have got as drunk as a lord
and perhaps--perhaps he might have bought her a new bonnet."

ben weatherst
 
 ___________________________
 
s colin suggested that they should all sit
cross-legged under the tree which made a canopy.

"it will be like sitting in a sort of temple," said colin.  "i'm rather
tired and i want to sit down."

"eh!" said dickon, "tha' mustn't begin by sayin' tha'rt tired.  tha'
might spoil th' magic."

colin turned and looked at him--into his innocent round eyes.

"that's true," he said slowly.  "i must only think of the magic." it
all seemed most majestic and mysterious when they sat down in their
circle.  ben weatherstaff felt as if he had somehow been led into
appearing at a prayer-meeting. ordinarily he was very fixed in being
what he called "agen' prayer-meetin's" but this being the rajah's
affair he did not resent it and was indeed inclined to be gratified at
being called upon to assist.  mistress mary felt solemnly enraptured.
dickon held his rabbit in his arm, and perhaps he made some charmer's
signal no one heard, for when he sat down, cross-legged like the rest,
the crow, the fox, the squirrels and the l
 
 ___________________________
 
ttling each into a place of rest as if of their
own desire.

"the 'creatures' have come," said colin gravely.  "they want to help
us."

colin really looked quite beautiful, mary thought.  he held his head
high as if he felt like a sort of priest and his strange eyes had a
wonderful look in them.  the light shone on him through the tree canopy.

"now we will begin," he said.  "shall we sway backward and forward,
mary, as if we were dervishes?"

"i canna' do no swayin' back'ard and for'ard," said ben weatherstaff.
"i've got th' rheumatics."

"the magic will take them away," said colin in a high priest tone, "but
we won't sway until it has done it.  we will only chant."

"i canna' do no chantin'" said ben weatherstaff a trifle testily.
"they turned me out o' th' church choir th' only time i ever tried it."

no one smiled.  they were all too much in earnest.  colin's face was
not even crossed by a shadow.  he was thinking only of the magic.

"then i will chant," he said.  and he began, looking like a stra
 
 ___________________________
 
nge boy
spirit.  "the sun is shining--the sun is shining.  that is the magic.
the flowers are growing--the roots are stirring.  that is the magic.
being alive is the magic--being strong is the magic.  the magic is in
me--the magic is in me.  it is in me--it is in me.  it's in every one
of us.  it's in ben weatherstaff's back.  magic! magic! come and help!"

he said it a great many times--not a thousand times but quite a goodly
number.  mary listened entranced.  she felt as if it were at once queer
and beautiful and she wanted him to go on and on.  ben weatherstaff
began to feel soothed into a sort of dream which was quite agreeable.
the humming of the bees in the blossoms mingled with the chanting voice
and drowsily melted into a doze.  dickon sat cross-legged with his
rabbit asleep on his arm and a hand res
 
 ___________________________
 
ting on the lamb's back.  soot
had pushed away a squirrel and huddled close to him on his shoulder,
the gray film dropped over his eyes.  at last colin stopped.

"now i am going to walk round the garden," he announced.

ben weatherstaff's head had just dropped forward and he lifted it with
a jerk.

"you have been asleep," said colin.

"nowt o' th' sort," mumbled ben.  "th' sermon was good enow--but i'm
bound to get out afore th' collection."

he was not quite awake yet.

"you're not in church," said colin.

"not me," said ben, straightening himself.  "who said i were? i heard
every bit of it.  you said th' magic was in my back.  th' doctor calls
it rheumatics."

the rajah waved his hand.

"that was the wrong magic," he said.  
 
 ___________________________
 
den," grunted ben.

it was not an unfriendly grunt, but it was a grunt.  in fact, being a
stubborn old party and not having entire faith in magic he had made up
his mind that if he were sent away he would climb his ladder and look
over the wall so that he might be ready to hobble back if there were
any stumbling.

the rajah did not object to his staying and so the procession was
formed.  it really did look like a procession.  colin was at its head
with dickon on one side and mary on the other.  ben weatherstaff walked
behind, and the "creatures" trailed after them, the lamb and the fox
cub keeping close to dickon, the white rabbit hopping along or stopping
to nibble and soot following with the solemnity of a person who felt
himself in charge.

it was a procession which moved slowly but with dignity.  every few
yards it stopped to rest.  colin leaned on dickon's arm and privately
ben weatherstaff kept a sharp lookout, but now and then colin took his
hand from its support and walked a few steps alone.  
 
 ___________________________
 
s mother might "come
into the secret." somehow it was not doubted that she was "safe for
sure."

so one beautiful still evening dickon told the whole story, with all
the thrilling details of the buried key and the robin and the gray haze
which had seemed like deadness and the secret mistress mary had planned
never to reveal.  the coming of dickon and how it had been told to him,
the doubt of mester colin and the final drama of his introduction to
the hidden domain, combined with the incident of ben weatherstaff's
angry face peering over the wall and mester colin's sudden indignant
strength, made mrs. sowerby's nice-looking face quite change color
several times.

"my word!" she said.  "it was a good thing that little lass came to th'
manor.  it's been th' makin' o' her an' th' savin, o' him.  standin' on
his feet! an' us all thinkin' he was a poor half-witted lad with not a
straight bone in him."

she asked a great many questions and her blue eyes were full of deep
thinking.

"what do they make of it a
 
 ___________________________
 
 me.  if he grew fond of
me i think i should tell him about the magic.  it might make him more
cheerful."




chapter xxvi

"it's mother!"


their belief in the magic was an abiding thing.  after the morning's
incantations colin sometimes gave them magic lectures.

"i like to do it," he explained, "because when i grow up and make great
scientific discoveries i shall be obliged to lecture about them and so
this is practise.  i can only give short lectures now because i am very
young, and besides ben weatherstaff would feel as if he were in church
and he would go to sleep."

"th' best thing about lecturin'," said ben, "is that a chap can get up
an' say aught he pleases an' no other chap can answer him back.  i
wouldn't be agen' lecturin' a bit mysel' sometimes."

but when colin held forth under his tree old ben fixed devouring eyes
on him and kept them there.  he looked him over with critical
affection.  it was not so much the lecture which interested him as the
legs which looked straighter and stronger
 
 ___________________________
 
 each day, the boyish head
which held itself up so well, the once sharp chin and hollow cheeks
which had filled and rounded out and the eyes which had begun to hold
the light he remembered in another pair.  sometimes when colin felt
ben's earnest gaze meant that he was much impressed he wondered what he
was reflecting on and once when he had seemed quite entranced he
questioned him.

"what are you thinking about, ben weatherstaff?" he asked.

"i was thinkin'" answered ben, "as i'd warrant tha's, gone up three or
four pound this week.  i was lookin' at tha' calves an' tha' shoulders.
i'd like to get thee on a pair o' scales."

"it's the magic and--and mrs. sowerby's buns and milk and things," said
colin.  "you see the scientific experiment has succeeded."

that morning dickon was too late to hear the lecture.  when he came he
was ruddy with running and his funny face looked more twinkling than
usual.  as they had a good 
 
 ___________________________
 
t at that minute something had rushed all
through him--a sort of rapturous belief and realization and it had been
so strong that he could not help calling out.

"i shall live forever and ever and ever!" he cried grandly.  "i shall
find out thousands and thousands of things.  i shall find out about
people and creatures and everything that grows--like dickon--and i
shall never stop making magic.  i'm well! i'm well! i feel--i feel as
if i want to shout out something--something thankful, joyful!"

ben weatherstaff, who had been working near a rose-bush, glanced round
at him.

"tha' might sing th' doxology," he suggested in his dryest grunt.  he
had no opinion of the doxology and he did not make the suggestion with
any particular reverence.

but colin was of an exploring mind and he knew nothing about the
doxology.

"what is that?" he inquired.

"dickon can sing it for thee, i'll warrant," replied ben weatherstaff.

dickon answered with his all-perceiving animal charmer's smile.

"they sing it i' church,"
 
 ___________________________
 
, dickon.
i want to hear it."

dickon was quite simple and unaffected about it.  he understood what
colin felt better than colin did himself.  he understood by a sort of
instinct so natural that he did not know it was understanding.  he
pulled off his cap and looked round still smiling.

"tha' must take off tha' cap," he said to colin, "an' so mun tha',
ben--an' tha' mun stand up, tha' knows."

colin took off his cap and the sun shone on and warmed his thick hair
as he watched dickon intently.  ben weatherstaff scrambled up from his
knees and bared his head too with a sort of puzzled half-resentful look
on his old face as if he didn't know exactly why he was doing this
remarkable thing.

dickon stood out among the trees and rose-bushes and began to sing in
quite a simple matter-of-fact way and in a nice strong boy voice:

         "praise god from whom all blessings flow,
         praise him all creatures here below,
         praise him above ye heavenly host,
         praise father, son, and holy gho
 
 ___________________________
 
st.
                     amen."

when he had finished, ben weatherstaff was standing quite still with
his jaws set obstinately but with a disturbed look in his eyes fixed on
colin.  colin's face was thoughtful and appreciative.

"it is a very nice song," he said.  "i like it.  perhaps it means just
what i mean when i want to shout out that i am thankful to the magic."
he stopped and thought in a puzzled way.  "perhaps they are both the
same thing.  how can we know the exact names of everything? sing it
again, dickon.  let us try, mary.  i want to sing it, too.  it'
 
 ___________________________
 
s my
song.  how does it begin? 'praise god from whom all blessings flow'?"

and they sang it again, and mary and colin lifted their voices as
musically as they could and dickon's swelled quite loud and
beautiful--and at the second line ben weatherstaff raspingly cleared
his throat and at the third line he joined in with such vigor that it
seemed almost savage and when the "amen" came to an end mary observed
that the very same thing had happened to him which had happened when he
found out that colin was not a cripple--his chin was twitching and he
was staring and winking and his leathery old cheeks were wet.

"i never seed no sense in th' doxology afore," he said hoarsely, "but i
may change my mind i' time.  i should say tha'd gone up five pou
 
 ___________________________
 
 door in the ivied wall had been pushed gently open and a woman had
entered.  she had come in with the last line of their song and she had
stood still listening and looking at them.  with the ivy behind her,
the sunlight drifting through the trees and dappling her long blue
cloak, and her nice fresh face smiling across the greenery she was
rather like a softly colored illustration in one of colin's books.  she
had wonderful affectionate eyes which seemed to take everything in--all
of them, even ben weatherstaff and the "creatures" and every flower
that was in bloom.  unexpectedly as she had appeared, not one of them
felt that she was an intruder at all.  dickon's eyes lighted like lamps.

"it's mother--that's who it is!" he cried and went across the grass at
a run.

colin began to move toward her, too, and mary went with him.  they both
felt their pulses beat faster.

"it's mother!" dickon said again when they met halfway.  "i knowed tha'
wanted to see her an' i told her where th' door was hid."

coli
 
 ___________________________
 
 something in his face which
touched her.  colin liked it.

"are you surprised because i am so well?" he asked.  she put her hand
on his shoulder and smiled the mist out of her eyes.  "aye, that i am!"
she said; "but tha'rt so like thy mother tha' made my heart jump."

"do you think," said colin a little awkwardly, "that will make my
father like me?"

"aye, for sure, dear lad," she answered and she gave his shoulder a
soft quick pat.  "he mun come home--he mun come home."

"susan sowerby," said ben weatherstaff, getting close to her.  "look at
th' lad's legs, wilt tha'? they was like drumsticks i' stockin' two
month' ago--an' i heard folk tell as they was bandy an' knock-kneed
both at th' same time.  look at 'em now!"

susan sowerby laughed a comfortable laugh.

"they're goin' to be fine strong lad's legs in a bit," she said.  "let
him go on playin' an' workin' in the garden an' eatin' hearty an'
drinkin' plenty o' good sweet milk an' there'll not be a finer pair i'
yorkshire, thank god for it."

she 
 
 ___________________________
 
 thought it would be dead," he said.

"mary thought so at first," said colin.  "but it came alive."

then they sat down under their tree--all but colin, who wanted to stand
while he told the story.

it was the strangest thing he had ever heard, archibald craven thought,
as it was poured forth in headlong boy fashion.  mystery and magic and
wild creatures, the weird midnight meeting--the coming of the
spring--the passion of insulted pride which had dragged the young rajah
to his feet to defy old ben weatherstaff to his face.  the odd
companionship, the play acting, the great secret so carefully kept.
the listener laughed until tears came into his eyes and sometimes tears
came into his eyes when he was not laughing.  the athlete, the
lecturer, the scientific discoverer was a laughable, lovable, healthy
young human thing.

"now," he said at the end of the story, "it need not be a secret any
more.  i dare say it will frighten them nearly into fits when they see
me--but i am never going to get into the cha
 
 ___________________________
 
ir again.  i shall walk
back with you, father--to the house."


ben weatherstaff's duties rarely took him away from the gardens, but on
this occasion he made an excuse to carry some vegetables to the kitchen
and being invited into the servants' hall by mrs. medlock to drink a
glass of beer he was on the spot--as he had hoped to be--when the most
dramatic event misselthwaite manor had seen during the present
generation actually took place.  one of the windows looking upon the
courtyard gave also a glimpse of the lawn.  mrs. medlock, knowing ben
had come from the gardens, hop
 
 ___________________________
 
ed that he might have caught sight of his
master and even by chance of his meeting with master colin.

"did you see either of them, weatherstaff?" she asked.

ben took his beer-mug from his mouth and wiped his lips with the back
of his hand.

"aye, that i did," he answered with a shrewdly significant air.

"both of them?" suggested mrs. medlock.

"both of 'em," returned ben weatherstaff.  "thank ye kindly, ma'am, i
could sup up another mug of it."

"together?" said mrs. medlock, hastily overfilling his beer-mug in her
excitement.

"together, ma'am," and ben gulped down half of his new mug at one gulp.

"where was master colin? how did he look? what did they say to each
other?"

"i didna' hear that," said ben, "along o' only bein' on th' stepladder
lookin, over th' wall.  but i'll tell thee this.  there's been things
goin' on outside as you house people knows nowt about.  an' w