e, healthy food.  let her run wild
in the garden.  don't look after her too much.  she needs liberty and
fresh air and romping about.  mrs. sowerby is to come and see her now
and then and she may sometimes go to the cottage."

mrs. medlock looked pleased.  she was relieved to hear that she need
not "look after" mary too much.  she had felt her a tiresome charge and
had indeed seen as little of her as she dared.  in addition to this she
was fond of martha's mother.

"thank you, sir," she said.  "susan sowerby and me went to school
together and she's as sensible and good-hearted a woman as you'd find
in a day's walk.  i never had any children myself and she's had twelve,
and there never was healthier or better ones.  miss mary can get no
harm from them.  i'd always take susan sowerby's advice about children
myself.  she's what you might call healthy-minded--if you understand
me."

"i understand," mr. craven answered.  "take miss mary away now and send
pitcher to me."

when mrs. medlock left her at th
 
 ___________________________
 
iged to remain a very long time and do a great many things.
this afternoon he did not give any medicine or leave any new orders and
he was spared any disagreeable scenes.  when he went downstairs he
looked very thoughtful and when he talked to mrs. medlock in the
library she felt that he was a much puzzled man.

"well, sir," she ventured, "could you have believed it?"

"it is certainly a new state of affairs," said the doctor.  "and
there's no denying it is better than the old one."

"i believe susan sowerby's right--i do that," said mrs. medlock.  "i
stopped in her cottage on my way to thwaite yesterday and had a bit of
talk with her.  and she says to me, 'well, sarah ann, she mayn't be a
good child, an' she mayn't be a pretty one, but she's a child, an'
children needs children.' we went to school together, susan sowerby and
me."

"she's the best sick nurse i know," said dr. craven.  "when i find her
in a cottage i know the chances are that i shall save my patient."

mrs. medlock smiled.  she was 
 
 ___________________________
 
fond of susan sowerby.

"she's got a way with her, has susan," she went on quite volubly.
"i've been thinking all morning of one thing she said yesterday.  she
says, 'once when i was givin' th' children a bit of a preach after
they'd been fightin' i ses to 'em all, "when i was at school my
jography told as th' world was shaped like a orange an' i found out
before i was ten that th' whole orange doesn't belong to nobody.  no
one owns more than his bit of a quarter an' there's times it seems like
there's not enow quar
 
 ___________________________
 
t he?
you'd think he was a whole royal family rolled into one--prince consort
and all.".

"eh!" protested mrs. medlock, "we've had to let him trample all over
every one of us ever since he had feet and he thinks that's what folks
was born for."

"perhaps he'll grow out of it, if he lives," suggested mr. roach.

"well, there's one thing pretty sure," said mrs. medlock.  "if he does
live and that indian child stays here i'll warrant she teaches him that
the whole orange does not belong to him, as susan sowerby says.  and
he'll be likely to find out the size of his own quarter."

inside the room colin was leaning back on his cushions.

"it's all safe now," he said.  "and this afternoon i shall see it--this
afternoon i shall be in it!"

dickon went back to the garden with his creatures and mary stayed with
colin.  she did not think he looked tired but he was very quiet before
their lunch came and he was quiet while they were eating it.  she
wondered why and asked him about it.

"what big eyes you've go
 
 ___________________________
 
e way if she had seen something in his face which
touched her.  colin liked it.

"are you surprised because i am so well?" he asked.  she put her hand
on his shoulder and smiled the mist out of her eyes.  "aye, that i am!"
she said; "but tha'rt so like thy mother tha' made my heart jump."

"do you think," said colin a little awkwardly, "that will make my
father like me?"

"aye, for sure, dear lad," she answered and she gave his shoulder a
soft quick pat.  "he mun come home--he mun come home."

"susan sowerby," said ben weatherstaff, getting close to her.  "look at
th' lad's legs, wilt tha'? they was like drumsticks i' stockin' two
month' ago--an' i heard folk tell as they was bandy an' knock-kneed
both at th' same time.  look at 'em now!"

susan sowerby laughed a comfortable laugh.

"they're goin' to be fine strong lad's legs in a bit," she said.  "let
him go on playin' an' workin' in the garden an' eatin' hearty an'
drinkin' plenty o' good sweet milk an' there'll not be a finer pair i'
yorkshire, 
 
 ___________________________
 
confidence whatever in what mrs. medlock had heard.  "it doesn't stand
to reason that a pretty woman could be th' mother o' such a fou' little
lass," she had added obstinately.

mary had not had time to pay much attention to her changing face.  she
had only known that she looked "different" and seemed to have a great
deal more hair and that it was growing very fast.  but remembering her
pleasure in looking at the mem sahib in the past she was glad to hear
that she might some day look like her.

susan sowerby went round their garden with them and was told the whole
story of it and shown every bush and tree which had come alive.  colin
walked on one side of her and mary on the other.  each of them kept
looking up at her comfortable rosy face, secretly curious about the
delightful feeling she gave them--a sort of warm, supported feeling.
it seemed as if she understood them as dickon understood his
"creatures." she stooped over the flowers and talked about them as if
they were children.  soot followed 
 
 ___________________________
 
at all.  we try
to choke it back but it will burst out and that sounds worse than ever."

"there's one thing that comes into my mind so often," said mary, "and i
can scarcely ever hold in when i think of it suddenly.  i keep thinking
suppose colin's face should get to look like a full moon.  it isn't
like one yet but he gets a tiny bit fatter every day--and suppose some
morning it should look like one--what should we do!"

"bless us all, i can see tha' has a good bit o' play actin' to do,"
said susan sowerby.  "but tha' won't have to keep it up much longer.
mester craven'll come home."

"do you think he will?" asked colin.  "why?"

susan sowerby chuckled softly.

"i suppose it 'ud nigh break thy heart if he found out before tha' told
him in tha' own way," she said.  "tha's laid awake nights plannin' it."

"i couldn't bear any one else to tell him," said colin.  "i think about
different ways every day, i think now i just want to run into his
room." "that'd be a fine start for him," said susan sowerb
 
 ___________________________
 
y.  "i'd like
to see his face, lad.  i would that! he mun come back--that he mun."

one of the things they talked of was the visit they were to make to her
cottage.  they planned it all.  they were to drive over the moor and
lunch out of doors among the heather.  they would see all the twelve
children and dickon's garden and would not come back until they were
tired.

susan sowerby got up at last to return to the house and mrs. medlock.
it was time for colin to be wheeled back also.  but before he got into
his chair he stood quite close to susan and fixed his eyes on her with
a kind of bewildered adoration and he suddenly caught hold of the fold
of her blue cloak and held it fast.

"you are just what i--what i wanted," he said.  "i wish you were my
mother--as well as dickon's!"

all at once susan sowerby bent down and drew him with her warm arms
close against the bosom un
 
 ___________________________
 
embering the dream--the real--real dream.

"in the garden!" he said, wondering at himself.  "in the garden! but
the door is locked and the key is buried deep."

when he glanced at the letters a few minutes later he saw that the one
lying at the top of the rest was an english letter and came from
yorkshire.  it was directed in a plain woman's hand but it was not a
hand he knew.  he opened it, scarcely thinking of the writer, but the
first words attracted his attention at once.


"dear sir:

i am susan sowerby that made bold to speak to you once on the moor.  it
was about miss mary i spoke.  i will make bold to speak again.  please,
sir, i would come home if i was you.  i think you would be glad to come
and--if you will excuse me, sir--i think your lady would ask you to
come if she was here.

                      your obedient servant,
                      susan sowerby."


mr. craven read the letter twice before he put it back in its envelope.
he kept thinking about the dream.

"i will go back to 