
the secret garden

chapter i

there is no one left


when mary lennox was sent to misselthwaite manor to live with her uncle
everybody said she was the most disagreeable-looking child ever seen.
it was true, too.  she had a little thin face and a little thin body,
thin light hair and a sour expression.  her hair was yellow, and her
face was yellow because she had been born in india and had always been
ill in one way or another.  her father had held a position under the
english government and had always been busy and ill himself, and her
mother had been a great be
 
 ___________________________
 
e of the nursery when they opened the
door a few minutes later.  she looked an ugly, cross little thing and
was frowning because she was beginning to be hungry and feel
disgracefully neglected.  the first man who came in was a large officer
she had once seen talking to her father.  he looked tired and troubled,
but when he saw her he was so startled that he almost jumped back.

"barney!" he cried out.  "there is a child here! a child alone! in a
place like this! mercy on us, who is she!"

"i am mary lennox," the little girl said, drawing herself up stiffly.
she thought the man was very rude to call her father's bungalow "a
place like this!" "i fell asleep when everyone had the cholera and i
have only just wakened up.  why does nobody come?"

"it is the child no one ever saw!" exclaimed the man, turning to his
companions.  "she has actually been forgotten!"

"why was i forgotten?" mary said, stamping her foot.  "why does nobody
come?"

the young man whose name was barney looked at her very sadly. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 she looked.

a neat, thin old man stood near the manservant who opened the door for
them.

"you are to take her to her room," he said in a husky voice.  "he
doesn't want to see her.  he's going to london in the morning."

"very well, mr. pitcher," mrs. medlock answered.  "so long as i know
what's expected of me, i can manage."

"what's expected of you, mrs. medlock," mr. pitcher said, "is that you
make sure that he's not disturbed and that he doesn't see what he
doesn't want to see."

and then mary lennox was led up a broad staircase and down a long
corridor and up a short flight of steps and through another corridor
and another, until a door opened in a wall and she found herself in a
room with a fire in it and a supper on a table.

mrs. medlock said unceremoniously:

"well, here you are! this room and the next are where you'll live--and
you must keep to them.  don't you forget that!"

it was in this way mistress mary arrived at misselthwaite manor and she
had perhaps never felt quite so contra
 
 ___________________________
 
maid she would have been more subservient and respectful and
would have known that it was her business to brush hair, and button
boots, and pick things up and lay them away.  she was, however, only an
untrained yorkshire rustic who had been brought up in a moorland
cottage with a swarm of little brothers and sisters who had never
dreamed of doing anything but waiting on themselves and on the younger
ones who were either babies in arms or just learning to totter about
and tumble over things.

if mary lennox had been a child who was ready to be amused she would
perhaps have laughed at martha's readiness to talk, but mary only
listened to her coldly and wondered at her freedom of manner.  at first
she was not at all interested, but gradually, as the girl rattled on in
her good-tempered, homely way, mary began to notice what she was saying.

"eh! you should see 'em all," she said.  "there's twelve of us an' my
father only gets sixteen shilling a week.  i can tell you my mother's
put to it to get porr
 
 ___________________________
 
riend i've got."

"i have no friends at all," said mary.  "i never had.  my ayah didn't
like me and i never played with any one."

it is a yorkshire habit to say what you think with blunt frankness, and
old ben weatherstaff was a yorkshire moor man.

"tha' an' me are a good bit alike," he said.  "we was wove out of th'
same cloth.  we're neither of us good lookin' an' we're both of us as
sour as we look.  we've got the same nasty tempers, both of us, i'll
warrant."

this was plain speaking, and mary lennox had never heard the truth
about herself in her life.  native servants always salaamed and
submitted to you, whatever you did.  she had never thought much about
her looks, but she wondered if she was as unattractive as ben
weatherstaff and she also wondered if she looked as sour as he had
looked before the robin came.  she actually began to wonder also if she
was "nasty tempered." she felt uncomfortable.

suddenly a clear rippling little sound broke out near her and she
turned round.  she was st
 
 ___________________________
 
e isn't now," he said.

"no door!" cried mary.  "there must be." "none as any one can find, an'
none as is any one's business.  don't you be a meddlesome wench an'
poke your nose where it's no cause to go.  here, i must go on with my
work.  get you gone an' play you.  i've no more time."

and he actually stopped digging, threw his spade over his shoulder and
walked off, without even glancing at her or saying good-by.




chapter v

the cry in the corridor


at first each day which passed by for mary lennox was exactly like the
others.  every morning she awoke in her tapestried room and found
martha kneeling upon the hearth building her fire; every morning she
ate her breakfast in the nursery which had nothing amusing in it; and
after each breakfast she gazed out of the window across to the huge
moor which seemed to spread out on all sides and climb up to the sky,
and after she had stared for a while she realized that if she did not
go out she would have to stay in and do nothing--and so she went 
 
 ___________________________
 
here, stop, mister! how much are they?' an' he says 'tuppence', an'
mother she began fumblin' in her pocket an' she says to me, 'martha,
tha's brought me thy wages like a good lass, an' i've got four places
to put every penny, but i'm just goin' to take tuppence out of it to
buy that child a skippin'-rope,' an' she bought one an' here it is."

she brought it out from under her apron and exhibited it quite proudly.
it was a strong, slender rope with a striped red and blue handle at
each end, but mary lennox had never seen a skipping-rope before.  she
gazed at it with a mystified expression.

"what is it for?" she asked curiously.

"for!" cried out martha.  "does tha' mean that they've not got
skippin'-ropes in india, for all they've got elephants and tigers and
camels! no wonder most of 'em's black.  this is what it's for; just
watch me."

and she ran into the middle of the room and, taking a handle in each
hand, began to skip, and skip, and skip, while mary turned in her chair
to stare at her, an
 
 ___________________________
 
something heavy in her pocket strike against her at each jump,
and when she saw the robin she laughed again.

"you showed me where the key was yesterday," she said.  "you ought to
show me the door today; but i don't believe you know!"

the robin flew from his swinging spray of ivy on to the top of the wall
and he opened his beak and sang a loud, lovely trill, merely to show
off.  nothing in the world is quite as adorably lovely as a robin when
he shows off--and they are nearly always doing it.

mary lennox had heard a great deal about magic in her ayah's stories,
and she always said that what happened almost at that moment was magic.

one of the nice little gusts of wind rushed down the walk, and it was a
stronger one than the rest.  it was strong enough to wave the branches
of the trees, and it was more than strong enough to sway the trailing
sprays of untrimmed ivy hanging from the wall.  mary had stepped close
to the robin, and suddenly the gust of wind swung aside some loose ivy
trails, and m
 
 ___________________________
 
owly.

then she slipped through it, and shut it behind her, and stood with her
back against it, looking about her and breathing quite fast with
excitement, and wonder, and delight.

she was standing inside the secret garden.




chapter ix

the strangest house any one ever lived in


it was the sweetest, most mysterious-looking place any one could
imagine.  the high walls which shut it in were covered with the
leafless stems of climbing roses which were so thick that they were
matted together.  mary lennox knew they were roses because she had seen
a great many roses in india.  all the ground was covered with grass of
a wintry brown and out of it grew clumps of bushes which were surely
rosebushes if they were alive.  there were numbers of standard roses
which had so spread their branches that they were like little trees.
there were other trees in the garden, and one of the things which made
the place look strangest and loveliest was that climbing roses had run
all over them and swung down long ten
 
 ___________________________
 
o are you?" he said at last in a half-frightened whisper.  "are you
a ghost?"

"no, i am not," mary answered, her own whisper sounding half
frightened.  "are you one?"

he stared and stared and stared.  mary could not help noticing what
strange eyes he had.  they were agate gray and they looked too big for
his face because they had black lashes all round them.

"no," he replied after waiting a moment or so.  "i am colin."

"who is colin?" she faltered.

"i am colin craven.  who are you?"

"i am mary lennox.  mr. craven is my uncle."

"he is my father," said the boy.

"your father!" gasped mary.  "no one ever told me he had a boy! why
didn't they?"

"come here," he said, still keeping his strange eyes fixed on her with
an anxious expression.

she came close to the bed and he put out his hand and touched her.

"you are real, aren't you?" he said.  "i have such real dreams very
often.  you might be one of them."

mary had slipped on a woolen wrapper before she left her room and she
put a piece of it
 
 ___________________________
 
 between his fingers.

"rub that and see how thick and warm it is," she said.  "i will pinch
you a little if you like, to show you how real i am.  for a minute i
thought you might be a dream too."

"where did you come from?" he asked.

"from my own room.  the wind wuthered so i couldn't go to sleep and i
heard some one crying and wanted to find out who it was.  what were you
crying for?"

"because i couldn't go to sleep either and my head ached.  tell me your
name again."

"mary lennox.  did no one ever tell you i had come to live here?"

he was still fingering the fold of her wrapper, but he began to look a
little more as if he believed in her reality.

"no," he answered.  "they daren't."

"why?" asked mary.

"because i should have been afraid you would see me.  i won't let
people see me and talk me over."

"why?" mary asked again, feeling more mystified every moment.

"because i am like this always, ill and having to lie down.  my father
won't let people talk me over either
 
 ___________________________
 
start."

very soon afterward a bell rang and she rolled up her knitting.

"i dare say th' nurse wants me to stay with him a bit," she said.  "i
hope he's in a good temper."

she was out of the room about ten minutes and then she came back with a
puzzled expression.

"well, tha' has bewitched him," she said.  "he's up on his sofa with
his picture-books. he's told the nurse to stay away until six o'clock.
i'm to wait in the next room.  th' minute she was gone he called me to
him an' says, 'i want mary lennox to come and talk to me, and remember
you're not to tell any one.' you'd better go as quick as you can."

mary was quite willing to go quickly.  she did not want to see colin as
much as she wanted to see dickon; but she wanted to see him very much.

there was a bright fire on the hearth when she entered his room, and in
the daylight she saw it was a very beautiful room indeed.  there were
rich colors in the rugs and hangings and pictures and books on the
walls which made it look glowing and comf
 
 ___________________________
 

because he had accidentally bumped against her.

"good lord!" exclaimed poor mrs. medlock with her eyes almost starting
out of her head.  "good lord!"

"what is this?" said dr. craven, coming forward.  "what does it mean?"

then mary was reminded of the boy rajah again.  colin answered as if
neither the doctor's alarm nor mrs. medlock's terror were of the
slightest consequence.  he was as little disturbed or frightened as if
an elderly cat and dog had walked into the room.

"this is my cousin, mary lennox," he said.  "i asked her to come and
talk to me.  i like her.  she must come and talk to me whenever i send
for her."

dr. craven turned reproachfully to mrs. medlock.  "oh, sir" she panted.
"i don't know how it's happened.  there's not a servant on the place
tha'd dare to talk--they all have their orders."

"nobody told her anything," said colin.  "she heard me crying and found
me herself.  i am glad she came.  don't be silly, medlock."

mary saw that dr. craven did not look pleased, but it wa