 suggested mr. vance, as he met carrie in
his little parlour.

"no; he said he wouldn't be home for dinner."

"better leave a little note for him, telling him where we are. he might
turn up."

"i will," said carrie, who had not thought of it before.

"tell him we'll be at sherry's until eight o'clock. he knows, though, i
guess."

carrie crossed the hall with rustling skirts, and scrawled the note,
gloves on. when she returned a newcomer was in the vance flat.

"mrs. wheeler, let me introduce mr. ames, a cousin of mine," said mrs.
vance. "he's going along with us, aren't you, bob?"

"i'm very glad to meet you," said ames, bowing politely to carrie.

the latter caught in a glance the dimensions of a very stalwart figure.
she also noticed that he was smooth-shaven, good looking, and young, but
nothing more.

"mr. ames is just down in new york for a few days," put in vance, "and
we're trying to show him around a little."

"oh, are you?" said carrie, taking another glance at the newcomer.

"yes;
 
 ___________________________
 
 i am just on here from indianapolis for a week or so," said young
ames, seating himself on the edge of a chair to wait while mrs. vance
completed the last touches of her toilet.

"i guess you find new york quite a thing to see, don't you?" said
carrie, venturing something to avoid a possible deadly silence.

"it is rather large to get around in a week," answered ames, pleasantly.

he was an exceedingly genial soul, this young man, and wholly free of
affectation. it seemed to carrie he was as yet only overcoming the last
traces of the bashfulness of youth. he did not seem apt at conversation,
but he had the merit of being well dressed and wholly courageous. carrie
felt as if it were not going to be hard to talk to him.

"well, i guess we're ready now. the coach is outside."

"come on, people," said mrs. vance, coming in smiling. "bob, you'll have
to look aft
 
 ___________________________
 
er mrs. wheeler."

"i'll try to," said bob smiling, and edging closer to carrie. "you won't
need much watching, will you?" he volunteered, in a sort of ingratiating
and help-me-out kind of way.

"not very, i hope," said carrie.

they descended the stairs, mrs. vance offering suggestions, and climbed
into the open coach.

"all right," said vance, slamming the coach door, and the conveyance
rolled away.

"what is it we're going to see?" asked ames.

"sothern," said vance, "in 'lord chumley.'"

"oh, he is so good!" said mrs. vance. "he's just the funniest man."

"i notice the papers praise it," said ames.

"i haven't any doubt," put in vance, "but we'll all enjoy it very much."

ames had taken a seat beside carrie, and accordingly he felt it his
bounden duty to pay her some attention. he was interested to find her so
young a wife, and so pretty, though it was only a respectful interest.
there was nothing of the dashing lady's man about hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m. he had respect
for the married state, and thought only of some pretty marriageable
girls in indianapolis.

"are you a born new yorker?" asked ames of carrie.

"oh, no; i've only been here for two years."

"oh, well, you've had time to see a great deal of it, anyhow."

"i don't seem to have," answered carrie. "it's about as strange to me as
when i first came here."

"you're not from the west, are you?"

"yes. i'm from wisconsin," she answered.

"well, it does seem as if most people in this town haven't been here so
very long. i hear of lots of indiana people in my line who are here."

"what is your line?" asked carrie.

"i'm connected with
 
 ___________________________
 
easure-seeking in the
streets which they were following. coaches were numerous, pedestrians
many, and in fifty-ninth street the street cars were crowded. at
fifty-ninth street and fifth avenue a blaze of lights from several new
hotels which bordered the plaza square gave a suggestion of sumptuous
hotel life. fifth avenue, the home of the wealthy, was noticeably
crowded with carriages, and gentlemen in evening dress. at sherry's an
imposing doorman opened the coach door and helped them out. young ames
held carrie's elbow as he helped her up the steps. they entered the
lobby already swarming with patrons, and then, after divesting
themselves of their wraps, went into a sumptuous dining-room.

in all carrie's experience she had never seen anything like this. in the
whole time she had been in new york hurstwood's modified state had not
permitted his bringing her to such a place. there was an almost
indescribable atmosphere about it which convinced the newcomer that this
was the proper thing. he
 
 ___________________________
 
though he had ordered.

ames was looking away again, and carrie was again looking at his
forehead. to her he seemed to be thinking about strange things. as he
studied the crowd his eye was mild.

"look at that woman's dress over there," he said, again turning to
carrie, and nodding in a direction.

"where?" said carrie, following his eyes.

"over there in the corner--way over. do you see that brooch?"

"isn't it large?" said carrie.

"one of the largest clusters of jewels i have ever seen," said ames.

"it is, isn't it?" said carrie. she felt as if she would like to be
agreeable to this young man, and also there came with it, or perhaps
preceded it, the slightest shade of a feeling that he was better
educated than she was--that his mind was better. he seemed to look it,
and the saving grace in carrie was that she could understand that people
could be wiser. she had seen a number of people in her life who reminded
her of what she had vaguely come to think of as scholars. this strong
young ma
 
 ___________________________
 
hanged to a book that was having its vogue at the
time--"moulding a maiden," by albert ross. mrs. vance had read it. vance
had seen it discussed in some of the papers.

"a man can make quite a strike writing a book," said vance. "i notice
this fellow ross is very much talked about." he was looking at carrie as
he spoke.

"i hadn't heard of him," said carrie, honestly.

"oh, i have," said mrs. vance. "he's written lots of things. this last
story is pretty good."

"he doesn't amount to much," said ames.

carrie turned her eyes toward him as to an oracle.

"his stuff is nearly as bad as 'dora thorne,'" concluded ames.

carrie felt this as a personal reproof. she read "dora thorne," or had a
great deal in the past. it seemed only fair to her, but she supposed
that people thought it very fine. now this clear-eyed, fine-headed
youth, who looked something like a student to her, made fun of it. it
was poor to him, not worth reading. she looked down, and for the first
time felt the pain of not under
 
 ___________________________
 
standing.

yet there was nothing sarcastic or supercilious in the way ames spoke.
he had very little of that in him. carrie felt that it was just kindly
thought of a high order--the right thing to think, and wondered what
else was right, according to him. he seemed to notice that she listened
and rather sympathised with him, and from now on he talked mostly to
her.

as the waiter bowed and scraped about, felt the dishes to see if they
were hot enough, brought spoons and forks, and did all those little
attentive things calculated to impress the luxury of the situation 
 
 ___________________________
 
upon
the diner, ames also leaned slightly to one side and told her of
indianapolis in an intelligent way. he really had a very bright mind,
which was finding its chief development in electrical knowledge. his
sympathies for other forms of information, however, and for types of
people, were quick and warm. the red glow on his head gave it a sandy
tinge and put a bright glint in his eye. carrie noticed all these things
as he leaned toward her and felt exceedingly young. this man was far
ahead of her. he seemed wiser 
 
 ___________________________
 
enough to spend
my money this way."

"oh, wouldn't you?" said carrie, the, to her, new attitude forcing
itself distinctly upon her for the first time.

"no," he said. "what good would it do? a man doesn't need this sort of
thing to be happy."

carrie thought of this doubtfully; but, coming from him, it had weight
with her.

"he probably could be happy," she thought to herself, "all alone. he's
so strong."

mr. and mrs. vance kept up a running fire of interruptions, and these
impressive things by ames came at odd moments. they were sufficient,
however, for the atmosphere that went with this youth impressed itself
upon carrie without words. there was something in him, or the world he
moved in, which appealed to her. he reminded her of scenes she had seen
on the stage--the sorrows and sacrifices that always went with she knew
not what. he had taken away some of the bitterness of the contrast
between this life and her life, and all by a certain calm indifference
which concerned only him.

as th
 
 ___________________________
 
without the walled city: the slope of the years


the immediate result of this was nothing. results from such things are
usually long in growing. morning brings a change of feeling. the
existent condition invariably pleads for itself. it is only at odd
moments that we get glimpses of the misery of things. the heart
understands when it is confronted with contrasts. take them away and the
ache subsides.

carrie went on, leading much this same life for six months thereafter or
more. she did not see ames any more. he called once upon the vances, but
she only heard about it through the young wife. then he went west, and
there was a gradual subsidence of whatever personal attraction had
existed. the mental effect of the thing had not gone, however, and never
would entirely. she had an ideal to contrast men by--particularly men
close to her.

during all this time--a period rapidly approaching three
years--hurstwood had been moving along in an even path. there was no
apparent slope downward, and di
 
 ___________________________
 
r by
the former, seized her completely. she had been taught how to dress and
where to go without having ample means to do either. now, these
things--ever-present realities as they were--filled her eyes and mind.
the more circumscribed became her state, the more entrancing seemed this
other. and now poverty threatened to seize her entirely and to remove
this other world far upward like a heaven to which any lazarus might
extend, appealingly, his hands.

so, too, the ideal brought into her life by ames remained. he had gone,
but here was his word that riches were not everything; that there was a
great deal more in the world than she knew; that the stage was good, and
the literature she read poor. he was a strong man and clean--how much
stronger and better than hurstwood and drouet she only half formulated
to herself, but the difference was painful. it was something to which
she voluntarily closed her eyes.

during the last three months of the warren street connection, hurstwood
took parts of 
 
 ___________________________
 
lt in a reunion after the show.
he was greatly taken with carrie. "we'll drive down to delmonico's now
and have something there, won't we, orrin?"

"to be sure," replied orrin, gaily.

carrie thought of hurstwood. never before had she neglected dinner
without an excuse.

they drove back, and at 6.15 sat down to dine. it was the sherry
incident over again, the remembrance of which came painfully back to
carrie. she remembered mrs. vance, who had never called again after
hurstwood's reception, and ames.

at this figure her mind halted. it was a strong, clean vision. he liked
better books than she read, better people than she associated with. his
ideals burned in her heart.

"it's fine to be a good actress," came distinctly back.

what sort of an actress was she?

"what are you thinking about, miss madenda?" inquired her merry
companion. "come, now, let's see if i can guess."

"oh, no," said carrie. "don't try."

she shook it off and ate. she forgot, in part, and was merry. when it
came to the
 
 ___________________________
 
ing carrie with admiration. "you're so
good."

timid as carrie was, she was strong in capability. the reliance of
others made her feel as if she must, and when she must she dared.
experience of the world and of necessity was in her favour. no longer
the lightest word of a man made her head dizzy. she had learned that men
could change and fail. flattery in its most palpable form had lost its
force with her. it required superiority--kindly superiority--to move
her--the superiority of a genius like ames.

"i don't like the actors in our company," she told lola one day.
"they're all so struck on themselves."

"don't you think mr. barclay's pretty nice?" inquired lola, who had
received a condescending smile or two from that quarter.

"oh, he's nice enough," answered carrie; "but he isn't sincere. he
assumes such an air."

lola felt for her first hold upon carrie in the following manner:

"are you paying room-rent where you are?"

"certainly," answered carrie. "why?"

"i know where i could get th
 
 ___________________________
 
es sleeping in the park, carried him over
more days. resorting to those peculiar charities, several of which, in
the press of hungry search, he accidentally stumbled upon, did the rest.
toward the dead of winter, carrie came back, appearing on broadway in a
new play; but he was not aware of it. for weeks he wandered about the
city, begging, while the fire sign, announcing her engagement, blazed
nightly upon the crowded street of amusements. drouet saw it, but did
not venture in.

about this time ames returned to new york. he had made a little success
in the west, and now opened a laboratory in wooster street. of course,
he encountered carrie through mrs. vance; but there was nothing
responsive between them. he thought she was still united to hurstwood,
until otherwise informed. not knowing the facts then, he did not profess
to understand, and refrained from comment.

with mrs. vance, he saw the new play, and expressed himself accordingly.

"she ought not to be in comedy," he said. "i think 
 
 ___________________________
 
ed over their ears. in the
former thoroughfare business men and travellers were making for
comfortable hotels. in the latter, crowds on cold errands shifted past
dingy stores, in the deep recesses of which lights were already
gleaming. there were early lights in the cable cars, whose usual clatter
was reduced by the mantle about the wheels. the whole city was muffled
by this fast-thickening mantle.

in her comfortable chambers at the waldorf, carrie was reading at this
time "père goriot," which ames had recommended to her. it was so strong,
and ames's mere recommendation had so aroused her interest, that she
caught nearly the full sympathetic significance of it. for the first
time, it was being borne in upon her how silly and worthless had been
her earlier reading, as a whole. becoming wearied, however, she yawned
and came to the window, looking out upon the old winding procession of
carriages rolling up fifth avenue.

"isn't it bad?" she observed to lola.

"terrible!" said that little lad
 
 ___________________________
 
ured
her, its ambassadors should be discredited. even had hurstwood returned
in his original beauty and glory, he could not now have allured her. she
had learned that in his world, as in her own present state, was not
happiness.

sitting alone, she was now an illustration of the devious ways by which
one who feels, rather than reasons, may be led in the pursuit of beauty.
though often disillusioned, she was still waiting for that halcyon day
when she should be led forth among dreams become real. ames had pointed
out a farther step, but on and on beyond that, if accomplished, would
lie others for her. it was forever to be the pursuit of that radiance of
delight which tints the distant hilltops of the world.

oh, carrie, carrie! oh, blind strivings of the human heart! onward,
onward, it saith, and where beauty leads, there it follows. whether it
be the tinkle of a lone sheep bell o'er some quiet landscape, or the
glimmer of beauty in sylvan places, or the show of soul in some passing
eye, the