particular spot, though he had scarcely the wherewithal to provide
a comfortable habitation for himself.

taking his place amid this lightsome atmosphere, he would stand, his
stocky figure cloaked in a great cape overcoat, his head protected by a
broad slouch hat, awaiting the applicants who had in various ways
learned the nature of his charity. for a while he would stand alone,
gazing like any idler upon an ever-fascinating scene. on the evening in
question, a policeman passing saluted him as "captain," in a friendly
way. an urchin who had frequently seen him before, stopped to gaze. all
others took him for nothing out of the ordinary, save in the matter of
dress, and conceived of him as a stranger whistling and idling for his
own amusement.

as the first half-hour waned, certain characters appeared. here and
there in the passing crowds one might see, now and then, a loiterer
edging interestedly near. a slouchy figure crossed the opposite corner
and glanced furtively in his direction. anothe
 
 ___________________________
 
thout an imaginary circle, which they seemed afraid to
enter--a dozen in all. presently, with the arrival of a keener sense of
cold, one figure came forward. it crossed broadway from out the shadow
of twenty-sixth street, and, in a halting, circuitous way, arrived close
to the waiting figure. there was something shamefaced or diffident about
the movement, as if the intention were to conceal any idea of stopping
until the very last moment. then suddenly, close to the soldier, came
the halt.

the captain looked in recognition, but there was no especial greeting.
the newcomer nodded slightly and murmured something like one who waits
for gifts. the other simply motioned toward the edge of the walk.

"stand over there," he said.

by this the spell was broken. even while the soldier resumed his short,
solemn walk, other figures shuffled forward. they did not so much as
greet the leader, but joined the one, sniffling and hitching and
scraping their feet.

"cold, ain't it?"

"i'm glad winter's over."
 
 ___________________________
 
nt collection. trousers were all warped
and frayed at the bottom and coats worn and faded. in the glare of the
store lights, some of the faces looked dry and chalky; others were red
with blotches and puffed in the cheeks and under the eyes; one or two
were rawboned and reminded one of railroad hands. a few spectators came
near, drawn by the seemingly conferring group, then more and more, and
quickly there was a pushing, gaping crowd. some one in the line began to
talk.

"silence!" exclaimed the captain. "now, then, gentlemen, these men are
without beds. they have to have some place to sleep to-night. they can't
lie out in the streets. i need twelve cents to put one of them to bed.
who will give it to me?"

no reply.

"well, we'll have to wait here, boys, until some one does. twelve cents
isn't so very much for one man."

"here's fifteen," exclaimed a young man, peering forward with strained
eyes. "it's all i can afford."

"all right. now i have fifteen. step out of the line," and seizing one

 
 ___________________________
 
by the shoulder, the captain marched him off a little way and stood him
up alone.

coming back, he resumed his place and began again.

"i have three cents left. these men must be put to bed somehow. there
are"--counting--"one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve men. nine cents more will put the next man to bed;
give him a good, comfortable bed for the night. i go right along and
look after that myself. who will give me nine cents?"

one of the watchers, this time a middle-aged man, handed 
 
 ___________________________
 
him a five-cent
piece.

"now, i have eight cents. four more will give this man a bed. come,
gentlemen. we are going very slow this evening. you all have good beds.
how about these?"

"here you are," remarked a bystander, putting a coin into his hand.

"that," said the captain, looking at the coin, "pays for two beds for
two men and gives me five on the next one. who will give me seven cents
more?"

"i will," said a voice.

coming down sixth avenue this evening, hurstwood chanced to cross east
through twenty-sixth street toward third avenue. he was wholly
disconsolate in spirit, hungry to what he deemed an almost mortal
extent, weary, and defeated. how should he get at carrie now? it would
be eleven before the show was over. if she came in a coach, she would go
away 
 
 ___________________________
 
in one. he would need to interrupt under most trying circumstances.
worst of all, he was hungry and weary, and at best a whole day must
intervene, for he had not heart to try again to-night. he had no food
and no bed.

when he neared broadway, he noticed the captain's gathering of
wanderers, but thinking it to be the result of a street preacher or some
patent medicine fakir, was about to pass on. however, in crossing the
street toward madison square park, he noticed the line of men whose beds
were already secured, stretching out from the main body of the crowd. in
the glare of the neighbouring electric light he recognised a type of his
own kind--the figures whom he saw about the streets and in the
lodging-houses, drifting in mind and body like himself. he 
 
 ___________________________
 
wondered what
it could be and turned back.

there was the captain curtly pleading as before. he heard with
astonishment and a sense of relief the oft-repeated words: "these men
must have a bed." before him was the line of unfortunates whose beds
were yet to be had, and seeing a newcomer quietly edge up and take a
position at the end of the line, he decided to do likewise. what use to
contend? he was weary to-night. it was a simple way out of one
difficulty, at least. to-morrow, maybe, he would do better.

back of him, where some of those were whose beds were 
 
 ___________________________
 
. cracked and husky voices pronounced
forcibly upon odd matters. vague and rambling observations were made in
reply.

there were squints, and leers, and some dull, ox-like stares from those
who were too dull or too weary to converse.

standing tells. hurstwood became more weary waiting. he thought he
should drop soon and shifted restlessly from one foot to the other. at
last his turn came. the man ahead had been paid for and gone to the
blessed line of success. he was now first, and already the captain was
talking for him.

"twelve cents, gentlemen--twelve cents puts this man to bed. he wouldn't
stand here in the cold if he had any place to go."

hurstwood swallowed something that rose to his throat. hunger and
weakness had made a coward of him.

"here you are," said a stranger, handing money to the captain.

now the latter put a kindly hand on the ex-manager's shoulder.

"line up over there," he said.

once there, hurstwood breathed easier. he felt as if the world were not
quite so bad with 
 
 ___________________________
 
such a good man in it. others seemed to feel like
himself about this.

"captain's a great feller, ain't he?" said the man ahead--a little,
woe-begone, helpless-looking sort of individual, who looked as though he
had ever been the sport and care of fortune.

"yes," said hurstwood, indifferently.

"huh! there's a lot back there yet," said a man farther up, leaning out
and looking back at the applicants for whom the captain was pleading.

"yes. must be over a hundred to-night," said another.

"look at the guy in the cab," observed a third.

a cab had stopped. some gentleman in evening dress reached out a bill to
the captain, who took it with simple thanks and turned away to his line.
there was a general craning of necks as the jewel in the white shirt
front sparkled and the cab moved off. even the crowd gaped in awe.

"that fixes up nine men for the night," said the captain, counting out
as many of the line near h
 
 ___________________________
 
im. "line up over there. now, then, there are
only seven. i need twelve cents."

money came slowly. in the course of time the crowd thinned out to a
meagre handful. fifth avenue, save for an occasional cab or foot
passenger, was bare. broadway was thinly peopled with pedestrians. only
now and then a stranger passing noticed the small group, handed out a
coin, and went away, unheeding.

the captain remained stolid and determined. he talked on, very slowly,
uttering the fewest words and with a certain assurance, as though he
could not fail.

"come; i can't stay out here all night. these men are getting tired and
cold. some one give me four cents."

there came a time when he said nothing at all. money was handed him, and
for each twelve cents he singled out a man and put him in the other
line. then he walked up and down as before, looking at the ground.

the theatres let out. fire signs dis
 
 ___________________________
 
rained with an effort from groaning, he was so weak.

at last a lady in opera cape and rustling skirts came down fifth avenue,
accompanied by her escort. hurstwood gazed wearily, reminded by her both
of carrie in her new world and of the time when he had escorted his own
wife in like manner.

while he was gazing, she turned and, looking at the remarkable company,
sent her escort over. he came, holding a bill in his fingers, all
elegant and graceful.

"here you are," he said.

"thanks," said the captain, turning to the two remaining applicants.
"now we have some for to-morrow night," he added.

therewith he lined up the last two and proceeded to the head, counting
as he went.

"one hundred and thirty-seven," he announced. "now, boys, line up. right
dress there. we won't be much longer about this. steady, now."

he placed himself at the head and called out "forward." hurstwood moved
with the line. across fifth avenue, through madison square by the
winding paths, east on twenty-third street, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 or nodded to the leader, whom they had
seen before. on third avenue they marched, a seemingly weary way, to
eighth street, where there was a lodging-house, closed, apparently, for
the night. they were expected, however.

outside in the gloom they stood, while the leader parleyed within. then
doors swung open and they were invited in with a "steady, now."

some one was at the head showing rooms, so that there was no delay for
keys. toiling up the creaky stairs, hurstwood looked back and saw the
captain, watching; the last one of the line being included in his broad
solicitude. then he gathered his cloak about him and strolled out into
the night.

"i can't stand much of this," said hurstwood, whose legs ached him
painfully, as he sat down upon the miserable bunk in the small,
lightless chamber allotted to him. "i've got to eat, or i'll die."




chapter xlvi

stirring troubled waters


playing in new york one evening on this her return, carrie was putting
the finishing touches to her toilet be
 
 ___________________________
 
 to lola.

"oh, why not?" said the latter.

"i think," she said, "i can do better in a serious play."

"what put that idea in your head?"

"oh, nothing," she answered; "i've always thought so."

still, she did nothing--grieving. it was a long way to this better
thing--or seemed so--and comfort was about her; hence the inactivity and
longing.




chapter xlvii

the way of the beaten: a harp in the wind


in the city, at that time, there were a number of charities similar in
nature to that of the captain's, which hurstwood now patronised in a
like unfortunate way. one was a convent mission-house of the sisters of
mercy in fifteenth street--a row of red brick family dwellings, before
the door of which hung a plain wooden contribution box, on which was
painted the statement that every noon a meal was given free to all those
who might apply and ask for aid. this simple announcement was modest in
the extreme, covering, as it did, a charity so broad. institutions and
charities are so large and so nu