d, but she looked so pretty
and good-natured that carrie instantly conceived a liking for her. the
newcomer did no more than smile shamefacedly, but it was sufficient.
carrie felt that she would like to know her, and a similar feeling
stirred in the mind of the other, who admired carrie's innocent face.

"that's a real pretty woman who has moved in next door," said carrie to
hurstwood at the breakfast table.

"who are they?" asked hurstwood.

"i don't know," said carrie. "the name on the bell is vance. some one
over there plays beautifully. i guess it must be she."

"well, you never can tell what sort of people you're living next to in
this town, can you?" said hurstwood, expressing the customary new york
opinion about neighbours.

"just think," said carrie, "i have been in this house with nine other
families for over a year and i don't know a soul. these people have been
here over a month and i haven't seen any one before this morning."

"it's just as well," said hurstwood. "you never know 
 
 ___________________________
 
who you're going to
get in with. some of these people are pretty bad company."

"i expect so," said carrie, agreeably.

the conversation turned to other things, and carrie thought no more upon
the subject until a day or two later, when, going out to market, she
encountered mrs. vance coming in. the latter recognised her and nodded,
for which carrie returned a smile. this settled the probability of
acquaintanceship. if there had been no faint recognition on this
occasion, there would have been no future association.

carrie saw no more of mrs. vance for several weeks, but she heard her
play through the thin walls which divided the front rooms of the flats,
and was pleased by the merry selection of pieces and the brilliance of
their rendition. she could play only moderately h
 
 ___________________________
 
erself, and such
variety as mrs. vance exercised bordered, for carrie, upon the verge of
great art. everything she had seen and heard thus far--the merest scraps
and shadows--indicated that these people were, in a measure, refined and
in comfortable circumstances. so carrie was ready for any extension of
the friendship which might follow.

one day carrie's bell rang and the servant, who was in the kitchen,
pressed the button which caused the front door of the general entrance
on the ground floor to be electrically unlatched. when ca
 
 ___________________________
 
rrie waited at
her own door on the third floor to see who it might be coming up to call
on her, mrs. vance appeared.

"i hope you'll excuse me," she said. "i went out a while ago and forgot
my outside key, so i thought i'd ring your bell."

this was a common trick of other residents of the building, whenever
they had forgotten their outside keys. they did not apologise for it,
however.

"certainly," said carrie. "i'm glad you did. i do the same thing
sometimes."

"isn't it just delightful weather?" said mrs. vance, pausing for a
moment.

thus, after a few more preliminaries, this visiting acquaintan
 
 ___________________________
 
ce was
well launched, and in the young mrs. vance carrie found an agreeable
companion.

on several occasions carrie visited her and was visited. both flats were
good to look upon, though that of the vances tended somewhat more to the
luxurious.

"i want you to come over this evening and meet my husband," said mrs.
vance, not long after their intimacy began. "he wants to meet you. you
play cards, don't you?"

"a little," said carrie.

"well, we'll have a game of cards. if your husband comes home bring him
over."

"he's not coming to dinner to-night," said carrie.

"well, when he does come we'll call him in."

carrie acquiesced, and that evening met the portly vance, an individual
a few years youn
 
 ___________________________
 
ger than hurstwood, and who owed his seemingly
comfortable matrimonial state much more to his money than to his good
looks. he thought well of carrie upon the first glance and laid himself
out to be genial, teaching her a new game of cards and talking to her
about new york and its pleasures. mrs. vance played some upon the piano,
and at last hurstwood came.

"i am very glad to meet you," he said to mrs. vance when carrie
introduced him, showing much of the old grace which had captivated
carrie.

"did you think your wife had run away?" said mr. vance, extending his
hand upon introduction.

"i didn't know but what she might have found a better husband," said
hurstwood.

he now turned his attention to mrs. vance, and in a flash carrie saw
again what she for some time had sub-consciously missed in
hurstwood--the adroitness and flattery of which he was capable. she also
saw that she was not well dressed-
 
 ___________________________
 
ower of initiative; but, nevertheless, she seemed ever capable
of getting herself into the tide of change where she would be easily
borne along. hurstwood noticed nothing. he had been unconscious of the
marked contrasts which carrie had observed. he did not even detect the
shade of melancholy which settled in her eyes. worst of all, she now
began to feel the loneliness of the flat and seek the company of mrs.
vance, who liked her exceedingly.

"let's go to the matinée this afternoon," said mrs. vance, who had
stepped across into carrie's flat one morning, still arrayed in a soft
pink dressing-gown, which she had donned upon rising. hurstwood and
vance had gone their separate ways nearly an hour before.

"all right," said carrie, noticing the air of the petted and
well-groomed woman in mrs. vance's general appearance. she looked as
though she was dearly loved and her every wish gratified. "what shall we
see?"

"oh, i do want to see nat goodwin," said mrs. vance. "i do think he is
the jollies
 
 ___________________________
 
t actor. the papers say this is such a good play."

"what time will we have to start?" asked carrie.

"let's go at one and walk down broadway from thirty-fourth street," said
mrs. vance. "it's such an interesting walk. he's at the madison square."

"i'll be glad to go," said carrie. "how much will we have to pay for
seats?"

"not more than a dollar," said mrs. vance.

the latter departed, and at one o'clock reappeared, stunningly arrayed
in a dark-blue walking dress, with a nobby hat to match. carrie had
gotten herself up charmingly enough, but this woman pained her by
contrast. she seemed to have so many dainty little things which carrie
had not. there were trinkets of gold, an elegant green leather purse
set with her initials, a fancy handkerchief, exceedingly rich in design,
and the like. carrie felt that she needed more and better clothes to
compare wi
 
 ___________________________
 
th this woman, and that any one looking at the two would pick
mrs. vance for her raiment alone. it was a trying, though rather unjust
thought, for carrie had now developed an equally pleasing figure, and
had grown in comeliness until she was a thoroughly attractive type of
her colour of beauty. there was some difference in the clothing of the
two, both of quality and age, but this difference was not especially
noticeable. it served, however, to augment carrie's dissatisfaction with
her state.

the walk down broadway, then as now, was one of the remarkable features
o
 
 ___________________________
 
ave its first airing on
broadway. so true and well understood was this fact, that several years
later a popular song, detailing this and other facts concerning the
afternoon parade on matinée days, and entitled "what right has he on
broadway?" was published, and had quite a vogue about the music-halls of
the city.

in all her stay in the city, carrie had never heard of this showy
parade; had never even been on broadway when it was taking place. on the
other hand, it was a familiar thing to mrs. vance, who not only knew of
it as an entity, but had often been in it, going purposely to see and be
seen, to create a stir with her beauty and dispel any tendency to fall
short in dressiness by contrasting herself with the beauty and fashion
of the town.

carrie stepped along easily enough after they got out of the car at
thirty-fourth street, but soon fixed her eyes upon the lovely company
which swarmed by and with them as they proceeded. she noticed suddenly
that mrs. vance's manner had rather sti
 
 ___________________________
 
rdashers, confectioners--all followed in
rapid succession. the street was full of coaches. pompous doormen in
immense coats, shiny brass belts and buttons, waited in front of
expensive salesrooms. coachmen in tan boots, white tights, and blue
jackets waited obsequiously for the mistresses of carriages who were
shopping inside. the whole street bore the flavour of riches and show,
and carrie felt that she was not of it. she could not, for the life of
her, assume the attitude and smartness of mrs. vance, who, in her
beauty, was all assurance. she could only imagine that it must be
evident to many that she was the less handsomely dressed of the two. it
cut her to the quick, and she resolved that she would not come here
again until she looked better. at the same time she longed to feel the
delight of parading here as an equal. ah, then she would be happy!




chapter xxxii

the feast of belshazzar: a seer to translate


such feelings as were generated in carrie by this walk put her in an
exceedi
 
 ___________________________
 
ancholia and called to the dinner
table, she changed her mind. a little food in the stomach does wonders.
she went again, and in so doing temporarily recovered her equanimity.
the great awakening blow had, however, been delivered. as often as she
might recover from these discontented thoughts now, they would occur
again. time and repetition--ah, the wonder of it! the dropping water and
the solid stone--how utterly it yields at last!

not long after this matinée experience--perhaps a month--mrs. vance
invited carrie to an evening at the theatre with them. she heard carrie
say that hurstwood was not coming home to dinner.

"why don't you come with us? don't get dinner for yourself. we're going
down to sherry's for dinner and then over to the lyceum. come along with
us."

"i think i will," answered carrie.

she began to dress at three o'clock for her departure at half-past five
for the noted dining-room which was then crowding delmonico's for
position in society. in this dressing carrie showed
 
 ___________________________
 
 the influence of her
association with the dashing mrs. vance. she had constantly had her
attention called by the latter to novelties in everything which pertains
to a woman's apparel.

"are you going to get such and such a hat?" or, "have you seen the new
gloves with the oval pearl buttons?" were but sample phrases out of a
large selection.

"the next time you get a pair of shoes, dearie," said mrs. vance, "get
button, with thick soles and patent-leather tips. they're all the rage
this fall."

"i will," said carrie.

"oh, dear, have you seen the new shirtwaists at altman's? they have some
of the loveliest patterns. i saw one there that i know would look
stunning on you. i said so when i saw it."

carrie listened to these things with considerable interest, for they
were suggested with more of friendliness than is usually common between
pretty women. mrs. vance liked carrie's stable good-nature so
 
 ___________________________
 
ned to offer the slightest objection so soon, but he felt that
carrie's wants were expanding. this did not appeal to him exactly, but
he cared for her in his own way, and so the thing stood. still, there
was something in the details of the transactions which caused carrie to
feel that her requests were not a delight to him. he did not enthuse
over the purchases. this led her to believe that neglect was creeping
in, and so another small wedge was entered.

nevertheless, one of the results of mrs. vance's suggestions was the
fact that on this occasion carrie was dressed somewhat to her own
satisfaction. she had on her best, but there was comfort in the thought
that if she must confine herself to a _best_, it was neat and fitting.
she looked the well-groomed woman of twenty-one, and mrs. vance praised
her, which brought colour to her plump cheeks and a noticeable
brightness into her large eyes. it was threatening rain, and mr. vance,
at his wife's request, had called a coach.

"your husband isn
 
 ___________________________
 
't coming?" suggested mr. vance, as he met carrie in
his little parlour.

"no; he said he wouldn't be home for dinner."

"better leave a little note for him, telling him where we are. he might
turn up."

"i will," said carrie, who had not thought of it before.

"tell him we'll be at sherry's until eight o'clock. he knows, though, i
guess."

carrie crossed the hall with rustling skirts, and scrawled the note,
gloves on. when she returned a newcomer was in the vance flat.

"mrs. wheeler, let me introduce mr. ames, a cousin of mine," said mrs.
vance. "he's going along with us, aren't you, bob?"

"i'm very glad to meet you," said ames, bowing politely to carrie.

the latter caught in a glance the dimensions of a very stalwart figure.
she also noticed that he was smooth-shaven, good looking, and young, but
nothing more.

"mr. ames is just down in new york for a few days," put in vance, "and
we're trying to show him around a little."

"oh, are you?" said carri
 
 ___________________________
 
e, taking another glance at the newcomer.

"yes; i am just on here from indianapolis for a week or so," said young
ames, seating himself on the edge of a chair to wait while mrs. vance
completed the last touches of her toilet.

"i guess you find new york quite a thing to see, don't you?" said
carrie, venturing something to avoid a possible deadly silence.

"it is rather large to get around in a week," answered ames, pleasantly.

he was an exceedingly genial soul, this young man, and wholly free of
affectation. it seemed to carrie he was as yet only overcoming the last
traces of the bashfulness of youth. he did not seem apt at conversation,
but he had the merit of being well d
 
 ___________________________
 
ressed and wholly courageous. carrie
felt as if it were not going to be hard to talk to him.

"well, i guess we're ready now. the coach is outside."

"come on, people," said mrs. vance, coming in smiling. "bob, you'll have
to look after mrs. wheeler."

"i'll try to," said bob smiling, and edging closer to carrie. "you won't
need much watching, will you?" he volunteered, in a sort of ingratiating
and help-me-out kind of way.

"not very, i hope," said carrie.

they descended the stairs, mrs. vance offering suggestions, and climbed
into the open coach.

"all right," said vance, slamming the coach door, and the conveyance
rolled away.

"what is it we're going to see?" asked ames.

"sothern," said vance, "in 'lord chumley.'"

"oh, he is so good!" said mrs. vance. "he's just the funniest man."

"i notice the papers praise it," said ames.

"i haven't any doubt," put in vance, "but we'll all enjoy it very much."

ames had taken a seat beside carrie, and accordingly he felt it his
bounden duty 
 
 ___________________________
 
on't seem to have," answered carrie. "it's about as strange to me as
when i first came here."

"you're not from the west, are you?"

"yes. i'm from wisconsin," she answered.

"well, it does seem as if most people in this town haven't been here so
very long. i hear of lots of indiana people in my line who are here."

"what is your line?" asked carrie.

"i'm connected with an electrical company," said the youth.

carrie followed up this desultory conversation with occasional
interruptions from the vances. several times it became general and
partially humorous, and in that manner the restaurant was reached.

carrie had noticed the appearance of gayety and pleasure-seeking in the
streets which they were following. coaches were numerous, pedestrians
many, and in fifty-ninth street the street cars were crowded. at
fifty-ninth street and fifth avenue a blaze of lights from several new
hotels which bordered the plaza square gave a suggestion of sumptuous
hotel life. fifth avenue, the home of the wea
 
 ___________________________
 
ng each day, had given her a distinct idea of the gorgeousness and
luxury of this wonderful temple of gastronomy. now, at last, she was
really in it. she had come up the imposing steps, guarded by the large
and portly doorman. she had seen the lobby, guarded by another large and
portly gentleman, and been waited upon by uniformed youths who took care
of canes, overcoats, and the like. here was the splendid dining-chamber,
all decorated and aglow, where the wealthy ate. ah, how fortunate was
mrs. vance; young, beautiful, and well off--at least, sufficiently so to
come here in a coach. what a wonderful thing it was to be rich.

vance led the way through lanes of shining tables, at which were seated
parties of two, three, four, five, or six. the air of assurance and
dignity about it all was exceedingly noticeable to the novitiate.
incandescent lights, the reflection of their glow in polished glasses,
and the shine of gilt upon the walls, combined into one tone of light
which it requires minutes
 
 ___________________________
 
 of complacent observation to separate and take
particular note of. the white shirt fronts of the gentlemen, the bright
costumes of the ladies, diamonds, jewels, fine feathers--all were
exceedingly noticeable.

carrie walked with an air equal to that of mrs. vance, and accepted the
seat which the head waiter provided for her. she was keenly aware of all
the little things that were done--the little genuflections and
attentions of the waiters and head waiter which americans pay for. the
air with which the latter pulled out each chair, and the wave of the
hand with which he motioned them to be seated, were worth several
dollars in themselves.

once seated, there began that exhibition of showy, wasteful, and
unwholesome gastronomy as practised by wealthy ame
 
 ___________________________
 
andelabra and the reflected tints of the walls on garments
and faces, made them seem remarkable. each waiter added an air of
exclusiveness and elegance by the manner in which he bowed, scraped,
touched, and trifled with things. the exclusively personal attention
which he devoted to each one, standing half bent, ear to one side,
elbows akimbo, saying: "soup--green turtle, yes. one portion, yes.
oysters--certainly--half-dozen--yes. asparagus. olives--yes."

it would be the same with each one, only vance essayed to order for all,
inviting counsel and suggestions. carrie studied the company with open
eyes. so this was high life in new york. it was so that the rich spent
their days and evenings. her poor little mind could not rise above
applying each scene to all society. every fine lady must be in the crowd
on broadway in the afternoon, in the theatre at the matinée, in the
coaches and dining-halls at night. it must be glow and shine everywhere,
with coaches waiting, and footmen attending, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
s reflection, "i
sometimes think it is a shame for people to spend so much money this
way."

carrie looked at him a moment with the faintest touch of surprise at his
seriousness. he seemed to be thinking about something over which she had
never pondered.

"do you?" she answered, interestedly.

"yes," he said, "they pay so much more than these things are worth. they
put on so much show."

"i don't know why people shouldn't spend when they have it," said mrs.
vance.

"it doesn't do any harm," said vance, who was still studying the bill of
fare, though he had ordered.

ames was looking away again, and carrie was again looking at his
forehead. to her he seemed to be thinking about strange things. as he
studied the crowd his eye was mild.

"look at that woman's dress over there," he said, again turning to
carrie, and nodding in a direction.

"where?" said carrie, following his eyes.

"over there in the corner--way over. do you see that brooch?"

"isn't it large?" said carrie.

"one of the largest
 
 ___________________________
 
g grace in carrie was that she could understand that people
could be wiser. she had seen a number of people in her life who reminded
her of what she had vaguely come to think of as scholars. this strong
young man beside her, with his clear, natural look, seemed to get a hold
of things which she did not quite understand, but approved of. it was
fine to be so, as a man, she thought.

the conversation changed to a book that was having its vogue at the
time--"moulding a maiden," by albert ross. mrs. vance had read it. vance
had seen it discussed in some of the papers.

"a man can make quite a strike writing a book," said vance. "i notice
this fellow ross is very much talked about." he was looking at carrie as
he spoke.

"i hadn't heard of him," said carrie, honestly.

"oh, i have," said mrs. vance. "he's written lots of things. this last
story is pretty good."

"he doesn't amount to much," said ames.

carrie turned her eyes toward him as to an oracle.

"his stuff is nearly as bad as 'dora thorne
 
 ___________________________
 
e dinner proceeded and
the supply of food warmed up his sympathies; "not rich enough to spend
my money this way."

"oh, wouldn't you?" said carrie, the, to her, new attitude forcing
itself distinctly upon her for the first time.

"no," he said. "what good would it do? a man doesn't need this sort of
thing to be happy."

carrie thought of this doubtfully; but, coming from him, it had weight
with her.

"he probably could be happy," she thought to herself, "all alone. he's
so strong."

mr. and mrs. vance kept up a running fire of interruptions, and these
impressive things by ames came at odd moments. they were sufficient,
however, for the atmosphere that went with this youth impressed itself
upon carrie without words. there was something in him, or the world he
moved in, which appealed to her. he reminded her of scenes she had seen
on the stage--the sorrows and sacrifices that always went with she knew
not what. he had taken away some of the bitterness of the contrast
between this life and her 
 
 ___________________________
 
he years


the immediate result of this was nothing. results from such things are
usually long in growing. morning brings a change of feeling. the
existent condition invariably pleads for itself. it is only at odd
moments that we get glimpses of the misery of things. the heart
understands when it is confronted with contrasts. take them away and the
ache subsides.

carrie went on, leading much this same life for six months thereafter or
more. she did not see ames any more. he called once upon the vances, but
she only heard about it through the young wife. then he went west, and
there was a gradual subsidence of whatever personal attraction had
existed. the mental effect of the thing had not gone, however, and never
would entirely. she had an ideal to contrast men by--particularly men
close to her.

during all this time--a period rapidly approaching three
years--hurstwood had been moving along in an even path. there was no
apparent slope downward, and distinctly none upward, so far as the
casu
 
 ___________________________
 
 as well this month as it had the month before. this was in lieu of
certain suggestions she had made concerning little things she wanted to
buy. she had not failed to notice that he did not seem to consult her
about buying clothes for himself. for the first time, it struck her as a
ruse, or that he said it so that she would not think of asking for
things. her reply was mild enough, but her thoughts were rebellious. he
was not looking after her at all. she was depending for her enjoyment
upon the vances.

and now the latter announced that they were going away. it was
approaching spring, and they were going north.

"oh, yes," said mrs. vance to carrie, "we think we might as well give up
the flat and store our things. we'll be gone for the summer, and it
would be a useless expense. i think we'll settle a little farther down
town when we come back."

carrie heard this with genuine sorrow. she had enjoyed mrs. vance's
companionship so much. there was no one else in the house whom she knew.
again 
 
 ___________________________
 
she would be all alone.

hurstwood's gloom over the slight decrease in profits and the departure
of the vances came together. so carrie had loneliness and this mood of
her husband to enjoy at the same time. it was a grievous thing. she
became restless and dissatisfied, not exactly, as she thought, with
hurstwood, but with life. what was it? a very dull round indeed. what
did she have? nothing but this narrow, little flat. the vances could
travel, they could do the things worth doing, and here she was. for what
was she made, anyhow? more thought followed, and then tears--tears
seemed justified, and the only relief in the world.

for another period this state continued, the twain leading a rather
monotonous life, and then there was a slight change for the worse. one
evening, hurstwood, after thinking about a way to modify carrie's desire
for clothes and the general strain upon his ability to provide, said:

"i don't think i
 
 ___________________________
 
imation was
concerned. she began to feel that she had made a mistake. incidentally,
she also began to recall the fact that he had practically forced her to
flee with him.

the new flat was located in thirteenth street, a half block west of
sixth avenue, and contained only four rooms. the new neighbourhood did
not appeal to carrie as much. there were no trees here, no west view of
the river. the street was solidly built up. there were twelve families
here, respectable enough, but nothing like the vances. richer people
required more space.

being left alone in this little place, carrie did without a girl. she
made it charming enough, but could not make it delight her. hurstwood
was not inwardly pleased to think that they should have to modify their
state, but he argued that he could do nothing. he must put the best face
on it, and let it go at that.

he tried to show carrie that there was no cause for financial alarm, but
only congratulation over the chance he would have at the end of the year
 
 ___________________________
 
le of chaff


carrie pondered over this situation as consistently as hurstwood, once
she got the facts adjusted in her mind. it took several days for her to
fully realise that the approach of the dissolution of her husband's
business meant commonplace struggle and privation. her mind went back to
her early venture in chicago, the hansons and their flat, and her heart
revolted. that was terrible! everything about poverty was terrible. she
wished she knew a way out. her recent experiences with the vances had
wholly unfitted her to view her own state with complacence. the glamour
of the high life of the city had, in the few experiences afforded her by
the former, seized her completely. she had been taught how to dress and
where to go without having ample means to do either. now, these
things--ever-present realities as they were--filled her eyes and mind.
the more circumscribed became her state, the more entrancing seemed this
other. and now poverty threatened to seize her entirely and to remove
 
 ___________________________
 
 strange to say, this passed without comment.

night approaching, and a slightly more conversational feeling
prevailing, carrie said:

"i think i'll sleep alone to-night. i have a headache."

"all right," said hurstwood.

the third night she went to her front bed without apologies.

this was a grim blow to hurstwood, but he never mentioned it.

"all right," he said to himself, with an irrepressible frown, "let her
sleep alone."




chapter xxxvi

a grim retrogression: the phantom of chance


the vances, who had been back in the city ever since christmas, had not
forgotten carrie; but they, or rather mrs. vance, had never called on
her, for the very simple reason that carrie had never sent her address.
true to her nature, she corresponded with mrs. vance as long as she
still lived in seventy-eighth street, but when she was compelled to move
into thirteenth, her fear that the latter would take it as an indication
of reduced circumstances caused her to study some way of avoiding the
necessity o
 
 ___________________________
 
f giving her address. not finding any convenient method, she
sorrowfully resigned the privilege of writing to her friend entirely.
the latter wondered at this strange silence, thought carrie must have
left the city, and in the end gave her up as lost. so she was thoroughly
surprised to encounter her in fourteenth street, where she had gone
shopping. carrie was there for the same purpose.

"why, mrs. wheeler," said mrs. vance, looking carrie over in a glance,
"where have you been? why haven't you been to see me? i've been
wondering all this time what had become of you. really, i----"

"i'm so glad to see you," said carrie, pleased and yet nonplussed. of
all times, this was the worst to encounter mrs. vance. "why, i'm living
down town here. i've been intending to come and see you. where are you
living now?"

"in fifty-eighth street," said mrs. vance, "just off seventh
avenue--218. why don't you come and see me?"

"i 
 
 ___________________________
 
will," said carrie. "really, i've been wanting to come. i know i
ought to. it's a shame. but you know----"

"what's your number?" said mrs. vance.

"thirteenth street," said carrie, reluctantly. "112 west."

"oh," said mrs. vance, "that's right near here, isn't it?"

"yes," said carrie. "you must come down and see me some time."

"well, you're a fine one," said mrs. vance, laughing, the while noting
that carrie's appearance had modified somewhat. "the address, too," she
added to herself. "they must be hard up."

still she liked carrie well enough to take her in tow.

"come with me in here a minute," she exclaimed, turning into a store.

when carrie returned home, there was hurstwood, reading as usual. he
seemed to take his condition with the utmost nonchalance. his beard was
at least four days old.

"oh," thought carrie, "if she were to come here and see him?"


 
 ___________________________
 
she shook her head in absolute misery. it looked as if her situation was
becoming unbearable.

driven to desperation, she asked at dinner:

"did you ever hear any more from that wholesale house?"

"no," he said. "they don't want an inexperienced man."

carrie dropped the subject, feeling unable to say more.

"i met mrs. vance this afternoon," she said, after a time.

"did, eh?" he answered.

"they're back in new york now," carrie went on. "she did look so nice."

"well, she can afford it as long as he puts up for it," returned
hurstwood. "he's got a soft job."

hurstwood was looking into the paper. he could not see the look of
infinite weariness and discontent carrie gave him.

"she said she thought she'd call here some day."

"she's been long getting round to it, hasn't she?" said hurstwood, with
a kind of sarcasm.
 
 ___________________________
 


the woman didn't appeal to him from her spending side.

"oh, i don't know," said carrie, angered by the man's attitude. "perhaps
i didn't want her to come."

"she's too gay," said hurstwood, significantly. "no one can keep up with
her pace unless they've got a lot of money."

"mr. vance doesn't seem to find it very hard."

"he may not now," answered hurstwood, doggedly, well understanding the
inference; "but his life isn't done yet. you can't tell what'll happen.
he may get down like anybody else."

there was something quite knavish in the man's attitude. his eye seemed
to be cocked with a twinkle upon the fortunate, expecting their defeat.
his own state seemed a thing apart--not considered.

this thing was the remains of his old-time cocksureness and
independence. sitting in 
 
 ___________________________
 
he would
not trust to this fine hand any longer.

"i call," he said.

"a full house!" said the youth, spreading out his cards.

hurstwood's hand dropped.

"i thought i had you," he said, weakly.

the youth raked in his chips, and hurstwood came away, not without first
stopping to count his remaining cash on the stair.

"three hundred and forty dollars," he said.

with this loss and ordinary expenses, so much had already gone.

back in the flat, he decided he would play no more.

remembering mrs. vance's promise to call, carrie made one other mild
protest. it was concerning hurstwood's appearance. this very day, coming
home, he changed his clothes to the old togs he sat around in.

"what makes you always put on those old clothes?" asked carrie.

"what's the use wearing my good ones around here?" he asked.

"well, i should think you'd feel better." then she added: "some one
might call."

"who?" he said.

"well, mrs. vance," said carrie.

"she needn't see me," he answered, sullenly.

this lack 
 
 ___________________________
 
of pride and interest made carrie almost hate him.

"oh," she thought, "there he sits. 'she needn't see me.' i should think
he would be ashamed of himself."

the real bitterness of this thing was added when mrs. vance did call. it
was on one of her shopping rounds. making her way up the commonplace
hall, she knocked at carrie's door. to her subsequent and agonising
distress, carrie was out. hurstwood opened the door, half-thinking that
the knock was carrie's. for once, he was taken honestly aback. the lost
voice of youth and pride spoke in him.

"why," he said, actually stammering, "how do you do?"

"how do you do?" said mrs. vance, who could scarcely believe her eyes.
his great confusion she instantly perce
 
 ___________________________
 
ived. he did not know whether to
invite her in or not.

"is your wife at home?" she inquired.

"no," he said, "carrie's out; but won't you step in? she'll be back
shortly."

"no-o," said mrs. vance, realising the change of it all. "i'm really
very much in a hurry. i thought i'd just run up and look in, but i
couldn't stay. just tell your wife she must come and see me."

"i will," said hurstwood, standing back, and feeling intense relief at
her going. he was so ashamed that he folded his hands weakly, as he sat
in the chair afterwards, and thought.

carrie, coming in from another direction, thought she saw mrs. vance
going away. she strained her eyes, but could not make sure.

"was anybody
 
 ___________________________
 
 here just now?" she asked of hurstwood.

"yes," he said guiltily; "mrs. vance."

"did she see you?" she asked, expressing her full despair.

this cut hurstwood like a whip, and made him sullen.

"if she had eyes, she did. i opened the door."

"oh," said carrie, closing one hand tightly out of sheer nervousness.
"what did she have to say?"

"nothing," he answered. "she couldn't stay."

"and you looking like that!" said carrie, throwing aside a long reserve.

"what of it?" he said, angering. "i didn't know she was coming, did i?"

"you knew she might," said carrie. "i told
 
 ___________________________
 

she knew he had gone.

after a few moments of silence, she stood up, dry-eyed, and looked out
the window. hurstwood was just strolling up the street, from the flat,
toward sixth avenue.

the latter made progress along thirteenth and across fourteenth street
to union square.

"look for work!" he said to himself. "look for work! she tells me to get
out and look for work."

he tried to shield himself from his own mental accusation, which told
him that she was right.

"what a cursed thing that mrs. vance's call was, anyhow," he thought.
"stood right there, and looked me over. i know what she was thinking."

he remembered the few times he had seen her in seventy-eighth street.
she was always a swell-looker; and he had tried to put on the air of
being worthy of such as she, in front of her. now, to think she had
caught him looking this way. he wrinkled his forehead in his distress.

"the devil!" he said a dozen times in an hour.

it was a quarter after four when he left the house. carrie was in t
 
 ___________________________
 
ions of a fine dinner now,
and such invigorating talk as would result in a reunion after the show.
he was greatly taken with carrie. "we'll drive down to delmonico's now
and have something there, won't we, orrin?"

"to be sure," replied orrin, gaily.

carrie thought of hurstwood. never before had she neglected dinner
without an excuse.

they drove back, and at 6.15 sat down to dine. it was the sherry
incident over again, the remembrance of which came painfully back to
carrie. she remembered mrs. vance, who had never called again after
hurstwood's reception, and ames.

at this figure her mind halted. it was a strong, clean vision. he liked
better books than she read, better people than she associated with. his
ideals burned in her heart.

"it's fine to be a good actress," came distinctly back.

what sort of an actress was she?

"what are you thinking about, miss madenda?" inquired her merry
companion. "come, now, let's see if i can guess."

"oh, no," said carrie. "don't try."

she shook it of
 
 ___________________________
 
dreamed of occupying.

"i guess we'd better move right away, don't you think so?" she observed
to lola, thinking of the commonplace chamber in seventeenth street.

"oh, by all means," said the latter.

the next day her trunks left for the new abode.

dressing, after the matinée on wednesday, a knock came at her
dressing-room door.

carrie looked at the card handed by the boy and suffered a shock of
surprise.

"tell her i'll be right out," she said softly. then, looking at the
card, added: "mrs. vance."

"why, you little sinner," the latter exclaimed, as she saw carrie coming
toward her across the now vacant stage. "how in the world did this
happen?"

carrie laughed merrily. there was no trace of embarrassment in her
friend's manner. you would have thought that the long separation had
come about accidentally.

"i don't know," returned carrie, warming, in spite of her first troubled
feelings, toward this handsome, good-natured young matron.

"well, you know, i saw your picture in the sunday p
 
 ___________________________
 
out
you. i should think you would be just too proud to breathe. i was almost
afraid to come back here this afternoon."

"oh, nonsense," said carrie, blushing. "you know i'd be glad to see
you."

"well, anyhow, here you are. can't you come up and take dinner with me
now? where are you stopping?"

"at the wellington," said carrie, who permitted herself a touch of pride
in the acknowledgment.

"oh, are you?" exclaimed the other, upon whom the name was not without
its proper effect.

tactfully, mrs. vance avoided the subject of hurstwood, of whom she
could not help thinking. no doubt carrie had left him. that much she
surmised.

"oh, i don't think i can," said carrie, "to-night. i have so little
time. i must be back here by 7.30. won't you come and dine with me?"

"i'd be delighted, but i can't to-night," said mrs. vance, studying
carrie's fine appearance. the latter's good fortune made her seem more
than ever worthy and delightful in the other's eyes. "i promised
faithfully to be home at six." 
 
 ___________________________
 
 with
him."

carrie shook her head.

"you're awfully queer," returned the little, blue-eyed soldier.

thus crowded fortune. for this whole week, though her large salary had
not yet arrived, it was as if the world understood and trusted her.
without money--or the requisite sum, at least--she enjoyed the luxuries
which money could buy. for her the doors of fine places seemed to open
quite without the asking. these palatial chambers, how marvellously they
came to her. the elegant apartments of mrs. vance in the chelsea--these
were hers. men sent flowers, love notes, offers of fortune. and still
her dreams ran riot. the one hundred and fifty! the one hundred and
fifty! what a door to an aladdin's cave it seemed to be. each day, her
head almost turned by developments, her fancies of what her fortune must
be, with ample money, grew and multiplied. she conceived of delights
which were not--saw lights of joy that never were on land or sea. then,
at last, after a world of anticipation, came her first
 
 ___________________________
 
led upon, did the rest.
toward the dead of winter, carrie came back, appearing on broadway in a
new play; but he was not aware of it. for weeks he wandered about the
city, begging, while the fire sign, announcing her engagement, blazed
nightly upon the crowded street of amusements. drouet saw it, but did
not venture in.

about this time ames returned to new york. he had made a little success
in the west, and now opened a laboratory in wooster street. of course,
he encountered carrie through mrs. vance; but there was nothing
responsive between them. he thought she was still united to hurstwood,
until otherwise informed. not knowing the facts then, he did not profess
to understand, and refrained from comment.

with mrs. vance, he saw the new play, and expressed himself accordingly.

"she ought not to be in comedy," he said. "i think she could do better
than that."

one afternoon they met at the vances' accidentally, and began a very
friendly conversation. she could hardly tell why the one-time