e saw what drouet liked; in a
vague way she saw where he was weak. it lessens a woman's opinion of a
man when she learns that his admiration is so pointedly and generously
distributed. she sees but one object of supreme compliment in this
world, and that is herself. if a man is to succeed with many women, he
must be all in all to each.

in her own apartments carrie saw things which were lessons in the same
school.

in the same house with her lived an official of one of the theatres, mr.
frank a. hale, manager of the standard, and his wife, a pleasing-looking
brunette of thirty-five. they were people of a sort very common in
america to-day, who live respectably from hand to mouth. hale received a
salary of forty-five dollars a week. his wife, quite attractive,
affected the feeling of youth, and objected to that sort of home life
which means the care of a house and the raising of a family. like drouet
and carrie, they also occupied three rooms on the floor above.

not long after she arrived m
 
 ___________________________
 
rs. hale established social relations with
her, and together they went about. for a long time this was her only
companionship, and the gossip of the manager's wife formed the medium
through which she saw the world. such trivialities, such praises of
wealth, such conventional expression of morals as sifted through this
passive creature's mind, fell upon carrie and for the while confused
her.

on the other hand, her own feelings were a corrective influence. the
constant drag to something better was not to
 
 ___________________________
 
ing of
either. she was busy adjusting her thoughts and feelings to newer
conditions, and was not in danger of suffering disturbing pangs from
either quarter.

one evening drouet found her dressing herself before the glass.

"cad," said he, catching her, "i believe you're getting vain."

"nothing of the kind," she returned, smiling.

"well, you're mighty pretty," he went on, slipping his arm around her.
"put on that navy-blue dress of yours and i'll take you to the show."

"oh, i've promised mrs. hale to go with her to the exposition to-night,"
she returned, apologetically.

"you did, eh?" he said, studying the situation abstractedly. "i wouldn't
care to go to that myself."

"well, i don't know," answered carrie, puzzling, but not offering to
break her promise in his favour.

just then a knock came at their door and the maid-servant handed a
letter in.

"he says there's an answer expected," she explained.

"it's from hurstwood," said drouet, noting the superscription as he tore
it open.

"yo
 
 ___________________________
 
," she exclaimed. her lips tightened. the feeling of
mutual antagonism was increased.

on the other hand, his interest in drouet's little shop-girl grew in an
almost evenly balanced proportion. that young lady, under the stress of
her situation and the tutelage of her new friend, changed effectively.
she had the aptitude of the struggler who seeks emancipation. the glow
of a more showy life was not lost upon her. she did not grow in
knowledge so much as she awakened in the matter of desire. mrs. hale's
extended harangues upon the subjects of wealth and position taught her
to distinguish between degrees of wealth.

mrs. hale loved to drive in the afternoon in the sun when it was fine,
and to satisfy her soul with a sight of those mansions and lawns which
she could not afford. on the north side had been erected a number of
elegant mansions along what is now known as the north shore drive. the
present lake wall of stone and granitoid was not then in place, but the
road had been well laid out, 
 
 ___________________________
 
the intermediate spaces of lawn were lovely
to look upon, and the houses were thoroughly new and imposing. when the
winter season had passed and the first fine days of the early spring
appeared, mrs. hale secured a buggy for an afternoon and invited carrie.
they rode first through lincoln park and on far out towards evanston,
turning back at four and arriving at the north end of the shore drive at
about five o'clock. at this time of year the days are still
comparatively short, and the shadows of the evening were beginning to
settle down upon the great city. lamps were beginning to burn with that
mellow radiance which seems almost watery and translucent to the eye.
there was a softness in the air
 
 ___________________________
 
sfied desire. she was
perfectly certain that here was happiness. if she could but stroll up
yon broad walk, cross that rich entrance-way, which to her was of the
beauty of a jewel, and sweep in grace and luxury to possession and
command--oh! how quickly would sadness flee; how, in an instant, would
the heartache end. she gazed and gazed, wondering, delighting, longing,
and all the while the siren voice of the unrestful was whispering in her
ear.

"if we could have such a home as that," said mrs. hale sadly, "how
delightful it would be."

"and yet they do say," said carrie, "that no one is ever happy."

she had heard so much of the canting philosophy of the grapeless fox.

"i notice," said mrs. hale, "that they all try mighty hard, though, to
take their misery in a mansion."

when she came to her own rooms, carrie saw their comparative
insignificance. she was not so dull but that she could perceive they
were but three small rooms in a moderately well-furnished
boarding-house. she was not con
 
 ___________________________
 
ause it had no tangibility. she was being pleaded with,
persuaded, led into denying old rights and assuming new ones, and yet
there were no words to prove it. such conversation as was indulged in
held the same relationship to the actual mental enactments of the twain
that the low music of the orchestra does to the dramatic incident which
it is used to cover.

"have you ever seen the houses along the lake shore on the north side?"
asked hurstwood.

"why, i was just over there this afternoon--mrs. hale and i. aren't they
beautiful?"

"they're very fine," he answered.

"oh, me," said carrie, pensively. "i wish i could live in such a place."

"you're not happy," said hurstwood, slowly, after a slight pause.

he had raised his eyes solemnly and was looking into her own. he assumed
that he had struck a deep chord. now was a slight chance to say a word
in his own behalf. he leaned over quietly and continued his steady gaze.
he felt the critical character of the period. she endeavoured to stir,
but
 
 ___________________________
 
further conclusion, her head lay softly upon his shoulder.




chapter xiv

with eyes and not seeing: one influence wanes


carrie in her rooms that evening was in a fine glow, physically and
mentally. she was deeply rejoicing in her affection for hurstwood and
his love, and looked forward with fine fancy to their next meeting
sunday night. they had agreed, without any feeling of enforced secrecy,
that she should come down town and meet him, though, after all, the need
of it was the cause.

mrs. hale, from her upper window, saw her come in.

"um," she thought to herself, "she goes riding with another man when her
husband is out of the city. he had better keep an eye on her."

the truth is that mrs. hale was not the only one who had a thought on
this score. the house-maid who had welcomed hurstwood had her opinion
also. she had no particular regard for carrie, whom she took to be cold
and disagreeable. at the same time, she had a fancy for the merry and
easy-mannered drouet, who threw her a 
 
 ___________________________
 
some time get a place as a real actress. the thought
had taken a mighty hold upon her. it hummed in her ears as the melody of
an old song.

outside in the little lobby another scene was being enacted. without the
interest of hurstwood, the little hall would probably have been
comfortably filled, for the members of the lodge were moderately
interested in its welfare. hurstwood's word, however, had gone the
rounds. it was to be a full-dress affair. the four boxes had been taken.
dr. norman mcneill hale and his wife were to occupy one. this was quite
a card. c. r. walker, dry-goods merchant and possessor of at least two
hundred thousand dollars, had taken another; a well-known coal merchant
had been induced to take the third, and hurstwood and his friends the
fourth. among the latter was drouet. the people who were now pouring
here were not celebrities, nor even local notabilities, in a general
sense. they were the lights of a certain circle--the circle of small
fortunes and secret order disti
 
 ___________________________
 
ly. she did not know just how such applications were made, but
she took it to be a matter which related more directly to the theatre
buildings. all you had to do was to inquire of some one about the
theatre for the manager and ask for a position. if there was anything,
you might get it, or, at least, he could tell you how.

she had had no experience with this class of individuals whatsoever, and
did not know the salacity and humour of the theatrical tribe. she only
knew of the position which mr. hale occupied, but, of all things, she
did not wish to encounter that personage, on account of her intimacy
with his wife.

there was, however, at this time, one theatre, the chicago opera house,
which was considerably in the public eye, and its manager, david a.
henderson, had a fair local reputation. carrie had seen one or two
elaborate performances there and had heard of several others. she knew
nothing of henderson nor of the methods of applying, but she
instinctively felt that this would be a l
 
 ___________________________
 
xperience settled her hunting for one day. she looked
around elsewhere, but it was from the outside. she got the location of
several playhouses fixed in her mind--notably the grand opera house and
mcvickar's, both of which were leading in attractions--and then came
away. her spirits were materially reduced, owing to the newly restored
sense of magnitude of the great interests and the insignificance of her
claims upon society, such as she understood them to be.

that night she was visited by mrs. hale, whose chatter and protracted
stay made it impossible to dwell upon her predicament or the fortune of
the day. before retiring, however, she sat down to think, and gave
herself up to the most gloomy forebodings. drouet had not put in an
appearance. she had had no word from any quarter, she had spent a dollar
of her precious sum in procuring food and paying car fare. it was
evident that she would not endure long. besides, she had discovered no
resource.

in this situation her thoughts went out t
 
 ___________________________
 
 drouet would be, and returned to his
hotel.

"has mr. drouet gone out?" he asked of the clerk.

"no," answered the latter, "he's in his room. do you wish to send up a
card?"

"no, i'll call around later," answered hurstwood, and strolled out.

he took a madison car and went direct to ogden place, this time walking
boldly up to the door. the chambermaid answered his knock.

"is mr. drouet in?" said hurstwood blandly.

"he is out of the city," said the girl, who had heard carrie tell this
to mrs. hale.

"is mrs. drouet in?"

"no, she has gone to the theatre."

"is that so?" said hurstwood, considerably taken back; then, as if
burdened with something important, "you don't know to which theatre?"

the girl really had no idea where she had gone, but not liking
hurstwood, and wishing to cause him trouble, answered: "yes, hooley's."

"thank you," returned the manager, and, tipping his hat slightly, went
away.

"i'll look in at hooley's," thought he, but as a matter of fact he did
not. before he h
 
 ___________________________
 
sick," reported one of the lackeys to the night
clerk.

"what's the matter with him?"

"i don't know. he's got a high fever."

the hotel physician looked at him.

"better send him to bellevue," he recommended. "he's got pneumonia."

accordingly, he was carted away.

in three weeks the worst was over, but it was nearly the first of may
before his strength permitted him to be turned out. then he was
discharged.

no more weakly looking object ever strolled out into the spring sunshine
than the once hale, lusty manager. all his corpulency had fled. his face
was thin and pale, his hands white, his body flabby. clothes and all, he
weighed but one hundred and thirty-five pounds. some old garments had
been given him--a cheap brown coat and misfit pair of trousers. also
some change and advice. he was told to apply to the charities.

again he resorted to the bowery lodging-house, brooding over where to
look. from this it was but a step to beggary.

"what can a man do?" he said. "i can't starve."

his