ent by. she felt as though she should be better served, and
her heart revolted.




chapter v

a glittering night flower: the use of a name


drouet did not call that evening. after receiving the letter, he had
laid aside all thought of carrie for the time being and was floating
around having what he considered a gay time. on this particular evening
he dined at "rector's," a restaurant of some local fame, which occupied
a basement at clark and monroe streets. thereafter he visited the resort
of fitzgerald and moy's in adams street, opposite the imposing federal
building. there he leaned over the splendid bar and swallowed a glass of
plain whiskey and purchased a couple of cigars, one of which he lighted.
this to him represented in part high life--a fair sample of what the
whole must be.

drouet was not a drinker in excess. he was not a moneyed man. he only
craved the best, as his mind conceived it, and such doings seemed to him
a part of the best. rector's, with its polished marble walls and floor,
its 
 
 ___________________________
 
h money to dine here lavishly
represented.

"you don't say so," would be the reply.

"why, yes, didn't you know that? why, he's manager of the grand opera
house."

when these things would fall upon drouet's ears, he would straighten
himself a little more stiffly and eat with solid comfort. if he had any
vanity, this augmented it, and if he had any ambition, this stirred it.
he would be able to flash a roll of greenbacks too some day. as it was,
he could eat where _they_ did.

his preference for fitzgerald and moy's adams street place was another
yard off the same cloth. this was really a gorgeous saloon from a
chicago standpoint. like rector's, it was also ornamented with a blaze
of incandescent lights, held in handsome chandeliers. the floors were of
brightly coloured tiles, the walls a composition of rich, dark, polished
wood, which reflected the light, and coloured stucco-work, which gave
the place a very sumptuous appearance. the long bar was a blaze of
lights, polished wood-work, coloured and cut g
 
 ___________________________
 
 of poisons. "he keepeth his creatures whole," was not written of
beasts alone. carrie was unwise, and, therefore, like the sheep in its
unwisdom, strong in feeling. the instinct of self-protection, strong in
all such natures, was roused but feebly, if at all, by the overtures of
drouet.

when carrie had gone, he felicitated himself upon her good opinion. by
george, it was a shame young girls had to be knocked around like that.
cold weather coming on and no clothes. tough. he would go around to
fitzgerald and moy's and get a cigar. it made him feel light of foot as
he thought about her.

carrie reached home in high good spirits, which she could scarcely
conceal. the possession of the money involved a number of points which
perplexed her seriously. how should she buy any clothes when minnie knew
that she had no money? she had no sooner entered the flat than this
point was settled for her. it could not be done. she could think of no
way of explaining.

"how did you come out?" asked minnie, referring to th
 
 ___________________________
 
 those curious
phantoms of the spirit slipping in, blurring strange scenes, one with
the other. the last one made her cry out, for carrie was slipping away
somewhere over a rock, and her fingers had let loose and she had seen
her falling.

"minnie! what's the matter? here, wake up," said hanson, disturbed, and
shaking her by the shoulder.

"wha--what's the matter?" said minnie, drowsily.

"wake up," he said, "and turn over. you're talking in your sleep."

a week or so later drouet strolled into fitzgerald and moy's, spruce in
dress and manner.

"hello, charley," said hurstwood, looking out from his office door.

drouet strolled over and looked in upon the manager at his desk.

"when do you go out on the road again?" he inquired.

"pretty soon," said drouet.

"haven't seen much of you this trip," said hurstwood.

"well, i've been busy," said drouet.

they talked some few minutes on general topics.

"say," said drouet, as if struck by a sudden idea, "i want you to come
out some evening."

"out where?" inq
 
 ___________________________
 
. she was not without realisation already that
this thing was impossible, so far as she was concerned. for her
daughter, she hoped better things. through jessica she might rise a
little. through george, jr.'s, possible success she might draw to
herself the privilege of pointing proudly. even hurstwood was doing well
enough, and she was anxious that his small real estate adventures
should prosper. his property holdings, as yet, were rather small, but
his income was pleasing and his position with fitzgerald and moy was
fixed. both those gentlemen were on pleasant and rather informal terms
with him.

the atmosphere which such personalities would create must be apparent to
all. it worked out in a thousand little conversations, all of which were
of the same calibre.

"i'm going up to fox lake to-morrow," announced george, jr., at the
dinner table one friday evening.

"what's going on up there?" queried mrs. hurstwood.

"eddie fahrway's got a new steam launch, and he wants me to come up and
see how it works."
 
 ___________________________
 
er about a great deal, spent money upon her, and when
he travelled took her with him. there were times when she would be alone
for two or three days, while he made the shorter circuits of his
business, but, as a rule, she saw a great deal of him.

"say, carrie," he said one morning, shortly after they had so
established themselves, "i've invited my friend hurstwood to come out
some day and spend the evening with us."

"who is he?" asked carrie, doubtfully.

"oh, he's a nice man. he's manager of fitzgerald and moy's."

"what's that?" said carrie.

"the finest resort in town. it's a way-up, swell place."

carrie puzzled a moment. she was wondering what drouet had told him,
what her attitude would be.

"that's all right," said drouet, feeling her thought. "he doesn't know
anything. you're mrs. drouet now."

there was something about this which struck carrie as slightly
inconsiderate. she could see that drouet did not have the keenest
sensibilities.

"why don't we get married?" she inquired, thinking of the
 
 ___________________________
 
las were up. the street looked like a sea of round black cloth
roofs, twisting, bobbing, moving. trucks and vans were rattling in a
noisy line and everywhere men were shielding themselves as best they
could. he scarcely noticed the picture. he was forever confronting his
wife, demanding of her to change her attitude toward him before he
worked her bodily harm.

at four o'clock another note came, which simply said that if the money
was not forthcoming that evening the matter would be laid before
fitzgerald and moy on the morrow, and other steps would be taken to get
it.

hurstwood almost exclaimed out loud at the insistency of this thing.
yes, he would send her the money. he'd take it to her--he would go up
there and have a talk with her, and that at once.

he put on his hat and looked around for his umbrella. he would have some
arrangement of this thing.

he called a cab and was driven through the dreary rain to the north
side. on the way his temper cooled as he thought of the details of the
case. what 
 
 ___________________________
 
business of his own.

"i'll look in here," thought the manager, pulling out the money drawers.
he did not know why he wished to look in there. it was quite a
superfluous action, which another time might not have happened at all.

as he did so, a layer of bills, in parcels of a thousand, such as banks
issue, caught his eye. he could not tell how much they represented, but
paused to view them. then he pulled out the second of the cash drawers.
in that were the receipts of the day.

"i didn't know fitzgerald and moy ever left any money this way," his
mind said to itself. "they must have forgotten it."

he looked at the other drawer and paused again.

"count them," said a voice in his ear.

he put his hand into the first of the boxes and lifted the stack,
letting the separate parcels fall. they were bills of fifty and one
hundred dollars done in packages of a thousand. he thought he counted
ten such.

"why don't i shut the safe?" his mind said to itself, lingering. "what
makes me pause here?"

for answer th
 
 ___________________________
 
, so there's nothing i can say. you wait until you hear more from
them."

all the time he had been talking he had been moving away from the door,
down the corridor, out of the hearing of carrie. they were now near the
end where the corridor opened into the large general parlour.

"you won't give it up?" said the man.

the words irritated hurstwood greatly. hot blood poured into his brain.
many thoughts formulated themselves. he was no thief. he didn't want the
money. if he could only explain to fitzgerald and moy, maybe it would be
all right again.

"see here," he said, "there's no use my talking about this at all. i
respect your power all right, but i'll have to deal with the people who
know."

"well, you can't get out of canada with it," said the man.

"i don't want to get out," said hurstwood. "when i get ready there'll be
nothing to stop me for."

he turned back, and the detective watched him closely. it seemed an
intolerable thing. still he went on and into the room.

"who was it?" asked carrie.

"
 
 ___________________________
 
 what hurt him most was the fact
that he was being pursued as a thief. he began to see the nature of that
social injustice which sees but one side--often but a single point in a
long tragedy. all the newspapers noted but one thing, his taking the
money. how and wherefore were but indifferently dealt with. all the
complications which led up to it were unknown. he was accused without
being understood.

sitting in his room with carrie the same day, he decided to send the
money back. he would write fitzgerald and moy, explain all, and then
send it by express. maybe they would forgive him. perhaps they would ask
him back. he would make good the false statement he had made about
writing them. then he would leave this peculiar town.

for an hour he thought over this plausible statement of the tangle. he
wanted to tell them about his wife, but couldn't. he finally narrowed it
down to an assertion that he was light-headed from entertaining friends,
had found the safe open, and having gone so far as to take the m
 
 ___________________________
 
ng down-town bar.
after the palatial resort in adams street, he could not stomach the
commonplace saloons which he found advertised. he lost a number of days
looking up these and finding them disagreeable. he did, however, gain
considerable knowledge by talking, for he discovered the influence of
tammany hall and the value of standing in with the police. the most
profitable and flourishing places he found to be those which conducted
anything but a legitimate business, such as that controlled by
fitzgerald and moy. elegant back rooms and private drinking booths on
the second floor were usually adjuncts of very profitable places. he saw
by portly keepers, whose shirt fronts shone with large diamonds, and
whose clothes were properly cut, that the liquor business here, as
elsewhere, yielded the same golden profit.

at last he found an individual who had a resort in warren street, which
seemed an excellent venture. it was fairly well-appearing and
susceptible of improvement. the owner claimed the business to
 
 ___________________________
 
e trade for
a while.

"it's profitable enough for two, is it?" he asked.

"you can see for yourself if you're any judge of the liquor trade," said
the owner. "this is only one of the two places i have. the other is down
in nassau street. i can't tend to them both alone. if i had some one who
knew the business thoroughly i wouldn't mind sharing with him in this
one and letting him manage it."

"i've had experience enough," said hurstwood blandly, but he felt a
little diffident about referring to fitzgerald and moy.

"well, you can suit yourself, mr. wheeler," said the proprietor.

he only offered a third interest in the stock, fixtures, and good-will,
and this in return for a thousand dollars and managerial ability on the
part of the one who should come in. there was no property involved,
because the owner of the saloon merely rented from an estate.

the offer was genuine enough, but it was a question with hurstwood
whether a third interest in that locality could be made to yield one
hundred and fifty do
 
 ___________________________
 
hout one such hearty greeting as he had been
wont to enjoy every day in chicago.

for another thing, hurstwood missed the celebrities--those well-dressed,
_élite_ individuals who lend grace to the average bars and bring news
from far-off and exclusive circles. he did not see one such in a month.
evenings, when still at his post, he would occasionally read in the
evening papers incidents concerning celebrities whom he knew--whom he
had drunk a glass with many a time. they would visit a bar like
fitzgerald and moy's in chicago, or the hoffman house, uptown, but he
knew that he would never see them down here.

again, the business did not pay as well as he thought. it increased a
little, but he found he would have to watch his household expenses,
which was humiliating.

in the very beginning it was a delight to go home late at night, as he
did, and find carrie. he managed to run up and take dinner with her
between six and seven, and to remain home until nine o'clock in the
morning, but the novelty of this 
 
 ___________________________
 
infully clear to him that it retarded his
search. not that he wished to be less well-appearing, but that he was
ashamed to belie his appearance by incongruous appeals. so he hesitated,
wondering what to do.

he thought of the hotels, but instantly he remembered that he had had no
experience as a clerk, and, what was more important, no acquaintances or
friends in that line to whom he could go. he did know some hotel owners
in several cities, including new york, but they knew of his dealings
with fitzgerald and moy. he could not apply to them. he thought of other
lines suggested by large buildings or businesses which he knew
of--wholesale groceries, hardware, insurance concerns, and the like--but
he had had no experience.

how to go about getting anything was a bitter thought. would he have to
go personally and ask; wait outside an office door, and, then,
distinguished and affluent looking, announce that he was looking for
something to do? he strained painfully at the thought. no, he could not
do that.

h
 
 ___________________________
 
s and benches as well as some chairs. here his preference was
to close his eyes and dream of other days, a habit which grew upon him.
it was not sleep at first, but a mental hearkening back to scenes and
incidents in his chicago life. as the present became darker, the past
grew brighter, and all that concerned it stood in relief.

he was unconscious of just how much this habit had hold of him until one
day he found his lips repeating an old answer he had made to one of his
friends. they were in fitzgerald and moy's. it was as if he stood in the
door of his elegant little office, comfortably dressed, talking to sagar
morrison about the value of south chicago real estate in which the
latter was about to invest.

"how would you like to come in on that with me?" he heard morrison say.

"not me," he answered, just as he had years before. "i have my hands
full now."

the movement of his lips aroused him. he wondered whether he had really
spoken. the next time he noticed anything of the sort he really did
talk