to seek relief in other places. twice a week
there were matin√©es, and then hurstwood ate a cold snack, which he
prepared himself. two other days there were rehearsals beginning at ten
in the morning and lasting usually until one. now, to this carrie added
a few visits to one or two chorus girls, including the blue-eyed soldier
of the golden helmet. she did it because it was pleasant and a relief
from dulness of the home over which her husband brooded.

the blue-eyed soldier's name was osborne--lola osborne. her room was in
nineteenth street near fourth avenue, a block now given up wholly to
office buildings. here she had a comfortable back room, looking over a
collection of back yards in which grew a number of shade trees pleasant
to see.

"isn't your home in new york?" she asked of lola one day.

"yes; but i can't get along with my people. they always want me to do
what they want. do you live here?"

"yes," said carrie.

"with your family?"

carrie was ashamed to say that she was married
 
 ___________________________
 
ce."

he only said this in his anger, but it prefigured a possible course of
action and attitude well enough.

"i don't care," thought carrie. "he ought to be told to get out and do
something. it isn't right that i should support him."

in these days carrie was introduced to several youths, friends of miss
osborne, who were of the kind most aptly described as gay and festive.
they called once to get miss osborne for an afternoon drive. carrie was
with her at the time.

"come and go along," said lola.

"no, i can't," said carrie.

"oh, yes, come and go. what have you got to do?"

"i have to be home by five," said carrie.

"what for?"

"oh, dinner."

"they'll take us to dinner," said lola.

"oh, no," said carrie. "i won't go. i can't."

"oh, do come. they're awful nice boys. we'll get you back in time. we're
only going for a drive in central park."

carrie thought a while, and at last yielded.

"now, i must be back by half-past four," she said.

the information went in one ear of lola and ou
 
 ___________________________
 
rie was, she was strong in capability. the reliance of
others made her feel as if she must, and when she must she dared.
experience of the world and of necessity was in her favour. no longer
the lightest word of a man made her head dizzy. she had learned that men
could change and fail. flattery in its most palpable form had lost its
force with her. it required superiority--kindly superiority--to move
her--the superiority of a genius like ames.

"i don't like the actors in our company," she told lola one day.
"they're all so struck on themselves."

"don't you think mr. barclay's pretty nice?" inquired lola, who had
received a condescending smile or two from that quarter.

"oh, he's nice enough," answered carrie; "but he isn't sincere. he
assumes such an air."

lola felt for her first hold upon carrie in the following manner:

"are you paying room-rent where you are?"

"certainly," answered carrie. "why?"

"i know where i could get the loveliest room and bath, cheap. it's too
big for me, but
 
 ___________________________
 
lf conspicuous in any way. it troubled her greatly.

things were precipitated by the offer of a better part. one of the
actresses playing the part of a modest sweetheart gave notice of leaving
and carrie was selected.

"how much are you going to get?" asked miss osborne, on hearing the good
news.

"i didn't ask him," said carrie.

"well, find out. goodness, you'll never get anything if you don't ask.
tell them you must have forty dollars, anyhow."

"oh, no," said carrie.

"certainly!" exclaimed lola. "ask 'em, anyway."

carrie succumbed to this prompting, waiting, however, until the manager
gave her notice of what clothing she must have to fit the part.

"how much do i get?" she inquired.

"thirty-five dollars," he replied.

carrie was too much astonished and delighted to think of mentioning
forty. she was nearly beside herself, and almost hugged lola, who clung
to her at the news.

"it isn't as much as you ought to get," said the latter, "especially
when you've got to buy clothes."

carri
 
 ___________________________
 
 a start. where to get the money? she had
none laid up for such an emergency. rent day was drawing near.

"i'll not do it," she said, remembering her necessity. "i don't use the
flat. i'm not going to give up my money this time. i'll move."

fitting into this came another appeal from miss osborne, more urgent
than ever.

"come live with me, won't you?" she pleaded. "we can have the loveliest
room. it won't cost you hardly anything that way."

"i'd like to," said carrie, frankly.

"oh, do," said lola. "we'll have such a good time."

carrie thought a while.

"i believe i will," she said, and then added: "i'll have to see first,
though."

with the idea thus grounded, rent day approaching, and clothes calling
for instant purchase, she soon found excuse in hurstwood's lassitude. he
said less and drooped more than ever.

as rent day approached, an idea grew in him. it was fostered by the
demands of creditors and the impossibility of holding up many more.
twenty-eight dollars was too much for ren
 
 ___________________________
 
saw nothing remarkable in asking her to come down lower.

"oh, i don't know," she answered, growing wary.

"there must be places around here where we could get a couple of rooms,
which would do just as well."

her heart revolted. "never!" she thought. who would furnish the money to
move? to think of being in two rooms with him! she resolved to spend her
money for clothes quickly, before something terrible happened. that very
day she did it. having done so, there was but one other thing to do.

"lola," she said, visiting her friend, "i think i'll come."

"oh, jolly!" cried the latter.

"can we get it right away?" she asked, meaning the room.

"certainly," cried lola.

they went to look at it. carrie had saved ten dollars from her
expenditures--enough for this and her board beside. her enlarged salary
would not begin for ten days yet--would not reach her for seventeen. she
paid half of the six dollars with her friend.

"now, i've just enough to get on to the end of the week," she confided.


 
 ___________________________
 
"oh, i've got some," said lola. "i've got twenty-five dollars, if you
need it."

"no," said carrie. "i guess i'll get along."

they decided to move friday, which was two days away. now that the thing
was settled, carrie's heart misgave her. she felt very much like a
criminal in the matter. each day looking at hurstwood, she had realised
that, along with the disagreeableness of his attitude, there was
something pathetic.

she looked at him the same evening she had made up her mind to go, and
now he seemed not so shiftless and
 
 ___________________________
 
ho had been good to her feel badly.

she did not realise what she was doing by allowing these feelings to
possess her. hurstwood, noticing the kindness, conceived better of her.
"carrie's good-natured, anyhow," he thought.

going to miss osborne's that afternoon, she found that little lady
packing and singing.

"why don't you come over with me to-day?" she asked.

"oh, i can't," said carrie. "i'll be there friday. would you mind
lending me the twenty-five dollars you spoke of?"

"why, no," said lola, going for her purse.

"i want to get some other things," said carrie.

"oh, that's all right," answered the little girl, good-naturedly, glad
to be of service.

it had been days since hurstwood had done more than go to the grocery or
to the news-stand. now the weariness of indoors was upon him--had been
for two days--but chill, grey weather had held him back. friday broke
fair and warm. it was one of those lovely harbingers of spring, given as
a sign in dreary winter that earth is not forsaken
 
 ___________________________
 
 more kindly toward him. she quite
forgot him until about to come out, after the show, when the chance of
his being there frightened her. as day after day passed and she heard
nothing at all, the thought of being bothered by him passed. in a little
while she was, except for occasional thoughts, wholly free of the gloom
with which her life had been weighed in the flat.

it is curious to note how quickly a profession absorbs one. carrie
became wise in theatrical lore, hearing the gossip of little lola. she
learned what the theatrical papers were, which ones published items
about actresses and the like. she began to read the newspaper notices,
not only of the opera in which she had so small a part, but of others.
gradually the desire for notice took hold of her. she longed to be
renowned like others, and read with avidity all the complimentary or
critical comments made concerning others high in her profession. the
showy world in which her interest lay completely absorbed her.

it was about th
 
 ___________________________
 
 items, was a wee notice. carrie read it with a tingling
body:

     "the part of katisha, the country maid, in 'the wives of abdul' at
     the broadway, heretofore played by inez carew, will be hereafter
     filled by carrie madenda, one of the cleverest members of the
     chorus."

carrie hugged herself with delight. oh, wasn't it just fine! at last!
the first, the long-hoped for, the delightful notice! and they called
her clever. she could hardly restrain herself from laughing loudly. had
lola seen it?

"they've got a notice here of the part i'm going to play to-morrow
night," said carrie to her friend.

"oh, jolly! have they?" cried lola, running to her. "that's all right,"
she said, looking. "you'll get more now, if you do well. i had my
picture in the 'world' once."

"did you?" asked carrie.

"did i? well, i should say," returned the little girl. "they had a frame
around it."

carrie laughed.

"they've never published my picture."

"but they will," said lola. "you'll see. you do b
 
 ___________________________
 
etter than most that
get theirs in now."

carrie felt deeply grateful for this. she almost loved lola for the
sympathy and praise she extended. it was so helpful to her--so almost
necessary.

fulfilling her part capably brought another notice in the papers that
she was doing her work acceptably. this pleased her immensely. she began
to think the world was taking note of her.

the first week she got her thirty-five dollars, it seemed an enormous
sum. paying only three dollars for room rent seemed ridiculous. after
giving lola her twenty-five, she still had seven dollars left. with four
left over
 
 ___________________________
 
 from previous earnings, she had eleven. five of this went to
pay the regular installment on the clothes she had to buy. the next week
she was even in greater feather. now, only three dollars need be paid
for room rent and five on her clothes. the rest she had for food and her
own whims.

"you'd better save a little for summer," cautioned lola. "we'll probably
close in may."

"i intend to," said carrie.

the regular entrance of thirty-five dollars a week to one who has
endured scant allowances for several years is a demoralising thing.
carrie found her purse bursting with good green bills of comfortable
denominations. having no one dependent upon her, she began to buy pretty
clothes and pleasing trinkets, to eat well, and to ornament her room.
friends were not long in gathering about. she met a few young men who
belonged to lola's st
 
 ___________________________
 
ry lovers of late hours, she
found herself criticising this man. he was too stilted, too
self-opinionated. he did not talk of anything that lifted her above the
common run of clothes and material success. when it was all over, he
smiled most graciously.

"got to go straight home, have you?" he said.

"yes," she answered, with an air of quiet understanding.

"she's not so inexperienced as she looks," he thought, and thereafter
his respect and ardour were increased.

she could not help sharing in lola's love for a good time. there were
days when they went carriage riding, nights when after the show they
dined, afternoons when they strolled along broadway, tastefully dressed.
she was getting in the metropolitan whirl of pleasure.

at last her picture appeared in one of the weeklies. she had not known
of it, and it took her breath. "miss carrie madenda," it was labelled.
"one of the favourites of 'the wives of abdul' company." at lola's
advice she had had some pictures taken by sarony. they ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d got one
there. she thought of going down and buying a few copies of the paper,
but remembered that there was no one she knew well enough to send them
to. only lola, apparently, in all the world was interested.

the metropolis is a cold place socially, and carrie soon found that a
little money brought her nothing. the world of wealth and distinction
was quite as far away as ever. she could feel that there was no warm,
sympathetic friendship back of the easy merriment with which many
approached her. all seemed to be seeking their own amusement, regardless
of the possible sad consequence to others. so much for the lessons of
hurstwood and drouet.

in april s
 
 ___________________________
 
wing to her moderate salary, was for securing a home
engagement.

"they're putting on a summer play at the casino," she announced, after
figuratively putting her ear to the ground. "let's try and get in that."

"i'm willing," said carrie.

they tried in time and were apprised of the proper date to apply again.
that was may 16th. meanwhile their own show closed may 5th.

"those that want to go with the show next season," said the manager,
"will have to sign this week."

"don't you sign," advised lola. "i wouldn't go."

"i know," said carrie, "but maybe i can't get anything else."

"well, i won't," said the little girl, who had a resource in her
admirers. "i went once and i didn't have anything at the end of the
season."

carrie thought this over. she had never been on the road.

"we can get along," added lola. "i always have."

carrie did not sign.

the manager who was putting on the summer skit at the casino had never
heard of carrie, but the several notices she had received, her
published
 
 ___________________________
 
 picture, and the programme bearing her name had some little
weight with him. he gave her a silent part at thirty dollars a week.

"didn't i tell you?" said lola. "it doesn't do you any good to go away
from new york. they forget all about you if you do."

now, because carrie was pretty, the gentlemen who made up the advance
illustrations of shows about to appear for the sunday papers selected
carrie's photo along with others to illustrate the announcement. because
she was very pretty, they gave it excellent space and drew scrolls about
it. carrie was delighted. still, the management did not seem to have
seen anything of it. at least, no more attention w
 
 ___________________________
 
by himself. figuratively, he could not kiss the hand
that smote him.

doing her simple part, carrie gradually realised the meaning of the
applause which was for her, and it was sweet. she felt mildly guilty of
something--perhaps unworthiness. when her associates addressed her in
the wings she only smiled weakly. the pride and daring of place were not
for her. it never once crossed her mind to be reserved or haughty--to be
other than she had been. after the performances she rode to her room
with lola, in a carriage provided.

then came a week in which the first fruits of success were offered to
her lips--bowl after bowl. it did not matter that her splendid salary
had not begun. the world seemed satisfied with the promise. she began to
get letters and cards. a mr. withers--whom she did not know from
adam--having learned by some hook or crook where she resided, bowed
himself politely in.

"you will excuse me for intruding," he said; "but have you been thinking
of changing your apartments?"

"
 
 ___________________________
 
s. all you have
to do is to pay that sum to the clerk at the end of the week or month,
just as you wish, and he will give you a receipt for what the rooms
would cost if charged for at our regular rates."

the speaker paused.

"suppose you come and look at the rooms," he added.

"i'd be glad to," said carrie, "but i have a rehearsal this morning."

"i did not mean at once," he returned. "any time will do. would this
afternoon be inconvenient?"

"not at all," said carrie.

suddenly she remembered lola, who was out at the time.

"i have a room-mate," she added, "who will have to go wherever i do. i
forgot about that."

"oh, very well," said mr. withers, blandly. "it is for you to say whom
you want with you. as i say, all that can be arranged to suit yourself."

he bowed and backed toward the door.

"at four, then, we may expect you?"

"yes," said carrie.

"i will be there to show you," and so mr. withers withdrew.

after rehearsal carrie informed lola.

"did they really?" exclaimed the latter
 
 ___________________________
 
, thinking of the wellington as a
group of managers. "isn't that fine? oh, jolly! it's so swell. that's
where we dined that night we went with those two cushing boys. don't you
know?"

"i remember," said carrie.

"oh, it's as fine as it can be."

"we'd better be going up there," observed carrie, later in the
afternoon.

the rooms which mr. withers displayed to carrie and lola were three and
bath--a suite on the parlour floor. they were done in chocolate and dark
red, with rugs and hangings to match. three windows looked down into
busy broadway on the east, three into a side street which crossed there.
there were two lovely bedrooms, set with brass and white enamel beds,
white, ribbon-trimmed chairs and chiffoniers to match. in the third
room, or parlour, was a piano, a heavy piano lamp, with a shade of
gorgeous pattern, a library table, several huge easy rockers, so
 
 ___________________________
 
me dado
book shelves, and a gilt curio case, filled with oddities. pictures were
upon the walls, soft turkish pillows upon the divan, footstools of brown
plush upon the floor. such accommodations would ordinarily cost a
hundred dollars a week.

"oh, lovely!" exclaimed lola, walking about.

"it is comfortable," said carrie, who was lifting a lace curtain and
looking down into crowded broadway.

the bath was a handsome affair, done in white enamel, with a large,
blue-bordered stone tub and nickel trimmings. it was bright and
commodious, with a bevelled mirror set in the wall at one end and
incandescent lights arranged in three places.

"do you find these satisfactory?" observed mr. withers.

"oh, very," answered carrie.

"well, then, any time you find it convenient
 
 ___________________________
 
 to move in, they are ready.
the boy will bring you the keys at the door."

carrie noted the elegantly carpeted and decorated hall, the marbelled
lobby, and showy waiting-room. it was such a place as she had often
dreamed of occupying.

"i guess we'd better move right away, don't you think so?" she observed
to lola, thinking of the commonplace chamber in seventeenth street.

"oh, by all means," said the latter.

the next day her trunks left for the new abode.

dressing, after the matin√©e on wednesday, a knock came at her
dressing-room door.

carrie looked at the card handed by the boy and suffered a shock of
surprise.

"tell her i'll be right out," she said softly. then, looking at the
card, added: "mrs. vance."

"why, you little sinner," the latter exclaimed, as she saw carrie coming
toward her across t
 
 ___________________________
 
terest made her feel
as if she were the one to condescend.

now, as on each preceding day, letters were handed her by the doorman
at the casino. this was a feature which had rapidly developed since
monday. what they contained she well knew. _mash notes_ were old affairs
in their mildest form. she remembered having received her first one far
back in columbia city. since then, as a chorus girl, she had received
others--gentlemen who prayed for an engagement. they were common sport
between her and lola, who received some also. they both frequently made
light of them.

now, however, they came thick and fast. gentlemen with fortunes did not
hesitate to note, as an addition to their own amiable collection of
virtues, that they had their horses and carriages. thus one:

     "i have a million in my own right. i could give you every luxury.
     there isn't anything you could ask for that you couldn't have. i
     say this, not because i want to speak of my money, but because i
     love you and w
 
 ___________________________
 
cloyed to
make these things wearisome. adulation, being new in any form, pleased
her. only she was sufficiently wise to distinguish between her old
condition and her new one. she had not had fame or money before. now
they had come. she had not had adulation and affectionate propositions
before. now they had come. wherefore? she smiled to think that men
should suddenly find her so much more attractive. in the least way it
incited her to coolness and indifference.

"do look here," she remarked to lola. "see what this man says: 'if you
will only deign to grant me one half-hour,'" she repeated, with an
imitation of languor. "the idea. aren't men silly?"

"he must have lots of money, the way he talks," observed lola.

"that's what they all say," said carrie, innocently.

"why don't you see him," suggested lola, "and hear what he has to say?"

"indeed i won't," said carrie. "i know what he'd say. i don't want to
meet anybody that way."

lola looked at her with big, merry eyes.

"he couldn't hurt
 
 ___________________________
 
ct enjoyment was
not open.

gradually she began to think it was because it was summer. nothing was
going on much save such entertainments as the one in which she was star.
fifth avenue was boarded up where the rich had deserted their mansions.
madison avenue was little better. broadway was full of loafing thespians
in search of next season engagements. the whole city was quiet and her
nights were taken up with her work. hence the feeling that there was
little to do.

"i don't know," she said to lola one day, sitting at one of the windows
which looked down into broadway, "i get lonely; don't you?"

"no," said lola, "not very often. you won't go anywhere. that's what's
the matter with you."

"where can i go?"

"why, there're lots of places," returned lola, who was thinking of her
own lightsome tourneys with the gay youths. "you won't go with anybody."

"i don't want to go with these people who write to me. i know what kind
they are."

"you oughtn't to be lonely," said lola, thinking of carri
 
 ___________________________
 

that."

he was so interested in forwarding all good causes that he sometimes
became enthusiastic, giving vent to these preachments. something in
carrie appealed to him. he wanted to stir her up.

"i know," she said, absently, feeling slightly guilty of neglect.

"if i were you," he said, "i'd change."

the effect of this was like roiling helpless waters. carrie troubled
over it in her rocking-chair for days.

"i don't believe i'll stay in comedy so very much longer," she
eventually remarked to lola.

"oh, why not?" said the latter.

"i think," she said, "i can do better in a serious play."

"what put that idea in your head?"

"oh, nothing," she answered; "i've always thought so."

still, she did nothing--grieving. it was a long way to this better
thing--or seemed so--and comfort was about her; hence the inactivity and
longing.




chapter xlvii

the way of the beaten: a harp in the wind


in the city, at that time, there were a number of charities similar in
nature to that of the captain'
 
 ___________________________
 
at this
time "p√®re goriot," which ames had recommended to her. it was so strong,
and ames's mere recommendation had so aroused her interest, that she
caught nearly the full sympathetic significance of it. for the first
time, it was being borne in upon her how silly and worthless had been
her earlier reading, as a whole. becoming wearied, however, she yawned
and came to the window, looking out upon the old winding procession of
carriages rolling up fifth avenue.

"isn't it bad?" she observed to lola.

"terrible!" said that little lady, joining her. "i hope it snows enough
to go sleigh riding."

"oh, dear," said carrie, with whom the sufferings of father goriot were
still keen. "that's all you think of. aren't you sorry for the people
who haven't anything to-night?"

"of course i am," said lola; "but what can i do? i haven't anything."

carrie smiled.

"you wouldn't care, if you had," she returned.

"i would, too," said lola. "but people never gave me anything when i was
hard up."

"isn't i
 
 ___________________________
 
t just awful?" said carrie, studying the winter's storm.

"look at that man over there," laughed lola, who had caught sight of
some one falling down. "how sheepish men look when they fall, don't
they?"

"we'll have to take a coach to-night," answered carrie, absently.

       *       *       *       *       *

in the lobby of the imperial, mr. charles drouet was just arriving,
shaking the snow from a very handsome ulster. bad weather had driven him
home early and stirred his desire for those pleasures which shut out the
snow and gloom of life. a good dinner, the company of a young woman, and
an