e put up his purse. then he got out a letter
from a bunch in his coat pocket. "this is the house i travel for," he
went on, pointing to a picture on it, "corner of state and lake." there
was pride in his voice. he felt that it was something to be connected
with such a place, and he made her feel that way.

"what is your address?" he began again, fixing his pencil to write.

she looked at his hand.

"carrie meeber," she said slowly. "three hundred and fifty-four west van
buren street, care s. c. hanson."

he wrote it carefully down and got out the purse again. "you'll be at
home if i come around monday night?" he said.

"i think so," she answered.

how true it is that words are but the vague shadows of the volumes we
mean. little audible links, they are, chaining together great inaudible
feelings and purposes. here were these two, bandying little phrases,
drawing purses, looking at cards, and both unconscious of how
inarticulate all their real feelings were. neither was wise enough to be
sure
 
 ___________________________
 
 on
the third floor, the front windows looking down into the street, where,
at night, the lights of grocery stores were shining and children were
playing. to carrie, the sound of the little bells upon the horse-cars,
as they tinkled in and out of hearing, was as pleasing as it was novel.
she gazed into the lighted street when minnie brought her into the front
room, and wondered at the sounds, the movement, the murmur of the vast
city which stretched for miles and miles in every direction.

mrs. hanson, after the first greetings were over, gave carrie the baby
and proceeded to get supper. her husband asked a few questions and sat
down to read the evening paper. he was a silent man, american born, of a
swede father, and now employed as a cleaner of refrigerator cars at the
stock-yards. to him the presence or absence of his wife's sister was a
matter of indifference. her personal appearance did not affect him one
way or the other. his one observation to the point was concerning the
chances of w
 
 ___________________________
 
 she had some slight gift of observation and that
sense, so rich in every woman--intuition.

she felt the drag of a lean and narrow life. the walls of the rooms were
discordantly papered. the floors were covered with matting and the hall
laid with a thin rag carpet. one could see that the furniture was of
that poor, hurriedly patched together quality sold by the instalment
houses.

she sat with minnie, in the kitchen, holding the baby until it began to
cry. then she walked and sang to it, until hanson, disturbed in his
reading, came and took it. a pleasant side to his nature came out here.
he was patient. one could see that he was very much wrapped up in his
offspring.

"now, now," he said, walking. "there, there," and there was a certain
swedish accent noticeable in his voice.

"you'll want to see the city first, won't you?" said minnie, when they
were eating. "well, we'll go out sunday and see lincoln park."

carrie noticed that hanson had said nothing to this. he seemed to be
thinking of 
 
 ___________________________
 

"it's that way," he said, pointing east. "that's east." then he went off
into the longest speech he had yet indulged in, concerning the lay of
chicago. "you'd better look in those big manufacturing houses along
franklin street and just the other side of the river," he concluded.
"lots of girls work there. you could get home easy, too. it isn't very
far."

carrie nodded and asked her sister about the neighbourhood. the latter
talked in a subdued tone, telling the little she knew about it, while
hanson concerned himself with the baby. finally he jumped up and handed
the child to his wife.

"i've got to get up early in the morning, so i'll go to bed," and off he
went, disappearing into the dark little bedroom off the hall, for the
night.

"he works way down at the stock-yards," explained minnie, "so he's got
to get up at half-past five."

"what time do you get up to get breakfast?" asked carrie.

"at about twenty minutes of five."

together they finished the labour of the day, carrie washing t
 
 ___________________________
 
he dishes
while minnie undressed the baby and put it to bed. minnie's manner was
one of trained industry, and carrie could see that it was a steady round
of toil with her.

she began to see that her relations with drouet would have to be
abandoned. he could not come here. she read from the manner of hanson,
in the subdued air of minnie, and, indeed, the whole atmosphere of the
flat, a settled opposition to anything save a conservative round of
toil. if hanson sat every evening in the front room and read his paper,
if he went to bed at nine, and minnie a little later, what would they
expect of her? she saw that she would first need to get work and
establish herself on a paying basis before she could think of having
company of any sort. her little flirtation with drouet seemed now an
extraordinary thing.

"no," she said to herself, "he can't come here."

she asked minnie for ink and paper, which were upon the mantel in the
dining-room, and when the la
 
 ___________________________
 
 with a "very truly," which she subsequently
changed to "sincerely." she sealed and addressed the letter, and going
in the front room, the alcove of which contained her bed, drew the one
small rocking-chair up to the open window, and sat looking out upon the
night and streets in silent wonder. finally, wearied by her own
reflections, she began to grow dull in her chair, and feeling the need
of sleep, arranged her clothing for the night and went to bed.

when she awoke at eight the next morning, hanson had gone. her sister
was busy in the dining-room, which was also the sitting-room, sewing.
she worked, after dressing, to arrange a little breakfast for herself,
and then advised with minnie as to which way to look. the latter had
changed considerably since carrie had seen her. she was now a thin,
though rugged, woman of twenty-seven, with ideas of life coloured by her
husband's, and fast hardening into narrower conceptions of pleasure and
duty than had ever been hers in a thoroughly circumscri
 
 ___________________________
 
 and ready, for all her weariness, to discuss the now
interesting events which led up to her achievement, the former had
merely smiled approvingly and inquired whether she would have to spend
any of it for car fare. this consideration had not entered in before,
and it did not now for long affect the glow of carrie's enthusiasm.
disposed as she then was to calculate upon that vague basis which allows
the subtraction of one sum from another without any perceptible
diminution, she was happy.

when hanson came home at seven o'clock, he was inclined to be a little
crusty--his usual demeanour before supper. this never showed so much in
anything he said as in a certain solemnity of countenance and the silent
manner in which he slopped about. he had a pair of yellow carpet
slippers which he enjoyed wearing, and these he would immediately
substitute for his solid pair of shoes. this, and washing his face with
the aid of common washing soap until it glowed a shiny red, constituted
his only preparation
 
 ___________________________
 
carrie with a touch of pride.

he asked her one or two more questions and then turned to play with the
baby, leaving the subject until it was brought up again by minnie at the
table.

carrie, however, was not to be reduced to the common level of
observation which prevailed in the flat.

"it seems to be such a large company," she said, at one place. "great
big plate-glass windows and lots of clerks. the man i saw said they
hired ever so many people."

"it's not very hard to get work now," put in hanson, "if you look
right."

minnie, under the warming influence of carrie's good spirits and her
husband's somewhat conversational mood, began to tell carrie of some of
the well-known things to see--things the enjoyment of which cost
nothing.

"you'd like to see michigan avenue. there are such fine houses. it is
such a fine street."

"where is 'h. r. jacob's'?" interrupted carrie, mentioning one of the
theatres devoted to melodrama which went by that name at the time.

"oh, it's not very far from he
 
 ___________________________
 
re," answered minnie. "it's in halstead
street, right up here."

"how i'd like to go there. i crossed halstead street to-day, didn't i?"

at this there was a slight halt in the natural reply. thoughts are a
strangely permeating factor. at her suggestion of going to the theatre,
the unspoken shade of disapproval to the doing of those things which
involved the expenditure of money--shades of feeling which arose in the
mind of hanson and then in minnie--slightly affected the atmosphere of
the table. minnie answered "yes," but carrie could feel that going to
the theatre was poorly advocated here. the subject was put off for a
little while until hanson, through with his meal, took his paper and
went into the front room.

when they were alone, the two sisters began a somewhat freer
conversation, carrie interrupting it to hum a little, as they worked at
the dishes.

"i should like to walk up and see halstead street, if it isn't
 
 ___________________________
 
as going
to think of running around in the beginning there would be a hitch
somewhere. unless carrie submitted to a solemn round of industry and saw
the need of hard work without longing for play, how was her coming to
the city to profit them? these thoughts were not those of a cold, hard
nature at all. they were the serious reflections of a mind which
invariably adjusted itself, without much complaining, to such
surroundings as its industry could make for it.

at last she yielded enough to ask hanson. it was a half-hearted
procedure without a shade of desire on her part.

"carrie wants us to go to the theatre," she said, looking in upon her
husband. hanson looked up from his paper, and they exchanged a mild
look, which said as plainly as anything: "this isn't what we expected."

"i don't care to go," he returned. "what does she want to see?"

"h. r. jacob's," said minnie.

he looked down at his paper and shook his head negatively.

when carrie saw how they looked upon her proposition, she g
 
 ___________________________
 
ained a still
clearer feeling of their way of life. it weighed on her, but took no
definite form of opposition.

"i think i'll go down and stand at the foot of the stairs," she said,
after a time.

minnie made no objection to this, and carrie put on her hat and went
below.

"where has carrie gone?" asked hanson, coming back into the dining-room
when he heard the door close.

"she said she was going down to the foot of the stairs," answered
minnie. "i guess she just wants to look out a while."

"she oughtn't to be thinking about spending her money on theatres
already, do you think?" he said.

"she just feels a little curious, i guess," ventured minnie. "everything
is so new."

"i don't know," said hanson, and went over to the baby, his forehead
slightly wrinkled.

he was thinking of a full career of va
 
 ___________________________
 
d worn
all summer at columbia city. her shoes were old, and her necktie was in
that crumpled, flattened state which time and much wearing impart. she
made a very average looking shop-girl with the exception of her
features. these were slightly more even than common, and gave her a
sweet, reserved, and pleasing appearance.

it is no easy thing to get up early in the morning when one is used to
sleeping until seven and eight, as carrie had been at home. she gained
some inkling of the character of hanson's life when, half asleep, she
looked out into the dining-room at six o'clock and saw him silently
finishing his breakfast. by the time she was dressed he was gone, and
she, minnie, and the baby ate together, the latter being just old enough
to sit in a high chair and disturb the dishes with a spoon. her spirits
were greatly subdued now when the fact of entering upon strange and
untried duties confronted her. only the ashes of all her fine fancies
were remaining--ashes still concealing, neverthe
 
 ___________________________
 
rivolous and gay of
places, and that also when the little toiler was bemoaning her narrow
lot, which was almost inseparable from the early stages of this, her
unfolding fate.




chapter vi

the machine and the maiden: a knight of to-day


at the flat that evening carrie felt a new phase of its atmosphere. the
fact that it was unchanged, while her feelings were different, increased
her knowledge of its character. minnie, after the good spirits carrie
manifested at first, expected a fair report. hanson supposed that carrie
would be satisfied.

"well," he said, as he came in from the hall in his working clothes, and
looked at carrie through the dining-room door, "how did you make out?"

"oh," said carrie, "it's pretty hard. i don't like it."

there was an air about her which showed plainer than any words that she
was both weary and disappointed.

"what sort of work is it?" he asked, lingering a moment as he turned
upon his heel to go into the bathroom.

"running a machine," answered carrie.

i
 
 ___________________________
 
to say: "oh, well, stand it a little
while. you will get something better," but now this was ashes. she
began to see that they looked upon her complaint as unwarranted, and
that she was supposed to work on and say nothing. she knew that she was
to pay four dollars for her board and room, and now she felt that it
would be an exceedingly gloomy round, living with these people.

minnie was no companion for her sister--she was too old. her thoughts
were staid and solemnly adapted to a condition. if hanson had any
pleasant thoughts or happy feelings he concealed them. he seemed to do
all his mental operations without the aid of physical expression. he was
as still as a deserted chamber. carrie, on the other hand, had the blood
of youth and some imagination. her day of love and the mysteries of
courtship were still ahead. she could think of things she would like to
do, of clothes she would like to wear, and of places she would like to
visit. these were the things upon which her mind ran, and it wa
 
 ___________________________
 
. she
wandered about after the dishes were put away, talked a little with
minnie, and then decided to go down and stand in the door at the foot of
the stairs. if drouet came, she could meet him there. her face took on
the semblance of a look of happiness as she put on her hat to go below.

"carrie doesn't seem to like her place very well," said minnie to her
husband when the latter came out, paper in hand, to sit in the
dining-room a few minutes.

"she ought to keep it for a time, anyhow," said hanson. "has she gone
downstairs?"

"yes," said minnie.

"i'd tell her to keep it if i were you. she might be here weeks without
getting another one."

minnie said she would, and hanson read his paper.

"if i were you," he said a little later, "i wouldn't let her stand in
the door down there. it don't look good."

"i'll tell her," said minnie.

the life of the streets continued for a long time to interest carrie.
she never wearied of wondering where the people in the cars were going
or what their enjo
 
 ___________________________
 
yments were. her imagination trod a very narrow round,
always winding up at points which concerned money, looks, clothes, or
enjoyment. she would have a far-off thought of columbia city now and
then, or an irritating rush of feeling concerning her experiences of the
present day, but, on the whole, the little world about her enlisted her
whole attention.

the first floor of the building, of which hanson's flat was the third,
was occupied by a bakery, and to this, while she was standing there,
hanson came down to buy a loaf of bread. she was not aware of his
presence until he was quite near her.

"i'm after bread," was all he said as he passed.

the contagion of thought here demonstrated itself. while hanson really
came for bread, the thought dwelt with him that now he would see what
carrie was doing. no sooner did he draw near her with that in mind than
she felt it. of course, she had no understanding of what put it into her
head, but, nevertheless, it aroused in her the first shade of rea
 
 ___________________________
 
l
antipathy to him. she knew now that she did not like him. he was
suspicious.

a thought will colour a world for us. the flow of carrie's meditations
had been disturbed, and hanson had not long gone upstairs before she
followed. she had realised with the lapse of the quarter hours that
drouet was not coming, and somehow she felt a little resentful, a little
as if she had been forsaken--was not good enough. she went upstairs,
where everything was silent. minnie was sewing by a lamp at the table.
hanson had already turned in for the night. in her weariness and
disappointment carrie did no more than announce that she was going to
bed.

"yes, you'd better," returned minnie. "
 
 ___________________________
 
you've got to get up early, you
know."

the morning was no better. hanson was just going out the door as carrie
came from her room. minnie tried to talk with her during breakfast, but
there was not much of interest which they could mutually discuss. as on
the previous morning, carrie walked down town, for she began to realise
now that her four-fifty would not even allow her car fare after she paid
her board. this seemed a miserable arrangement. but the morning light
swept away the first misgivings of the day, as morning light is ever
wont to do.

at the shoe factory 
 
 ___________________________
 
e phrases, which at first shocked her. she saw
that she was taken to be of the same sort and addressed accordingly.

"hello," remarked one of the stout-wristed sole-workers to her at noon.
"you're a daisy." he really expected to hear the common "aw! go chase
yourself!" in return, and was sufficiently abashed, by carrie's silently
moving away, to retreat, awkwardly grinning.

that night at the flat she was even more lonely--the dull situation was
becoming harder to endure. she could see that the hansons seldom or
never had any company. standing at the street door looking out, she
ventured to walk out a little way. her easy gait and idle manner
attracted attention of an offensive but common sort. she was slightly
taken back at the overtures of a well-dressed man of thirty, who in
passing looked at her, reduced his pace, turned back, and said:

"out for a little stroll, are you, this evening?"

carrie looked at him in amazement, and then summoned sufficient thought
to reply: "why, i don't know 
 
 ___________________________
 
you," backing away as she did so.

"oh, that don't matter," said the other affably.

she bandied no more words with him, but hurried away, reaching her own
door quite out of breath. there was something in the man's look which
frightened her.

during the remainder of the week it was very much the same. one or two
nights she found herself too tired to walk home, and expended car fare.
she was not very strong, and sitting all day affected her back. she
went to bed one night before hanson.

transplantation is not always successful in the matter of flowers or
maidens. it requires sometimes a richer soil, a better atmosphere to
continue even a natural growth. it would have been better if her
acclimatization had been more gradual--less rigid. she would have done
better if she had not secured a position so quickly, and had seen more
of the city which she constantly troubled to know about.

on the first morning it rained she found that she had no umbrella.
minnie loaned her one of he
 
 ___________________________
 
es and bought herself one, using a dollar and a
quarter of her small store to pay for it.

"what did you do that for, carrie?" asked minnie, when she saw it.

"oh, i need one," said carrie.

"you foolish girl."

carrie resented this, though she did not reply. she was not going to be
a common shop-girl, she thought; they need not think it, either.

on the first saturday night carrie paid her board, four dollars. minnie
had a quaver of conscience as she took it, but did not know how to
explain to hanson if she took less. that worthy gave up just four
dollars less toward the household expenses with a smile of satisfaction.
he contemplated increasing his building and loan payments. as for
carrie, she studied over the problem of finding clothes and amusement on
fifty cents a week. she brooded over this until she was in a state of
mental rebellion.

"i'm going up the street for a walk," she said after supper.

"not alone, are you?" asked hanson.

"yes," returned carrie.

"i wouldn't," said minnie.
 
 ___________________________
 


"i want to see _something_," said carrie, and by the tone she put into
the last word they realised for the first time she was not pleased with
them.

"what's the matter with her?" asked hanson, when she went into the front
room to get her hat.

"i don't know," said minnie.

"well, she ought to know better than to want to go out alone."

carrie did not go very far, after all. she returned and stood in the
door. the next day they went out to garfield park, but it did not please
her. she did not look well enough. in the shop next day she heard the
highly coloured reports which girls give of their trivial amusements.
they had been happy. on several days it rained and she used up car fare
 
 ___________________________
 


minnie looked serious.

"why don't you keep part of your money and buy yourself one?" she
suggested, worried over the situation which the withholding of carrie's
money would create.

"i'd like to for a week or so, if you don't mind," ventured carrie.

"could you pay two dollars?" asked minnie.

carrie readily acquiesced, glad to escape the trying situation, and
liberal now that she saw a way out. she was elated and began figuring at
once. she needed a hat first of all. how minnie explained to hanson she
never knew. he said nothing at all, but there were thoughts in the air
which left disagreeable impressions.

the new arrangement might have worked if sickness had not intervened. it
blew up cold after a rain one afternoon when carrie was still without a
jacket. she came out of the warm shop at six and shivered as the wind
struck her. in the morning she was sneezing, and going down town made it
worse. that day her bones ached and she felt light-headed. towards
evening she felt very ill, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
when she reached home was not hungry.
minnie noticed her drooping actions and asked her about herself.

"i don't know," said carrie. "i feel real bad."

she hung about the stove, suffered a chattering chill, and went to bed
sick. the next morning she was thoroughly feverish.

minnie was truly distressed at this, but maintained a kindly demeanour.
hanson said perhaps she had better go back home for a while. when she
got up after three days, it was taken for granted that her position was
lost. the winter was near at hand, she had no clothes, and now she was
out of work.

"i don't know," said carrie; "i'll go down monday and see if i can't get
something."

if anything, her efforts were more poorly rewarded on this trial than
the last. her clothes were nothing suitable for fall wearing. her last
money she had spent for a hat. for three days she wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ndered about,
utterly dispirited. the attitude of the flat was fast becoming
unbearable. she hated to think of going back there each evening. hanson
was so cold. she knew it could not last much longer. shortly she would
have to give up and go home.

on the fourth day she was down town all day, having borrowed ten cents
for lunch from minnie. she had applied in the cheapest kind of places
without success. she even answered for a waitress in a small restaurant
where she saw a card in the window, but they wanted an experienced girl.
she moved through the thick throng of strangers, utterly subdued in
spirit. suddenly a hand pulled her arm and t
 
 ___________________________
 
ed. she would prevaricate, but it would be
in the line of her feelings at least. so instead of complaining when she
felt so good, she said:

"i have the promise of something."

"where?"

"at the boston store."

"is it sure promised?" questioned minnie.

"well, i'm to find out to-morrow," returned carrie, disliking to draw
out a lie any longer than was necessary.

minnie felt the atmosphere of good feeling which carrie brought with
her. she felt now was the time to express to carrie the state of
hanson's feeling about her entire chicago venture.

"if you shouldn't get it--" she paused, troubled for an easy way.

"if i don't get something pretty soon, i think i'll go home."

minnie saw her chance.

"sven thinks it might be best for the winter, anyhow."

the situation flashed on carrie at once. they were unwilling to keep her
any longer, out of work. she did not blame minnie, she did not blame
hanson very much. now, as she sat there digesting the remark, she was
glad she had drouet's money.

"y
 
 ___________________________
 
ught.

she had reached home early and went in the front room to think. what
could she do? she could not buy new shoes and wear them here. she would
need to save part of the twenty to pay her fare home. she did not want
to borrow of minnie for that. and yet, how could she explain where she
even got that money? if she could only get enough to let her out easy.

she went over the tangle again and again. here, in the morning, drouet
would expect to see her in a new jacket, and that couldn't be. the
hansons expected her to go home, and she wanted to get away, and yet she
did not want to go home. in the light of the way they would look on her
getting money without work, the taking of it now seemed dreadful. she
began to be ashamed. the whole situation depressed her. it was all so
clear when she was with drouet. now it was all so tangled, so
hopeless--much worse than it was before, because she had the semblance
of aid in her hand which she could not use.

her spirits sank so that at supper minnie f
 
 ___________________________
 
me away."

she thought a long time about this. finally she agreed. he would come
out as far as peoria street and wait for her. she was to meet him at
half-past eight. at half-past five she reached home, and at six her
determination was hardened.

"so you didn't get it?" said minnie, referring to carrie's story of the
boston store.

carrie looked at her out of the corner of her eye. "no," she answered.

"i don't think you'd better try any more this fall," said minnie.

carrie said nothing.

when hanson came home he wore the same inscrutable demeanour. he washed
in silence and went off to read his paper. at dinner carrie felt a
little nervous. the strain of her own plans was considerable, and the
feeling that she was not welcome here was strong.

"didn't find anything, eh?" said hanson.

"no."

he turned to his eating again, the thought that it was a burden to have
her here dwelling in his mind. she would have to go home, that was all.
once she was away, there would be no more coming back in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he spring.

carrie was afraid of what she was going to do, but she was relieved to
know that this condition was ending. they would not care. hanson
particularly would be glad when she went. he would not care what became
of her.

after dinner she went into the bathroom, where they could not disturb
her, and wrote a little note.

"good-bye, minnie," it read. "i'm not going home. i'm going to stay in
chicago a little while and look for work. don't worry. i'll be all
right."

in the front room hanson was reading his paper. as usual, she helped
minnie clear away the dishes and straighten up. then she said:

"i guess i'll stand down at the door a little while." she could scarcely
prevent her voice from trembling.

minnie remembered hanson's remonstrance.

"sven doesn't think it looks good to stand down there," she said.

"doesn't he?" said carrie. "i won't do it any more after this."

she put on her hat and fidgeted around the table in the little bedroom,
wondering where to slip the note. fin
 
 ___________________________
 
ally she put it under minnie's
hair-brush.

when she had closed the hall-door, she paused a moment and wondered what
they would think. some thought of the queerness of her deed affected
her. she went slowly down the stairs. she looked back up the lighted
step, and then affected to stroll up the street. when she reached the
corner she quickened her pace.

as she was hurrying away, hanson came back to his wife.

"is carrie down at the door again?" he asked.

"yes," said minnie; "she said she wasn't going to do it any more."

he went over to the baby where it was playing on the floor and began to
poke his finger at it.

drouet was on the corner waiting, in good spirits.

"hello, carrie," he said, as a sprightly figure of a girl drew near him.
"got here safe, did you? well, we'll take a car."




chapter viii

intimations by winter: an ambassador summoned


among the forces which 
 
 ___________________________
 
ding will yet point steadfast and unwavering to the distant
pole of truth.

in carrie--as in how many of our worldlings do they not?--instinct and
reason, desire and understanding, were at war for the mastery. she
followed whither her craving led. she was as yet more drawn than she
drew.

when minnie found the note next morning, after a night of mingled wonder
and anxiety, which was not exactly touched by yearning, sorrow, or love,
she exclaimed: "well, what do you think of that?"

"what?" said hanson.

"sister carrie has gone to live somewhere else."

hanson jumped out of bed with more celerity than he usually displayed
and looked at the note. the only indication of his thoughts came in the
form of a little clicking sound made by his tongue; the sound some
people make when they wish to urge on a horse.

"where do you suppose she's gone to?" said minnie, thoroughly aroused.

"i don't know," a touch of cynicism lighting his eye. "now she has gone
and done it."

minnie moved her head in a puzz
 
 ___________________________
 
led way.

"oh, oh," she said, "she doesn't know what she has done."

"well," said hanson, after a while, sticking his hands out before him,
"what can you do?"

minnie's womanly nature was higher than this. she figured the
possibilities in such cases.

"oh," she said at last, "poor sister carrie!"

at the time of this particular conversation, which occurred at 5 a. m.,
that little soldier of fortune was sleeping a rather troubled sleep in
her new room, alone.

carrie's new state was remarkable in that she saw possibilities in it.
she was no sensualist, longing to drowse sleepily in 
 
 ___________________________
 
 waters were blurring everything. she came away suffering as
though she had lost something. she was more inexpressibly sad than she
had ever been in life.

it was this way through many shifts of the tired brain, those curious
phantoms of the spirit slipping in, blurring strange scenes, one with
the other. the last one made her cry out, for carrie was slipping away
somewhere over a rock, and her fingers had let loose and she had seen
her falling.

"minnie! what's the matter? here, wake up," said hanson, disturbed, and
shaking her by the shoulder.

"wha--what's the matter?" said minnie, drowsily.

"wake up," he said, "and turn over. you're talking in your sleep."

a week or so later drouet strolled into fitzgerald and moy's, spruce in
dress and manner.

"hello, charley," said hurstwood, looking out from his office door.

drouet strolled over and looked in upon the manager at his desk.

"when do you go out on the road again?" he inquired.

"pretty soon," said drouet.

"haven't seen much of you 
 
 ___________________________
 
bout money and
investment. she could see now that he was "broke."

"i don't know," he said solemnly; "i can try."




chapter xxxiv

the grind of the millstones: a sample of chaff


carrie pondered over this situation as consistently as hurstwood, once
she got the facts adjusted in her mind. it took several days for her to
fully realise that the approach of the dissolution of her husband's
business meant commonplace struggle and privation. her mind went back to
her early venture in chicago, the hansons and their flat, and her heart
revolted. that was terrible! everything about poverty was terrible. she
wished she knew a way out. her recent experiences with the vances had
wholly unfitted her to view her own state with complacence. the glamour
of the high life of the city had, in the few experiences afforded her by
the former, seized her completely. she had been taught how to dress and
where to go without having ample means to do either. now, these
things--ever-present realities as they were--