 away. down the aisle, toward the gate
leading into the waiting-room and the street, stood drouet. he was
looking back. when he saw that she saw him and was safe with her sister
he turned to go, sending back the shadow of a smile. only carrie saw it.
she felt something lost to her when he moved away. when he disappeared
she felt his absence thoroughly. with her sister she was much alone, a
lone figure in a tossing, thoughtless sea.




chapter ii

what poverty threatened: of granite and brass


minnie's flat, as the one-floor resident apartments were then being
called, was in a part of west van buren street inhabited by families of
labourers and clerks, men who had come, and were still coming, with the
rush of population pouring in at the rate of 50,000 a year. it was on
the third floor, the front windows looking down into the street, where,
at night, the lights of grocery stores were shining and children were
playing. to carrie, the sound of the little bells upon the horse-cars,
as they tin
 
 ___________________________
 
kled in and out of hearing, was as pleasing as it was novel.
she gazed into the lighted street when minnie brought her into the front
room, and wondered at the sounds, the movement, the murmur of the vast
city which stretched for miles and miles in every direction.

mrs. hanson, after the first greetings were over, gave carrie the baby
and proceeded to get supper. her husband asked a few questions and sat
down to read the evening paper. he was a silent man, american born, of a
swede father, and now employed as a cleaner of refrigerator cars at the
stock-yards. to him the presence or absence of his w
 
 ___________________________
 
n them.

in the interval which marked the preparation of the meal carrie found
time to study the flat. she had some slight gift of observation and that
sense, so rich in every woman--intuition.

she felt the drag of a lean and narrow life. the walls of the rooms were
discordantly papered. the floors were covered with matting and the hall
laid with a thin rag carpet. one could see that the furniture was of
that poor, hurriedly patched together quality sold by the instalment
houses.

she sat with minnie, in the kitchen, holding the baby until it began to
cry. then she walked and sang to it, until hanson, disturbed in his
reading, came and took it. a pleasant side to his nature came out here.
he was patient. one could see that he was very much wrapped up in his
offspring.

"now, now," he said, walking. "there, there," and there was a certain
swedish accent noticeable in his voice.

"you'll want to see the city first, won't you?" said minnie, when they
were eating. "well, we'll go out sunday and
 
 ___________________________
 
 see lincoln park."

carrie noticed that hanson had said nothing to this. he seemed to be
thinking of something else.

"well," she said, "i think i'll look around to-morrow. i've got friday
and saturday, and it won't be any trouble. which way is the business
part?"

minnie began to explain, but her husband took this part of the
conversation to himself.

"it's that way," he said, pointing east. "that's east." then he went off
into the longest speech he had yet indulged in, concerning the lay of
chicago. "you'd better look in those big manufacturing houses along
franklin street and just the other side of the river," he concluded.
"lots of girls work there. you could get home easy, too. it isn't very
far."

carrie nodded and asked her sister about the neighbourhood.
 
 ___________________________
 
 the latter
talked in a subdued tone, telling the little she knew about it, while
hanson concerned himself with the baby. finally he jumped up and handed
the child to his wife.

"i've got to get up early in the morning, so i'll go to bed," and off he
went, disappearing into the dark little bedroom off the hall, for the
night.

"he works way down at the stock-yards," explained minnie, "so he's got
to get up at half-past five."

"what time do you get up to get breakfast?" asked carrie.

"at about twenty minutes of five."

together they finished the labour of the day, carrie washing the dishes
while minnie undressed the baby and put it to bed. minnie's manner was
one of trained industry, and carrie could see that it was a steady round
of toil with her.

she began to see that her relations with drouet would have to be
abandoned. he could not come here. she read from the manner
 
 ___________________________
 
 of hanson,
in the subdued air of minnie, and, indeed, the whole atmosphere of the
flat, a settled opposition to anything save a conservative round of
toil. if hanson sat every evening in the front room and read his paper,
if he went to bed at nine, and minnie a little later, what would they
expect of her? she saw that she would first need to get work and
establish herself on a paying basis before she could think of having
company of any sort. her little flirtation with drouet seemed now an
extraordinary thing.

"no," she said to herself, "he can't come here."

she asked minnie for ink and paper, which were upon the mantel in the
dining-room, and when the latter had gone to bed at ten, got out
drouet's card and wrote him.

"i cannot have you call on 
 
 ___________________________
 
l rocking-chair up to the open window, and sat looking out upon the
night and streets in silent wonder. finally, wearied by her own
reflections, she began to grow dull in her chair, and feeling the need
of sleep, arranged her clothing for the night and went to bed.

when she awoke at eight the next morning, hanson had gone. her sister
was busy in the dining-room, which was also the sitting-room, sewing.
she worked, after dressing, to arrange a little breakfast for herself,
and then advised with minnie as to which way to look. the latter had
changed considerably since carrie had seen her. she was now a thin,
though rugged, woman of twenty-seven, with ideas of life coloured by her
husband's, and fast hardening into narrower conceptions of pleasure and
duty than had ever been hers in a thoroughly circumscribed youth. she
had invited carrie, not because she longed for her presence, but because
the latter was dissatisfied at home, and could probably get work and pay
her board here. she was please
 
 ___________________________
 
or her to hope to do anything at all. men and
women hurried by in long, shifting lines. she felt the flow of the tide
of effort and interest--felt her own helplessness without quite
realising the wisp on the tide that she was. she cast about vainly for
some possible place to apply, but found no door which she had the
courage to enter. it would be the same thing all over. the old
humiliation of her plea, rewarded by curt denial. sick at heart and in
body, she turned to the west, the direction of minnie's flat, which she
had now fixed in mind, and began that wearisome, baffled retreat which
the seeker for employment at nightfall too often makes. in passing
through fifth avenue, south towards van buren street, where she intended
to take a car, she passed the door of a large wholesale shoe house,
through the plate-glass window of which she could see a middle-aged
gentleman sitting at a small desk. one of those forlorn impulses which
often grow out of a fixed sense of defeat, the last sprouting o
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
discovered a new atmosphere. behold, the throng was moving with a
lightsome step. she noticed that men and women were smiling. scraps of
conversation and notes of laughter floated to her. the air was light.
people were already pouring out of the buildings, their labour ended for
the day. she noticed that they were pleased, and thoughts of her
sister's home and the meal that would be awaiting her quickened her
steps. she hurried on, tired perhaps, but no longer weary of foot. what
would not minnie say! ah, the long winter in chicago--the lights, the
crowd, the amusement! this was a great, pleasing metropolis after all.
her new firm was a goodly institution. its windows were of huge plate
glass. she could probably do well there. thoughts of drouet returned--of
the things he had told her. she now felt that life was better, that it
was livelier, sprightlier. she boarded a car in the best of spirits,
feeling her blood still flowing pleasantly. she would live in chicago,
her mind kept saying 
 
 ___________________________
 
have been much more becoming had she been cradled a child of fortune.
with ready will and quick mental selection she scattered her meagre
four-fifty per week with a swift and graceful hand. indeed, as she sat
in her rocking-chair these several evenings before going to bed and
looked out upon the pleasantly lighted street, this money cleared for
its prospective possessor the way to every joy and every bauble which
the heart of woman may desire. "i will have a fine time," she thought.

her sister minnie knew nothing of these rather wild cerebrations, though
they exhausted the markets of delight. she was too busy scrubbing the
kitchen wood-work and calculating the purchasing power of eighty cents
for sunday's dinner. when carrie had returned home, flushed with her
first success and ready, for all her weariness, to discuss the now
interesting events which led up to her achievement, the former had
merely smiled approvingly and inquired whether she would have to spend
any of it for car fare. this 
 
 ___________________________
 
deed, it affected the entire atmosphere of the flat,
as such things are inclined to do, and gave to his wife's mind its
subdued and tactful turn, anxious to avoid taciturn replies. under the
influence of carrie's announcement he brightened up somewhat.

"you didn't lose any time, did you?" he remarked, smiling a little.

"no," returned carrie with a touch of pride.

he asked her one or two more questions and then turned to play with the
baby, leaving the subject until it was brought up again by minnie at the
table.

carrie, however, was not to be reduced to the common level of
observation which prevailed in the flat.

"it seems to be such a large company," she said, at one place. "great
big plate-glass windows and lots of clerks. the man i saw said they
hired ever so many people."

"it's not very hard to get work now," put in hanson, "if you look
right."

minnie, under the warming influence of carrie's good spirits and her
husband's somewhat conversational mood, began to tell carrie of some 
 
 ___________________________
 
of
the well-known things to see--things the enjoyment of which cost
nothing.

"you'd like to see michigan avenue. there are such fine houses. it is
such a fine street."

"where is 'h. r. jacob's'?" interrupted carrie, mentioning one of the
theatres devoted to melodrama which went by that name at the time.

"oh, it's not very far from here," answered minnie. "it's in halstead
street, right up here."

"how i'd like to go there. i crossed halstead street to-day, didn't i?"

at this there was a slight halt in the natural reply. thoughts are a
strangely permeating factor. at her suggestion of going to the theatre,
the unspoken shade of disapproval to the doing of those things which
involved the expenditure of money--shades of feeling which arose in the
mind of hanson and then in minnie--slightly affected the atmosphere of
the table. minnie answered "y
 
 ___________________________
 
poorly advocated here. the subject was put off for a
little while until hanson, through with his meal, took his paper and
went into the front room.

when they were alone, the two sisters began a somewhat freer
conversation, carrie interrupting it to hum a little, as they worked at
the dishes.

"i should like to walk up and see halstead street, if it isn't too far,"
said carrie, after a time. "why don't we go to the theatre to-night?"

"oh, i don't think sven would want to go to-night," returned minnie. "he
has to get up so early."

"he wouldn't mind--he'd enjoy it," said carrie.

"no, he doesn't go very often," returned minnie.

"well, i'd like to go," rejoined carrie. "let's you and me go."

minnie pondered a while, not upon whether she could or would go--for
that point was already negatively settled with her--but upon some means
of diverting the thoughts of her sister to some other topic.

"we'll go some other time," she said at last, finding no ready means of
escape.

carrie sensed the ro
 
 ___________________________
 
ot of the opposition at once.

"i have some money," she said. "you go with me."

minnie shook her head.

"he could go along," said carrie.

"no," returned minnie softly, and rattling the dishes to drown the
conversation. "he wouldn't."

it had been several years since minnie had seen carrie, and in that time
the latter's character had developed a few shades. naturally timid in
all things that related to her own advancement, and especially so when
without power or resource, her craving for pleasure was so strong that
it was the one stay of her nature. she would speak for that when silent
on all else.

"ask him," she pleaded softly.

minnie was thinking of the resource which carrie's board would add. it
would pay the rent and would make the subject of expenditure a l
 
 ___________________________
 
elf, without much complaining, to such
surroundings as its industry could make for it.

at last she yielded enough to ask hanson. it was a half-hearted
procedure without a shade of desire on her part.

"carrie wants us to go to the theatre," she said, looking in upon her
husband. hanson looked up from his paper, and they exchanged a mild
look, which said as plainly as anything: "this isn't what we expected."

"i don't care to go," he returned. "what does she want to see?"

"h. r. jacob's," said minnie.

he looked down at his paper and shook his head negatively.

when carrie saw how they looked upon her proposition, she gained a still
clearer feeling of their way of life. it weighed on her, but took no
definite form of opposition.

"i think i'll go down and stand at the foot of the stairs," she said,
after a time.

minnie made no objection to this, and carrie put on her hat and went
below.

"where has carrie gone?" asked hanson, coming back into the dining-room
when he heard the door close.


 
 ___________________________
 
"she said she was going down to the foot of the stairs," answered
minnie. "i guess she just wants to look out a while."

"she oughtn't to be thinking about spending her money on theatres
already, do you think?" he said.

"she just feels a little curious, i guess," ventured minnie. "everything
is so new."

"i don't know," said hanson, and went over to the baby, his forehead
slightly wrinkled.

he was thinking of a full career of vanity and wastefulness which a
young girl might indulge in, and wondering how carrie could contemplate
such a course when she had so little, as yet, with which to do.

on saturday carrie went out by herself--first toward the river, which
interested her, and then back along jackson street, which was then lined
by the pretty houses and fine lawns 
 
 ___________________________
 
op-girl with the exception of her
features. these were slightly more even than common, and gave her a
sweet, reserved, and pleasing appearance.

it is no easy thing to get up early in the morning when one is used to
sleeping until seven and eight, as carrie had been at home. she gained
some inkling of the character of hanson's life when, half asleep, she
looked out into the dining-room at six o'clock and saw him silently
finishing his breakfast. by the time she was dressed he was gone, and
she, minnie, and the baby ate together, the latter being just old enough
to sit in a high chair and disturb the dishes with a spoon. her spirits
were greatly subdued now when the fact of entering upon strange and
untried duties confronted her. only the ashes of all her fine fancies
were remaining--ashes still concealing, nevertheless, a few red embers
of hope. so subdued was she by her weakening nerves, that she ate quite
in silence, going over imaginary conceptions of the character of the
shoe company, th
 
 ___________________________
 
e nature of the work, her employer's attitude. she was
vaguely feeling that she would come in contact with the great owners,
that her work would be where grave, stylishly dressed men occasionally
look on.

"well, good luck," said minnie, when she was ready to go. they had
agreed it was best to walk, that morning at least, to see if she could
do it every day--sixty cents a week for car fare being quite an item
under the circumstances.

"i'll tell you how it goes to-night," said carrie.

once in the sunlit street, with labourers tramping by in either
direction, the horse-cars passing crowded to the rails with the small
clerks and floor help in the great wholesale houses, and men and women
generally coming out of doors and passin
 
 ___________________________
 
right," said drouet, going out.

thus was carrie's name bandied about in the most frivolous and gay of
places, and that also when the little toiler was bemoaning her narrow
lot, which was almost inseparable from the early stages of this, her
unfolding fate.




chapter vi

the machine and the maiden: a knight of to-day


at the flat that evening carrie felt a new phase of its atmosphere. the
fact that it was unchanged, while her feelings were different, increased
her knowledge of its character. minnie, after the good spirits carrie
manifested at first, expected a fair report. hanson supposed that carrie
would be satisfied.

"well," he said, as he came in from the hall in his working clothes, and
looked at carrie through the dining-room door, "how did you make out?"

"oh," said carrie, "it's pretty hard. i don't like it."

there was an air about her which showed plainer than any words that she
was both weary and disappointed.

"what sort of work is it?" he asked, lingering a moment as he turn
 
 ___________________________
 
ed
upon his heel to go into the bathroom.

"running a machine," answered carrie.

it was very evident that it did not concern him much, save from the side
of the flat's success. he was irritated a shade because it could not
have come about in the throw of fortune for carrie to be pleased.

minnie worked with less elation than she had just before carrie arrived.
the sizzle of the meat frying did not sound quite so pleasing now that
carrie had reported her discontent. to carrie, the one relief of the
whole day would have been a jolly home, a sympathetic reception, a
bright supper table, and some one to say: "oh, well, stand it a little
while. you will get something better," but now this was ashes. she
began to see that they looked upon her complaint as unwarranted, and
that she was suppos
 
 ___________________________
 
ed to work on and say nothing. she knew that she was
to pay four dollars for her board and room, and now she felt that it
would be an exceedingly gloomy round, living with these people.

minnie was no companion for her sister--she was too old. her thoughts
were staid and solemnly adapted to a condition. if hanson had any
pleasant thoughts or happy feelings he concealed them. he seemed to do
all his mental operations without the aid of physical expression. he was
as still as a deserted chamber. carrie, on the other hand, had the blood
of youth and some imagination. her day of love and the mysteries of
courtship were still ahead. she could think of things she would like to
do, of clothe
 
 ___________________________
 
f her day,
that drouet might come. now, when she saw how unreceptive these two
people were, she hoped he would not. she did not know exactly what she
would do or how she would explain to drouet, if he came. after supper
she changed her clothes. when she was trimly dressed she was rather a
sweet little being, with large eyes and a sad mouth. her face expressed
the mingled expectancy, dissatisfaction, and depression she felt. she
wandered about after the dishes were put away, talked a little with
minnie, and then decided to go down and stand in the door at the foot of
the stairs. if drouet came, she could meet him there. her face took on
the semblance of a look of happiness as she put on her hat to go below.

"carrie doesn't seem to like her place very well," said minnie to her
husband when the latter came out, paper in hand, to sit in the
dining-room a few minutes.

"she ought to keep it for a time, anyhow," said hanson. "has she gone
downstairs?"

"yes," said minnie.

"i'd tell her to keep i
 
 ___________________________
 
t if i were you. she might be here weeks without
getting another one."

minnie said she would, and hanson read his paper.

"if i were you," he said a little later, "i wouldn't let her stand in
the door down there. it don't look good."

"i'll tell her," said minnie.

the life of the streets continued for a long time to interest carrie.
she never wearied of wondering where the people in the cars were going
or what their enjoyments were. her imagination trod a very narrow round,
always winding up at points which concerned money, looks, clothes, or
enjoyment. she would have a far-off thought of columbia city now and
then, or an irritating rush of feeling concerning her experiences of the
present day, but, on the whole, the little world about her enlisted her
 
 ___________________________
 
 it aroused in her the first shade of real
antipathy to him. she knew now that she did not like him. he was
suspicious.

a thought will colour a world for us. the flow of carrie's meditations
had been disturbed, and hanson had not long gone upstairs before she
followed. she had realised with the lapse of the quarter hours that
drouet was not coming, and somehow she felt a little resentful, a little
as if she had been forsaken--was not good enough. she went upstairs,
where everything was silent. minnie was sewing by a lamp at the table.
hanson had already turned in for the night. in her weariness and
disappointment carrie did no more than announce that she was going to
bed.

"yes, you'd better," returned minnie. "you've got to get up early, you
know."

the morning was no better. hanson was just going out the door as carrie
came from her room. minnie tried to talk with her during breakfast, but
there was not much of interest which they could mutually discuss. as on
the previous morning, carrie
 
 ___________________________
 
bed one night before hanson.

transplantation is not always successful in the matter of flowers or
maidens. it requires sometimes a richer soil, a better atmosphere to
continue even a natural growth. it would have been better if her
acclimatization had been more gradual--less rigid. she would have done
better if she had not secured a position so quickly, and had seen more
of the city which she constantly troubled to know about.

on the first morning it rained she found that she had no umbrella.
minnie loaned her one of hers, which was worn and faded. there was the
kind of vanity in carrie that troubled at this. she went to one of the
great department stores and bought herself one, using a dollar and a
quarter of her small store to pay for it.

"what did you do that for, carrie?" asked minnie, when she saw it.

"oh, i need one," said carrie.

"you foolish girl."

carrie resented this, though she did not reply. she was not going to be
a common shop-girl, she thought; they need not think it, ei
 
 ___________________________
 
ther.

on the first saturday night carrie paid her board, four dollars. minnie
had a quaver of conscience as she took it, but did not know how to
explain to hanson if she took less. that worthy gave up just four
dollars less toward the household expenses with a smile of satisfaction.
he contemplated increasing his building and loan payments. as for
carrie, she studied over the problem of finding clothes and amusement on
fifty cents a week. she brooded over this until she was in a state of
mental rebellion.

"i'm going up the street for a walk," she said after supper.

"no
 
 ___________________________
 
t alone, are you?" asked hanson.

"yes," returned carrie.

"i wouldn't," said minnie.

"i want to see _something_," said carrie, and by the tone she put into
the last word they realised for the first time she was not pleased with
them.

"what's the matter with her?" asked hanson, when she went into the front
room to get her hat.

"i don't know," said minnie.

"well, she ought to know better than to want to go out alone."

carrie did not go very far, after all. she returned and stood in the
door. the next day they went out to garfield park, but it did not please
her. she did not look well enough. in the shop next day she heard the
highly coloured reports which girls give of their trivial amusements.
they had been happy. on several days it rained and she used up car fare.
one night she got thoroughly soaked, going to catch the car at van buren
stree
 
 ___________________________
 
ded young
fellows of the shop. not one of them had a show of refinement. she saw
only their workday side.

there came a day when the first premonitory blast of winter swept over
the city. it scudded the fleecy clouds in the heavens, trailed long,
thin streamers of smoke from the tall stacks, and raced about the
streets and corners in sharp and sudden puffs. carrie now felt the
problem of winter clothes. what was she to do? she had no winter jacket,
no hat, no shoes. it was difficult to speak to minnie about this, but at
last she summoned the courage.

"i don't know what i'm going to do about clothes," she said one evening
when they were together. "i need a hat."

minnie looked serious.

"why don't you keep part of your money and buy yourself one?" she
suggested, worried over the situation which the withholding of carrie's
money would create.

"i'd like to for a week or so, if you don't mind," ventured carrie.

"could you pay two dollars?" asked minnie.

carrie readily acquiesced, glad to esc
 
 ___________________________
 
ape the trying situation, and
liberal now that she saw a way out. she was elated and began figuring at
once. she needed a hat first of all. how minnie explained to hanson she
never knew. he said nothing at all, but there were thoughts in the air
which left disagreeable impressions.

the new arrangement might have worked if sickness had not intervened. it
blew up cold after a rain one afternoon when carrie was still without a
jacket. she came out of the warm shop at six and shivered as the wind
struck her. in the morning she was sneezing, and going down town made it
worse. that day her bones ached and she felt light-headed. towards
evening she
 
 ___________________________
 
 felt very ill, and when she reached home was not hungry.
minnie noticed her drooping actions and asked her about herself.

"i don't know," said carrie. "i feel real bad."

she hung about the stove, suffered a chattering chill, and went to bed
sick. the next morning she was thoroughly feverish.

minnie was truly distressed at this, but maintained a kindly demeanour.
hanson said perhaps she had better go back home for a while. when she
got up after three days, it was taken for granted that her position was
lost. the winter was near at hand, she had no clothes, and now she was
out of work.

"i don't know," said carrie; "i'll go down monday and see if i can't get
something."

if anything, her efforts were more poorly rewarded on this trial than
the last. her clothes were nothing suitable for fal
 
 ___________________________
 
l wearing. her last
money she had spent for a hat. for three days she wandered about,
utterly dispirited. the attitude of the flat was fast becoming
unbearable. she hated to think of going back there each evening. hanson
was so cold. she knew it could not last much longer. shortly she would
have to give up and go home.

on the fourth day she was down town all day, having borrowed ten cents
for lunch from minnie. she had applied in the cheapest kind of places
without success. she even answered for a waitress in a small restaurant
where she saw a card in the window, but they wanted an experienced girl.
she moved through the thick throng of strangers, utterly subdued in
spirit. suddenly a hand pulled her arm and turned her about.

"well, well!" said a voice. in the first glance she beheld drouet. he
was not only rosy-cheeked, but radiant. he was the essence of sunshine
and good-humour. "why, how are you,
 
 ___________________________
 
 carrie had gone, he felicitated himself upon her good opinion. by
george, it was a shame young girls had to be knocked around like that.
cold weather coming on and no clothes. tough. he would go around to
fitzgerald and moy's and get a cigar. it made him feel light of foot as
he thought about her.

carrie reached home in high good spirits, which she could scarcely
conceal. the possession of the money involved a number of points which
perplexed her seriously. how should she buy any clothes when minnie knew
that she had no money? she had no sooner entered the flat than this
point was settled for her. it could not be done. she could think of no
way of explaining.

"how did you come out?" asked minnie, referring to the day.

carrie had none of the small deception which could feel one thing and
say something directly opposed. she would prevaricate, but it would be
in the line of her feelings at least. so instead of complaining when she
felt so good, she said:

"i have the promise of something."

 
 ___________________________
 

"where?"

"at the boston store."

"is it sure promised?" questioned minnie.

"well, i'm to find out to-morrow," returned carrie, disliking to draw
out a lie any longer than was necessary.

minnie felt the atmosphere of good feeling which carrie brought with
her. she felt now was the time to express to carrie the state of
hanson's feeling about her entire chicago venture.

"if you shouldn't get it--" she paused, troubled for an easy way.

"if i don't get something pretty soon, i think i'll go home."

minnie saw her chance.

"sven thinks it might be best for the winter, anyhow."

the situation flashed on carrie at once. they were unwilling to keep her
any longer, out of work. she did not 
 
 ___________________________
 
blame minnie, she did not blame
hanson very much. now, as she sat there digesting the remark, she was
glad she had drouet's money.

"yes," she said after a few moments, "i thought of doing that."

she did not explain that the thought, however, had aroused all the
antagonism of her nature. columbia city, what was there for her? she
knew its dull, little round by heart. here was the great, mysterious
city which was still a magnet for her. what she had seen only suggested
its possibilities. now to turn back on
 
 ___________________________
 
 it and live the little old life
out there--she almost exclaimed against the thought.

she had reached home early and went in the front room to think. what
could she do? she could not buy new shoes and wear them here. she would
need to save part of the twenty to pay her fare home. she did not want
to borrow of minnie for that. and yet, how could she explain where she
even got that money? if she could only get enough to let her out easy.

she went over the tangle again and again. here, in the morning, drouet
would expect to see her in a new jacket, and that couldn't be. the
hansons expected her to go home, and she wanted to get away, and yet she
did not want to go home. in the light of the way they would look on her
getting money without work, the taking of it now seemed dreadful. she
began to be ashamed. th
 
 ___________________________
 
e whole situation depressed her. it was all so
clear when she was with drouet. now it was all so tangled, so
hopeless--much worse than it was before, because she had the semblance
of aid in her hand which she could not use.

her spirits sank so that at supper minnie felt that she must have had
another hard day. carrie finally decided that she would give the money
back. it was wrong to take it. she would go down in the morning and hunt
for work. at noon she would meet drouet as agreed and tell him. at this
decision her heart sank, until she was the old carrie of distress.

curiously, she could not hold the money in her hand without feeling some
relief. even after all her depressing conclusions, she could sweep away
all thought about the matter and then the 
 
 ___________________________
 
a
little and then help her get something. he really imagined that he
would. he would be out on the road and she could be working.

"now, i'll tell you what you do," he said, "you go out there and get
whatever you want and come away."

she thought a long time about this. finally she agreed. he would come
out as far as peoria street and wait for her. she was to meet him at
half-past eight. at half-past five she reached home, and at six her
determination was hardened.

"so you didn't get it?" said minnie, referring to carrie's story of the
boston store.

carrie looked at her out of the corner of her eye. "no," she answered.

"i don't think you'd better try any more this fall," said minnie.

carrie said nothing.

when hanson came home he wore the same inscrutable demeanour. he washed
in silence and went off to read his paper. at dinner carrie felt a
little nervous. the strain of her own plans was considerable, and the
feeling that she was not welcome here was strong.

"didn't find anything, eh?"
 
 ___________________________
 
that it was a burden to have
her here dwelling in his mind. she would have to go home, that was all.
once she was away, there would be no more coming back in the spring.

carrie was afraid of what she was going to do, but she was relieved to
know that this condition was ending. they would not care. hanson
particularly would be glad when she went. he would not care what became
of her.

after dinner she went into the bathroom, where they could not disturb
her, and wrote a little note.

"good-bye, minnie," it read. "i'm not going home. i'm going to stay in
chicago a little while and look for work. don't worry. i'll be all
right."

in the front room hanson was reading his paper. as usual, she helped
minnie clear away the dishes and straighten up. then she said:

"i guess i'll stand down at the door a little while." she could scarcely
prevent her voice from trembling.

minnie remembered hanson's remonstrance.

"sven doesn't think it looks good to stand down there," she said.

"doesn't he?" said c
 
 ___________________________
 
arrie. "i won't do it any more after this."

she put on her hat and fidgeted around the table in the little bedroom,
wondering where to slip the note. finally she put it under minnie's
hair-brush.

when she had closed the hall-door, she paused a moment and wondered what
they would think. some thought of the queerness of her deed affected
her. she went slowly down the stairs. she looked back up the lighted
step, and then affected to stroll up the street. when she reached the
corner she quickened her pace.

as she was hurrying away, hanson came back to his wife.

"is carrie down at the door again?" he asked.

"yes," said minnie; "she said she wasn't going to do it any more."

 
 ___________________________
 
en this jangle of free-will and instinct shall have been
adjusted, when perfect understanding has given the former the power to
replace the latter entirely, man will no longer vary. the needle of
understanding will yet point steadfast and unwavering to the distant
pole of truth.

in carrie--as in how many of our worldlings do they not?--instinct and
reason, desire and understanding, were at war for the mastery. she
followed whither her craving led. she was as yet more drawn than she
drew.

when minnie found the note next morning, after a night of mingled wonder
and anxiety, which was not exactly touched by yearning, sorrow, or love,
she exclaimed: "well, what do you think of that?"

"what?" said hanson.

"sister carrie has gone to live somewhere else."

hanson jumped out of bed with more celerity than he usually displayed
and looked at the note. the only indication of his thoughts came in the
form of a little clicking sound made by his tongue; the sound some
people make when they wish to urg
 
 ___________________________
 
e on a horse.

"where do you suppose she's gone to?" said minnie, thoroughly aroused.

"i don't know," a touch of cynicism lighting his eye. "now she has gone
and done it."

minnie moved her head in a puzzled way.

"oh, oh," she said, "she doesn't know what she has done."

"well," said hanson, after a while, sticking his hands out before him,
"what can you do?"

minnie's womanly nature was higher than this. she figured the
possibilities in such cases.

"oh," she said at last, "poor sister carrie!"

at the time of this particular conversation, which occurred at 5 a. m.,
that little soldier of fortune was sleeping a rather troubled sleep in
her new room, alone.

carrie's new state was remarkable in that she saw possibilities in it.
she was no sensualist, longing to drowse sleepily in the lap of luxury.
she turned about, troubled by her daring, glad of her relea
 
 ___________________________
 
s were still bright. out wabash avenue they
strolled, drouet still pouring forth his volume of small information. he
had carrie's arm in his, and held it closely as he explained. once in a
while, after some witticism, he would look down, and his eyes would meet
hers. at last they came to the steps, and carrie stood up on the first
one, her head now coming even with his own. he took her hand and held it
genially. he looked steadily at her as she glanced about, warmly musing.

at about that hour, minnie was soundly sleeping, after a long evening of
troubled thought. she had her elbow in an awkward position under her
side. the muscles so held irritated a few nerves, and now a vague scene
floated in on the drowsy mind. she fancied she and carrie were somewhere
beside an old coal-mine. she could see the tall runway and the heap of
earth and coal cast out. there was a deep pit, into which they were
looking; they could see the curious wet stones far down where the wall
disappeared in vague shadows.
 
 ___________________________
 
 an old basket, used for descending, was
hanging there, fastened by a worn rope.

"let's get in," said carrie.

"oh, no," said minnie.

"yes, come on," said carrie.

she began to pull the basket over, and now, in spite of all protest, she
had swung over and was going down.

"carrie," she called, "carrie, come back;" but carrie was far down now
and the shadow had swallowed her completely.

she moved her arm.

now the mystic scenery merged queerly and the place was by waters she
had never seen. they were upon some board or ground or something that
reached far out, and at the end of this was carrie. they looked about,
and now th
 
 ___________________________
 
e thing was sinking, and minnie heard the low sip of the
encroaching water.

"come on, carrie," she called, but carrie was reaching farther out. she
seemed to recede, and now it was difficult to call to her.

"carrie," she called, "carrie," but her own voice sounded far away, and
the strange waters were blurring everything. she came away suffering as
though she had lost something. she was more inexpressibly sad than she
had ever been in life.

it was this way through many shifts of the tired brain, those curious
phantoms of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he spirit slipping in, blurring strange scenes, one with
the other. the last one made her cry out, for carrie was slipping away
somewhere over a rock, and her fingers had let loose and she had seen
her falling.

"minnie! what's the matter? here, wake up," said hanson, disturbed, and
shaking her by the shoulder.

"wha--what's the matter?" said minnie, drowsily.

"wake up," he said, "and turn over. you're talking in your sleep."

a week or so later drouet strolled into fitzgerald and moy's, spruce in
dress and manner.

"hello, charley," said hurstwood, looking out from his office door.

drouet strolled over and looked in upon the manager at his desk.

"when do you go out on the road again?" he inquired.

"pretty soon," said drouet.

"haven't seen much of you this trip," said hurstwood.

"well, i've been busy," said drouet.

they talked some 