ie pye and julia bell did
not “speak” for three months, because josie pye had told bessie wright
that julia bell’s bow when she got up to recite made her think of a
chicken jerking its head, and bessie told julia. none of the sloanes
would have any dealings with the bells, because the bells had declared
that the sloanes had too much to do in the program, and the sloanes had
retorted that the bells were not capable of doing the little they had to
do properly. finally, charlie sloane fought moody spurgeon macpherson,
because moody spurgeon had said that anne shirley put on airs about
her recitations, and moody spurgeon was “licked”; consequently moody
spurgeon’s sister, ella may, would not “speak” to anne shirley all the
rest of the winter. with the exception of these trifling frictions, work
in miss stacy’s little kingdom went on with regularity and smoothness.

the winter weeks slipped by. it was an unusually mild winter, with so
little snow that anne and diana could go to school nearly every
 
 ___________________________
 
h after all and
mrs. allan wants us to decorate it,” cried anne.

“no. charlotte’s beau won’t agree to that, because nobody ever has been
married in the church yet, and he thinks it would seem too much like a
funeral. it’s too mean, because it would be such fun. guess again.”

“jane’s mother is going to let her have a birthday party?”

diana shook her head, her black eyes dancing with merriment.

“i can’t think what it can be,” said anne in despair, “unless it’s that
moody spurgeon macpherson saw you home from prayer meeting last night.
did he?”

“i should think not,” exclaimed diana indignantly. “i wouldn’t be likely
to boast of it if he did, the horrid creature! i knew you couldn’t guess
it. mother had a letter from aunt josephine today, and aunt josephine
wants you and me to go to town next tuesday and stop with her for the
exhibition. there!”

“oh, diana,” whispered anne, finding it necessary to lean up against a
maple tree for support, “do you really mean it