at green gables was a cheerful
apartment--or would have been cheerful if it had not been so painfully
clean as to give it something of the appearance of an unused parlor. its
windows looked east and west; through the west one, looking out on
the back yard, came a flood of mellow june sunlight; but the east one,
whence you got a glimpse of the bloom white cherry-trees in the left
orchard and nodding, slender birches down in the hollow by the brook,
was greened over by a tangle of vines. here sat marilla cuthbert, when
she sat at all, always slightly distrustful of sunshine, which seemed to
her too dancing and irresponsible a thing for a world which was meant to
be taken seriously; and here she sat now, knitting, and the table behind
her was laid for supper.

mrs. rachel, before she had fairly closed the door, had taken a mental
note of everything that was on that table. there were three plates laid,
so that marilla must be expecting some one home with matthew to tea; but
the dishes were everyday dishes
 
 ___________________________
 
d one kind of cake, so that the expected company could not be any
particular company. yet what of matthew’s white collar and the sorrel
mare? mrs. rachel was getting fairly dizzy with this unusual mystery
about quiet, unmysterious green gables.

“good evening, rachel,” marilla said briskly. “this is a real fine
evening, isn’t it? won’t you sit down? how are all your folks?”

something that for lack of any other name might be called friendship
existed and always had existed between marilla cuthbert and mrs. rachel,
in spite of--or perhaps because of--their dissimilarity.

marilla was a tall, thin woman, with angles and without curves; her dark
hair showed some gray streaks and was always twisted up in a hard little
knot behind with two wire hairpins stuck aggressively through it. she
looked like a woman of narrow experience and rigid conscience, which she
was; but there was a saving something about her mouth which, if it had
been ever so slightly developed, might have been considered indi
 
 ___________________________
 
hing--much the same feeling that came over him when he had to kill
a lamb or calf or any other innocent little creature.

the yard was quite dark as they turned into it and the poplar leaves
were rustling silkily all round it.

“listen to the trees talking in their sleep,” she whispered, as he
lifted her to the ground. “what nice dreams they must have!”

then, holding tightly to the carpet-bag which contained “all her worldly
goods,” she followed him into the house.




chapter iii. marilla cuthbert is surprised


|marilla came briskly forward as matthew opened the door. but when her
eyes fell on the odd little figure in the stiff, ugly dress, with the
long braids of red hair and the eager, luminous eyes, she stopped short
in amazement.

“matthew cuthbert, who’s that?” she ejaculated. “where is the boy?”

“there wasn’t any boy,” said matthew wretchedly. “there was only _her_.”

he nodded at the child, remembering that he had never even asked her
name.

“no boy! but th
 
 ___________________________
 
s well as can be expected, thank you,” said anne smilelessly. a
blight seemed to have descended on her.

“i suppose we’ll stay a little while to rest the mare,” said marilla,
“but i promised matthew i’d be home early. the fact is, mrs. spencer,
there’s been a queer mistake somewhere, and i’ve come over to see where
it is. we send word, matthew and i, for you to bring us a boy from the
asylum. we told your brother robert to tell you we wanted a boy ten or
eleven years old.”

“marilla cuthbert, you don’t say so!” said mrs. spencer in distress.
“why, robert sent word down by his daughter nancy and she said you
wanted a girl--didn’t she flora jane?” appealing to her daughter who had
come out to the steps.

“she certainly did, miss cuthbert,” corroborated flora jane earnestly.

“i’m dreadful sorry,” said mrs. spencer. “it’s too bad; but it certainly
wasn’t my fault, you see, miss cuthbert. i did the best i could and i
thought i was following your instructions. 
 
 ___________________________
 
thew
reassuringly. “only be as good and kind to her as you can without
spoiling her. i kind of think she’s one of the sort you can do anything
with if you only get her to love you.”

marilla sniffed, to express her contempt for matthew’s opinions
concerning anything feminine, and walked off to the dairy with the
pails.

“i won’t tell her tonight that she can stay,” she reflected, as she
strained the milk into the creamers. “she’d be so excited that she
wouldn’t sleep a wink. marilla cuthbert, you’re fairly in for it. did
you ever suppose you’d see the day when you’d be adopting an orphan
girl? it’s surprising enough; but not so surprising as that matthew
should be at the bottom of it, him that always seemed to have such a
mortal dread of little girls. anyhow, we’ve decided on the experiment
and goodness only knows what will come of it.”




chapter vii. anne says her prayers


|when marilla took anne up to bed that night she said stiffly:

“now, anne, i noticed last n
 
 ___________________________
 
 in sympathy, and fled through the
hall and up the stairs like a whirlwind. a subdued slam above told that
the door of the east gable had been shut with equal vehemence.

“well, i don’t envy you your job bringing _that_ up, marilla,” said mrs.
rachel with unspeakable solemnity.

marilla opened her lips to say she knew not what of apology or
deprecation. what she did say was a surprise to herself then and ever
afterwards.

“you shouldn’t have twitted her about her looks, rachel.”

“marilla cuthbert, you don’t mean to say that you are upholding her in
such a terrible display of temper as we’ve just seen?” demanded mrs.
rachel indignantly.

“no,” said marilla slowly, “i’m not trying to excuse her. she’s been
very naughty and i’ll have to give her a talking to about it. but we
must make allowances for her. she’s never been taught what is right. and
you _were_ too hard on her, rachel.”

marilla could not help tacking on that last sentence, although she was
again surprise
 
 ___________________________
 
f the avonlea people were on
premier’s side of politics; hence on the night of the meeting nearly
all the men and a goodly proportion of the women had gone to town thirty
miles away. mrs. rachel lynde had gone too. mrs. rachel lynde was a
red-hot politician and couldn’t have believed that the political rally
could be carried through without her, although she was on the opposite
side of politics. so she went to town and took her husband--thomas would
be useful in looking after the horse--and marilla cuthbert with her.
marilla had a sneaking interest in politics herself, and as she thought
it might be her only chance to see a real live premier, she promptly
took it, leaving anne and matthew to keep house until her return the
following day.

hence, while marilla and mrs. rachel were enjoying themselves hugely
at the mass meeting, anne and matthew had the cheerful kitchen at green
gables all to themselves. a bright fire was glowing in the old-fashioned
waterloo stove and blue-white frost crystals were
 
 ___________________________
 
t gasp of relief.

“i’m afraid my imagination is a little rusty--it’s so long since i used
it,” she said. “i dare say your claim to sympathy is just as strong as
mine. it all depends on the way we look at it. sit down here and tell me
about yourself.”

“i am very sorry i can’t,” said anne firmly. “i would like to, because
you seem like an interesting lady, and you might even be a kindred
spirit although you don’t look very much like it. but it is my duty to
go home to miss marilla cuthbert. miss marilla cuthbert is a very kind
lady who has taken me to bring up properly. she is doing her best, but
it is very discouraging work. you must not blame her because i jumped on
the bed. but before i go i do wish you would tell me if you will forgive
diana and stay just as long as you meant to in avonlea.”

“i think perhaps i will if you will come over and talk to me
occasionally,” said miss barry.

that evening miss barry gave diana a silver bangle bracelet and told the
senior member
 
 ___________________________
 
sn’t want advice and she
thinks she knows more about bringing children up than i do for all
she’s an old maid. but that’s always the way. folks that has brought up
children know that there’s no hard and fast method in the world that’ll
suit every child. but them as never have think it’s all as plain and
easy as rule of three--just set your three terms down so fashion, and
the sum ‘ll work out correct. but flesh and blood don’t come under the
head of arithmetic and that’s where marilla cuthbert makes her mistake.
i suppose she’s trying to cultivate a spirit of humility in anne by
dressing her as she does; but it’s more likely to cultivate envy and
discontent. i’m sure the child must feel the difference between her
clothes and the other girls’. but to think of matthew taking notice of
it! that man is waking up after being asleep for over sixty years.”

marilla knew all the following fortnight that matthew had something on
his mind, but what it was she could not guess, until c
 
 ___________________________
 
 fresh young
lives. miss barry was a rather selfish old lady, if the truth must
be told, and had never cared much for anybody but herself. she valued
people only as they were of service to her or amused her. anne had
amused her, and consequently stood high in the old lady’s good graces.
but miss barry found herself thinking less about anne’s quaint speeches
than of her fresh enthusiasms, her transparent emotions, her little
winning ways, and the sweetness of her eyes and lips.

“i thought marilla cuthbert was an old fool when i heard she’d adopted
a girl out of an orphan asylum,” she said to herself, “but i guess she
didn’t make much of a mistake after all. if i’d a child like anne in the
house all the time i’d be a better and happier woman.”

anne and diana found the drive home as pleasant as the drive
in--pleasanter, indeed, since there was the delightful consciousness of
home waiting at the end of it. it was sunset when they passed through
white sands and turned into the shore r
 
 ___________________________
 
eat help to you.”

“she is,” said marilla, “and she’s real steady and reliable now. i used
to be afraid she’d never get over her featherbrained ways, but she has
and i wouldn’t be afraid to trust her in anything now.”

“i never would have thought she’d have turned out so well that first day
i was here three years ago,” said mrs. rachel. “lawful heart, shall i
ever forget that tantrum of hers! when i went home that night i says to
thomas, says i, ‘mark my words, thomas, marilla cuthbert ‘ll live to
rue the step she’s took.’ but i was mistaken and i’m real glad of it. i
ain’t one of those kind of people, marilla, as can never be brought to
own up that they’ve made a mistake. no, that never was my way, thank
goodness. i did make a mistake in judging anne, but it weren’t no
wonder, for an odder, unexpecteder witch of a child there never was in
this world, that’s what. there was no ciphering her out by the rules
that worked with other children. it’s nothing short
 
 ___________________________
 
t


|anne had her “good” summer and enjoyed it wholeheartedly. she and diana
fairly lived outdoors, reveling in all the delights that lover’s lane
and the dryad’s bubble and willowmere and victoria island afforded.
marilla offered no objections to anne’s gypsyings. the spencervale
doctor who had come the night minnie may had the croup met anne at the
house of a patient one afternoon early in vacation, looked her over
sharply, screwed up his mouth, shook his head, and sent a message to
marilla cuthbert by another person. it was:

“keep that redheaded girl of yours in the open air all summer and don’t
let her read books until she gets more spring into her step.”

this message frightened marilla wholesomely. she read anne’s death
warrant by consumption in it unless it was scrupulously obeyed. as a
result, anne had the golden summer of her life as far as freedom and
frolic went. she walked, rowed, berried, and dreamed to her heart’s
content; and when september came she was bright-eyed 
 
 ___________________________
 
run over and see what she wants.”

anne ran down the clover slope like a deer, and disappeared in the firry
shadows of the haunted wood. mrs. lynde looked after her indulgently.

“there’s a good deal of the child about her yet in some ways.”

“there’s a good deal more of the woman about her in others,” retorted
marilla, with a momentary return of her old crispness.

but crispness was no longer marilla’s distinguishing characteristic. as
mrs. lynde told her thomas that night.

“marilla cuthbert has got _mellow_. that’s what.”

anne went to the little avonlea graveyard the next evening to put fresh
flowers on matthew’s grave and water the scotch rosebush. she lingered
there until dusk, liking the peace and calm of the little place,
with its poplars whose rustle was like low, friendly speech, and its
whispering grasses growing at will among the graves. when she finally
left it and walked down the long hill that sloped to the lake of shining
waters it was past sunset and all avonle