h the church that is in their house.

16:20 all the brethren greet you. greet ye one another with
an holy kiss.

16:21 the salutation of me paul with mine own hand.

16:22 if any man love not the lord jesus christ, let him be
anathema maranatha.

16:23 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you.

16:24 my love be with you all in christ jesus. amen.




the second epistle of paul the apostle to the corinthians


1:1 paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the will of god, and timothy
our brother, unto the church of god which is at corinth, with all the
saints which are in all achaia: 1:2 grace be to you and peace from god
our father, and from the lord jesus christ.

1:3 blessed be god, even the father of our lord jesus christ, the
father of mercies, and the god of all comfort; 1:4 who comforteth us
in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are
in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of
god.

1:5 for as the suffe
 
 ___________________________
 
ny man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.

3:15 yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

3:16 now the lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means.
the lord be with you all.

3:17 the salutation of paul with mine own hand, which is the token in
every epistle: so i write.

3:18 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all. amen.




the first epistle of paul the apostle to timothy


1:1 paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the commandment of god our
saviour, and lord jesus christ, which is our hope; 1:2 unto timothy,
my own son in the faith: grace, mercy, and peace, from god our father
and jesus christ our lord.

1:3 as i besought thee to abide still at ephesus, when i went into
macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other
doctrine, 1:4 neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies,
which minister questions, rather than godly edifyin
 
 ___________________________
 
15 this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that
christ jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom i am chief.

1:16 howbeit for this cause i obtained mercy, that in me first jesus
christ might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

1:17 now unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
god, be honour and glory for ever and ever. amen.

1:18 this charge i commit unto thee, son timothy, according to the
prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest war a
good warfare; 1:19 holding faith, and a good conscience; which some
having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck: 1:20 of whom is
hymenaeus and alexander; whom i have delivered unto satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme.

2:1 i exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; 2:2 for
kings, and for all that are in 
 
 ___________________________
 
; whom no man hath
seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. amen.

6:17 charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living god, who
giveth us richly all things to enjoy; 6:18 that they do good, that
they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; 6:19 laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

6:20 o timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so
called: 6:21 which some professing have erred concerning the faith.
grace be with thee. amen.




the second epistle of paul the apostle to timothy


1:1 paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the will of god, according to
the promise of life which is in christ jesus, 1:2 to timothy,
my dearly beloved son: grace, mercy, and peace, from god the father
and christ jesus
 
 ___________________________
 
igent to
come unto me to nicopolis: for i have determined there to winter.

3:13 bring zenas the lawyer and apollos on their journey diligently,
that nothing be wanting unto them.

3:14 and let our's also learn to maintain good works for necessary
uses, that they be not unfruitful.

3:15 all that are with me salute thee. greet them that love us in the
faith. grace be with you all. amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to philemon


1:1 paul, a prisoner of jesus christ, and timothy our brother, unto
philemon our dearly beloved, and fellowlabourer, 1:2 and to our
beloved apphia, and archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the church in
thy house: 1:3 grace to you, and peace, from god our father and the
lord jesus christ.

1:4 i thank my god, making mention of thee always in my prayers, 1:5
hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the lord jesus,
and toward all saints; 1:6 that the communication of thy faith may
become effectual by the acknowledging of eve
 
 ___________________________
 


13:20 now the god of peace, that brought again from the dead our lord
jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, 13:21 make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight,
through jesus christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. amen.

13:22 and i beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation: for
i have written a letter unto you in few words.

13:23 know ye that our brother timothy is set at liberty; with whom,
if he come shortly, i will see you.

13:24 salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the saints.

they of italy salute you.

13:25 grace be with you all. amen.




the general epistle of james


1:1 james, a servant of god and of the lord jesus christ,
to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.

1:2 my brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers
temptations; 1:3 knowing this, that the trying of your faith worket