he called them: and they left their father
zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.

1:21 and they went into capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day
he entered into the synagogue, and taught.

1:22 and they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as
one that had authority, and not as the scribes.

1:23 and there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit;
and he cried out, 1:24 saying, let us alone; what have we to do with
thee, thou jesus of nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? i know thee
who thou art, the holy one of god.

1:25 and jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of
him.

1:26 and when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud
voice, he came out of him.

1:27 and they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among
themselves, saying, what thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for
with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him.

1:28 and immediately
 
 ___________________________
 
 among you: but whosoever will be great
among you, shall be your minister: 10:44 and whosoever of you will be
the chiefest, shall be servant of all.

10:45 for even the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

10:46 and they came to jericho: and as he went out of jericho with his
disciples and a great number of people, blind bartimaeus, the son of
timaeus, sat by the highway side begging.

10:47 and when he heard that it was jesus of nazareth, he began to cry
out, and say, jesus, thou son of david, have mercy on me.

10:48 and many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried
the more a great deal, thou son of david, have mercy on me.

10:49 and jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called. and they
call the blind man, saying unto him, be of good comfort, rise; he
calleth thee.

10:50 and he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to jesus.

10:51 and jesus answered and said unto him, what wilt thou tha
 
 ___________________________
 
of the hill whereon their city was built,
that they might cast him down headlong.

4:30 but he passing through the midst of them went his way, 4:31 and
came down to capernaum, a city of galilee, and taught them on the
sabbath days.

4:32 and they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with
power.

4:33 and in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an
unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice, 4:34 saying, let us
alone; what have we to do with thee, thou jesus of nazareth? art thou
come to destroy us? i know thee who thou art; the holy one of god.

4:35 and jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of
him.

and when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him,
and hurt him not.

4:36 and they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying,
what a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the
unclean spirits, and they come out.

4:37 and the fame of him went out into every place of the country
round ab
 
 ___________________________
 
mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on: 18:33 and they shall
scourge him, and put him to death: and the third day he shall rise
again.

18:34 and they understood none of these things: and this saying was
hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken.

18:35 and it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto jericho, a
certain blind man sat by the way side begging: 18:36 and hearing the
multitude pass by, he asked what it meant.

18:37 and they told him, that jesus of nazareth passeth by.

18:38 and he cried, saying, jesus, thou son of david, have mercy on
me.

18:39 and they which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his
peace: but he cried so much the more, thou son of david, have mercy on
me.

18:40 and jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and
when he was come near, he asked him, 18:41 saying, what wilt thou that
i shall do unto thee? and he said, lord, that i may receive my sight.

18:42 and jesus said unto him, receive thy 
 
 ___________________________
 
lf drew near, and went with them.

24:16 but their eyes were holden that they should not know him.

24:17 and he said unto them, what manner of communications are these
that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?  24:18 and the
one of them, whose name was cleopas, answering said unto him, art thou
only a stranger in jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are
come to pass there in these days?  24:19 and he said unto them, what
things? and they said unto him, concerning jesus of nazareth, which
was a prophet mighty in deed and word before god and all the people:
24:20 and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be
condemned to death, and have crucified him.

24:21 but we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed
israel: and beside all this, to day is the third day since these
things were done.

24:22 yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished,
which were early at the sepulchre; 24:23 and when they found not his
body, they
 
 ___________________________
 
 brook cedron, where was a garden, into the which he
entered, and his disciples.

18:2 and judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place: for jesus
ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples.

18:3 judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the
chief priests and pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches
and weapons.

18:4 jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him,
went forth, and said unto them, whom seek ye?  18:5 they answered him,
jesus of nazareth. jesus saith unto them, i am he.

and judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.

18:6 as soon then as he had said unto them, i am he, they went
backward, and fell to the ground.

18:7 then asked he them again, whom seek ye? and they said, jesus of
nazareth.

18:8 jesus answered, i have told you that i am he: if therefore ye
seek me, let these go their way: 18:9 that the saying might be
fulfilled, which he spake, of them which thou gavest me have i lost
none.

18:10 then si
 
 ___________________________
 
ll i crucify your king? the chief priests
answered, we have no king but caesar.

19:16 then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. and
they took jesus, and led him away.

19:17 and he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the
place of a skull, which is called in the hebrew golgotha: 19:18 where
they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and
jesus in the midst.

19:19 and pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. and the
writing was jesus of nazareth the king of the jews.

19:20 this title then read many of the jews: for the place where jesus
was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in hebrew, and
greek, and latin.

19:21 then said the chief priests of the jews to pilate, write not,
the king of the jews; but that he said, i am king of the jews.

19:22 pilate answered, what i have written i have written.

19:23 then the soldiers, when they had crucified jesus, took his
garments, and made four parts, to every soldier
 
 ___________________________
 
 2:18 and on my servants and on my handmaidens i will
pour out in those days of my spirit; and they shall prophesy: 2:19 and
i will shew wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath;
blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke: 2:20 the sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and notable
day of the lord come: 2:21 and it shall come to pass, that whosoever
shall call on the name of the lord shall be saved.

2:22 ye men of israel, hear these words; jesus of nazareth, a man
approved of god among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which god
did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know: 2:23 him,
being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of god,
ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: 2:24 whom
god hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death: because it was
not possible that he should be holden of it.

2:25 for david speaketh concerning him, i foresaw the lord always
before my face, for h
 
 ___________________________
 
ot able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which he spake.

6:11 then they suborned men, which said, we have heard him speak
blasphemous words against moses, and against god.

6:12 and they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes,
and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the council,
6:13 and set up false witnesses, which said, this man ceaseth not to
speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law: 6:14 for
we have heard him say, that this jesus of nazareth shall destroy this
place, and shall change the customs which moses delivered us.

6:15 and all that sat in the council, looking stedfastly on him, saw
his face as it had been the face of an angel.

7:1 then said the high priest, are these things so?  7:2 and he said,
men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; the god of glory appeared unto
our father abraham, when he was in mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
charran, 7:3 and said unto him, get thee out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and
 
 ___________________________
 
thee of god.

10:34 then peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth i perceive
that god is no respecter of persons: 10:35 but in every nation he that
feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.

10:36 the word which god sent unto the children of israel, preaching
peace by jesus christ: (he is lord of all:) 10:37 that word, i say, ye
know, which was published throughout all judaea, and began from
galilee, after the baptism which john preached; 10:38 how god anointed
jesus of nazareth with the holy ghost and with power: who went about
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for god
was with him.

10:39 and we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land
of the jews, and in jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree:
10:40 him god raised up the third day, and shewed him openly; 10:41
not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before god, even to
us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.

10:42 and he
 
 ___________________________
 
lders: from whom also i received letters unto the brethren,
and went to damascus, to bring them which were there bound unto
jerusalem, for to be punished.

22:6 and it came to pass, that, as i made my journey, and was come
nigh unto damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a
great light round about me.

22:7 and i fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me,
saul, saul, why persecutest thou me?  22:8 and i answered, who art
thou, lord? and he said unto me, i am jesus of nazareth, whom thou
persecutest.

22:9 and they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid;
but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me.

22:10 and i said, what shall i do, lord? and the lord said unto me,
arise, and go into damascus; and there it shall be told thee of all
things which are appointed for thee to do.

22:11 and when i could not see for the glory of that light, being led
by the hand of them that were with me, i came into damascus.

22:12 and one ananias, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ost
straitest sect of our religion i lived a pharisee.

26:6 and now i stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of
god, unto our fathers: 26:7 unto which promise our twelve tribes,
instantly serving god day and night, hope to come. for which hope's
sake, king agrippa, i am accused of the jews.

26:8 why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that god
should raise the dead?  26:9 i verily thought with myself, that i
ought to do many things contrary to the name of jesus of nazareth.

26:10 which thing i also did in jerusalem: and many of the saints did
i shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests;
and when they were put to death, i gave my voice against them.

26:11 and i punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them
to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, i persecuted
them even unto strange cities.

26:12 whereupon as i went to damascus with authority and commission
from the chief priests, 26:13 at midday, o ki