d in the daily
ministration.

6:2 then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them,
and said, it is not reason that we should leave the word of god, and
serve tables.

6:3 wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the holy ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over
this business.

6:4 but we will give ourselves continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of the word.

6:5 and the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose
stephen, a man full of faith and of the holy ghost, and philip, and
prochorus, and nicanor, and timon, and parmenas, and nicolas a
proselyte of antioch: 6:6 whom they set before the apostles: and when
they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.

6:7 and the word of god increased; and the number of the disciples
multiplied in jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests
were obedient to the faith.

6:8 and stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and
miracles among the 
 
 ___________________________
 
people.

6:9 then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the
synagogue of the libertines, and cyrenians, and alexandrians, and of
them of cilicia and of asia, disputing with stephen.

6:10 and they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which he spake.

6:11 then they suborned men, which said, we have heard him speak
blasphemous words against moses, and against god.

6:12 and they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes,
and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the council,
6:13 and set up false witnesses, which said, this man ceaseth not to
speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law: 6:14 for
we have 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the holy ghost, looked up stedfastly into
heaven, and saw the glory of god, and jesus standing on the right hand
of god, 7:56 and said, behold, i see the heavens opened, and the son
of man standing on the right hand of god.

7:57 then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears,
and ran upon him with one accord, 7:58 and cast him out of the city,
and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young
man's feet, whose name was saul.

7:59 and they stoned stephen, calling upon god, and saying, lord
jesus, receive my spirit.

7:60 and he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, lord, lay not
this sin to their charge. and when he had said this, he fell asleep.

8:1 and saul was consenting unto his death. and at that time there was
a great persecution against the church which was at jerusalem; and
they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of judaea and
samaria, except the apostles.

8:2 and devout men carried stephen to his burial,
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord, how that he said, john
indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the holy
ghost.

11:17 forasmuch then as god gave them the like gift as he did unto us,
who believed on the lord jesus christ; what was i, that i could
withstand god?  11:18 when they heard these things, they held their
peace, and glorified god, saying, then hath god also to the gentiles
granted repentance unto life.

11:19 now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that
arose about stephen travelled as far as phenice, and cyprus, and
antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the jews only.

11:20 and some of them were men of cyprus and cyrene, which, when they
were come to antioch, spake unto the grecians, preaching the lord
jesus.

11:21 and the hand of the lord was with them: and a great number
believed, and turned unto the lord.

11:22 then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church
which was in jerusalem: and they sent forth barnabas, that he shoul
 
 ___________________________
 
se, and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins, calling on the name of the lord.

22:17 and it came to pass, that, when i was come again to jerusalem,
even while i prayed in the temple, i was in a trance; 22:18 and saw
him saying unto me, make haste, and get thee quickly out of jerusalem:
for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.

22:19 and i said, lord, they know that i imprisoned and beat in every
synagogue them that believed on thee: 22:20 and when the blood of thy
martyr stephen was shed, i also was standing by, and consenting unto
his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.

22:21 and he said unto me, depart: for i will send thee far hence unto
the gentiles.

22:22 and they gave him audience unto this word, and then lifted up
their voices, and said, away with such a fellow from the earth: for it
is not fit that he should live.

22:23 and as they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw
dust into the air, 22:24 the chief captain commanded 