at amon; and amon
begat josias; 1:11 and josias begat jechonias and his brethren, about
the time they were carried away to babylon: 1:12 and after they were
brought to babylon, jechonias begat salathiel; and salathiel begat
zorobabel; 1:13 and zorobabel begat abiud; and abiud begat eliakim;
and eliakim begat azor; 1:14 and azor begat sadoc; and sadoc begat
achim; and achim begat eliud; 1:15 and eliud begat eleazar; and
eleazar begat matthan; and matthan begat jacob; 1:16 and jacob begat
joseph the husband of mary, of whom was born jesus, who is called
christ.

1:17 so all the generations from abraham to david are fourteen
generations; and from david until the carrying away into babylon are
fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into babylon unto
christ are fourteen generations.

1:18 now the birth of jesus christ was on this wise: when as his
mother mary was espoused to joseph, before they came together, she was
found with child of the holy ghost.

1:19 then jos
 
 ___________________________
 
eph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to
make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.

1:20 but while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the
lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, joseph, thou son of david,
fear not to take unto thee mary thy wife: for that which is conceived
in her is of the holy ghost.

1:21 and she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name
jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.

1:22 now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the lord by the prophet, saying, 1:23 behold, a virgin shall
be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his
name emmanuel, which being interpreted is, g
 
 ___________________________
 
od with us.

1:24 then joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the lord
had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: 1:25 and knew her not till
she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name jesus.

2:1 now when jesus was born in bethlehem of judaea in the days of
herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to
jerusalem, 2:2 saying, where is he that is born king of the jews? for
we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him.

2:3 when herod the king had hear
 
 ___________________________
 
 star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

2:11 and when they were come into the house, they saw the young child
with mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they
had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and
frankincense and myrrh.

2:12 and being warned of god in a dream that they should not return to
herod, they departed into their own country another way.

2:13 and when they were departed, behold, the angel of the lord
appeareth to joseph in a dream, saying, arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and flee into egypt, and be thou there until i
bring thee word: for herod will seek the young child to destroy him.

2:14 when he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night,
and departed into egypt: 2:15 and was there until the death of herod:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the
prophet, saying, out of egypt have i called my son.

2:16 then herod, when he saw that he was mocked of
 
 ___________________________
 
en that were
in bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and
under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the
wise men.

2:17 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by jeremy the prophet,
saying, 2:18 in rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and
weeping, and great mourning, rachel weeping for her children, and
would not be comforted, because they are not.

2:19 but when herod was dead, behold, an angel of the lord appeareth
in a dream to joseph in egypt, 2:20 saying, arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and go into the land of israel: for they are
dead which sought the young child's life.

2:21 and he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came
into the land of israel.

2:22 but when he heard that archelaus did reign in judaea in the room
of his father herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding,
being warned of god in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of
galilee: 2:23 and he came and dw
 
 ___________________________
 


27:54 now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching
jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they
feared greatly, saying, truly this was the son of god.

27:55 and many women were there beholding afar off, which followed
jesus from galilee, ministering unto him: 27:56 among which was mary
magdalene, and mary the mother of james and joses, and the mother of
zebedees children.

27:57 when the even was come, there came a rich man of arimathaea,
named joseph, who also himself was jesus' disciple: 27:58 he went to
pilate, and begged the body of jesus. then pilate commanded the body
to be delivered.

27:59 and when joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean
linen cloth, 27:60 and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn
out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the
sepulchre, and departed.

27:61 and there was mary magdalene, and the other mary, sitting over
against the sepulchre.

27:62 now the next day, 
 
 ___________________________
 
that
he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, truly this man was
the son of god.

15:40 there were also women looking on afar off: among whom was mary
magdalene, and mary the mother of james the less and of joses, and
salome; 15:41 (who also, when he was in galilee, followed him, and
ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto
jerusalem.

15:42 and now when the even was come, because it was the preparation,
that is, the day before the sabbath, 15:43 joseph of arimathaea, an
honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of god, came,
and went in boldly unto pilate, and craved the body of jesus.

15:44 and pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto
him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.

15:45 and when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to
joseph.

15:46 and he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn o
 
 ___________________________
 
hless.

1:23 and it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his
ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.

1:24 and after those days his wife elisabeth conceived, and hid
herself five months, saying, 1:25 thus hath the lord dealt with me in
the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.

1:26 and in the sixth month the angel gabriel was sent from god unto a
city of galilee, named nazareth, 1:27 to a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was joseph, of the house of david; and the virgin's name
was mary.

1:28 and the angel came in unto her, and said, hail, thou that art
highly favoured, the lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

1:29 and when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in
her mind what manner of salutation this should be.

1:30 and the angel said unto her, fear not, mary: for thou hast found
favour with god.

1:31 and, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a
son, and sh
 
 ___________________________
 
 to them that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of
peace.

1:80 and the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the
deserts till the day of his shewing unto israel.

2:1 and it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree
from caesar augustus that all the world should be taxed.

2:2 (and this taxing was first made when cyrenius was governor of
syria.)  2:3 and all went to be taxed, every one into his own city.

2:4 and joseph also went up from galilee, out of the city of nazareth,
into judaea, unto the city of david, which is called bethlehem;
(because he was of the house and lineage of david:) 2:5 to be taxed
with mary his espoused wife, being great with child.

2:6 and so it was, that, while they were there, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered.

2:7 and she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room
for th
 
 ___________________________
 
lothes, lying in a manger.

2:13 and suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host praising god, and saying, 2:14 glory to god in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men.

2:15 and it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into
heaven, the shepherds said one to another, let us now go even unto
bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the lord
hath made known unto us.

2:16 and they came with haste, and found mary, and joseph, and the
babe lying in a manger.

2:17 and when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying
which was told them concerning this child.

2:18 and all they that heard it wondered at those things which were
told them by the shepherds.

2:19 but mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.

2:20 and the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising god for all
the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

2:21 and when eight days were accompl
 
 ___________________________
 
lord's christ.

2:27 and he came by the spirit into the temple: and when the parents
brought in the child jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,
2:28 then took he him up in his arms, and blessed god, and said, 2:29
lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word: 2:30 for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, 2:31 which thou hast
prepared before the face of all people; 2:32 a light to lighten the
gentiles, and the glory of thy people israel.

2:33 and joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were
spoken of him.

2:34 and simeon blessed them, and said unto mary his mother, behold,
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in israel; and
for a sign which shall be spoken against; 2:35 (yea, a sword shall
pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed.

2:36 and there was one anna, a prophetess, the daughter of phanuel, of
the tribe of aser: she was of a great age, and had lived 
 
 ___________________________
 
ccording to the law of
the lord, they returned into galilee, to their own city nazareth.

2:40 and the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom: and the grace of god was upon him.

2:41 now his parents went to jerusalem every year at the feast of the
passover.

2:42 and when he was twelve years old, they went up to jerusalem after
the custom of the feast.

2:43 and when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child
jesus tarried behind in jerusalem; and joseph and his mother knew not
of it.

2:44 but they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day's
journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.

2:45 and when they found him not, they turned back again to jerusalem,
seeking him.

2:46 and it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and
asking them questions.

2:47 and all that heard him were astonished at his understanding an
 
 ___________________________
 
he evils which herod had done,
3:20 added yet this above all, that he shut up john in prison.

3:21 now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that
jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, 3:22
and the holy ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him,
and a voice came from heaven, which said, thou art my beloved son; in
thee i am well pleased.

3:23 and jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being
(as was supposed) the son of joseph, which was the son of heli, 3:24
which was the son of matthat, which was the son of levi, which was the
son of melchi, which was the son of janna, which was the son of
joseph, 3:25 which was the son of mattathias, which was the son of
amos, which was the son of naum, which was the son of esli, which was
the son of nagge, 3:26 which was the son of maath, which was the son
of mattathias, which was the son of semei, which was the son of
joseph, which was the son of juda, 3:27 which was the 
 
 ___________________________
 

which was the son of rhesa, which was the son of zorobabel, which was
the son of salathiel, which was the son of neri, 3:28 which was the
son of melchi, which was the son of addi, which was the son of cosam,
which was the son of elmodam, which was the son of er, 3:29 which was
the son of jose, which was the son of eliezer, which was the son of
jorim, which was the son of matthat, which was the son of levi, 3:30
which was the son of simeon, which was the son of juda, which was the
son of joseph, which was the son of jonan, which was the son of
eliakim, 3:31 which was the son of melea, which was the son of menan,
which was the son of mattatha, which was the son of nathan, which was
the son of david, 3:32 which was the son of jesse, which was the son
of obed, which was the son of booz, which was the son of salmon, which
was the son of naasson, 3:33 which was the son of aminadab, which was
the son of aram, which was the son of esrom, which was the son of
phares, which was the son 
 
 ___________________________
 
ring of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, 4:19 to preach the acceptable year of the lord.

4:20 and he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and
sat down. and the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were
fastened on him.

4:21 and he began to say unto them, this day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears.

4:22 and all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth. and they said, is not this joseph's
son?  4:23 and he said unto them, ye will surely say unto me this
proverb, physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in
capernaum, do also here in thy country.

4:24 and he said, verily i say unto you, no prophet is accepted in his
own country.

4:25 but i tell you of a truth, many widows were in israel in the days
of elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when
great famine was throughout all the land; 4:26 but unto none of them
was elias sent, 
 
 ___________________________
 
,
into thy hands i commend my spirit: and having said thus, he gave up
the ghost.

23:47 now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified god,
saying, certainly this was a righteous man.

23:48 and all the people that came together to that sight, beholding
the things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned.

23:49 and all his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from
galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things.

23:50 and, behold, there was a man named joseph, a counsellor; and he
was a good man, and a just: 23:51 (the same had not consented to the
counsel and deed of them;) he was of arimathaea, a city of the jews:
who also himself waited for the kingdom of god.

23:52 this man went unto pilate, and begged the body of jesus.

23:53 and he took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a
sepulchre that was hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid.

23:54 and that day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on.

23:55 and
 
 ___________________________
 
e brought him to jesus. and when jesus beheld him, he said,
thou art simon the son of jona: thou shalt be called cephas, which is
by interpretation, a stone.

1:43 the day following jesus would go forth into galilee, and findeth
philip, and saith unto him, follow me.

1:44 now philip was of bethsaida, the city of andrew and peter.

1:45 philip findeth nathanael, and saith unto him, we have found him,
of whom moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, jesus of
nazareth, the son of joseph.

1:46 and nathanael said unto him, can there any good thing come out of
nazareth? philip saith unto him, come and see.

1:47 jesus saw nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, behold an
israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!  1:48 nathanael saith unto him,
whence knowest thou me? jesus answered and said unto him, before that
philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, i saw thee.

1:49 nathanael answered and saith unto him, rabbi, thou art the son of
god; thou art the k
 
 ___________________________
 
: and he that
believeth not the son shall not see life; but the wrath of god abideth
on him.

4:1 when therefore the lord knew how the pharisees had heard that
jesus made and baptized more disciples than john, 4:2 (though jesus
himself baptized not, but his disciples,) 4:3 he left judaea, and
departed again into galilee.

4:4 and he must needs go through samaria.

4:5 then cometh he to a city of samaria, which is called sychar, near
to the parcel of ground that jacob gave to his son joseph.

4:6 now jacob's well was there. jesus therefore, being wearied with
his journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about the sixth hour.

4:7 there cometh a woman of samaria to draw water: jesus saith unto
her, give me to drink.

4:8 (for his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.)  4:9
then saith the woman of samaria unto him, how is it that thou, being a
jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of samaria? for the jews
have no dealings with the samaritans.

4:10 je
 
 ___________________________
 
me.

6:39 and this is the father's will which hath sent me, that of all
which he hath given me i should lose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day.

6:40 and this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which
seeth the son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and i
will raise him up at the last day.

6:41 the jews then murmured at him, because he said, i am the bread
which came down from heaven.

6:42 and they said, is not this jesus, the son of joseph, whose father
and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, i came down from
heaven?  6:43 jesus therefore answered and said unto them, murmur not
among yourselves.

6:44 no man can come to me, except the father which hath sent me draw
him: and i will raise him up at the last day.

6:45 it is written in the prophets, and they shall be all taught of
god.

every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the father,
cometh unto me.

6:46 not that any man hath seen the fa
 
 ___________________________
 
was dead already,
they brake not his legs: 19:34 but one of the soldiers with a spear
pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.

19:35 and he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he
knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.

19:36 for these things were done, that the scripture should be
fulfilled, a bone of him shall not be broken.

19:37 and again another scripture saith, they shall look on him whom
they pierced.

19:38 and after this joseph of arimathaea, being a disciple of jesus,
but secretly for fear of the jews, besought pilate that he might take
away the body of jesus: and pilate gave him leave. he came therefore,
and took the body of jesus.

19:39 and there came also nicodemus, which at the first came to jesus
by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred
pound weight.

19:40 then took they the body of jesus, and wound it in linen clothes
with the spices, as the manner of the jews is to bury.
 
 ___________________________
 
a, that is to say,
the field of blood.

1:20 for it is written in the book of psalms, let his habitation be
desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let another
take.

1:21 wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time
that the lord jesus went in and out among us, 1:22 beginning from the
baptism of john, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must
one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.

1:23 and they appointed two, joseph called barsabas, who was surnamed
justus, and matthias.

1:24 and they prayed, and said, thou, lord, which knowest the hearts
of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen, 1:25 that he
may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which judas by
transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.

1:26 and they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon matthias;
and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

2:1 and when the day of pentecost was fully come, the
 
 ___________________________
 
should sojourn in a
strange land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and
entreat them evil four hundred years.

7:7 and the nation to whom they shall be in bondage will i judge, said
god: and after that shall they come forth, and serve me in this place.

7:8 and he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so abraham begat
isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day; and isaac begat jacob; and
jacob begat the twelve patriarchs.

7:9 and the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold joseph into egypt: but
god was with him, 7:10 and delivered him out of all his afflictions,
and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of pharaoh king of egypt;
and he made him governor over egypt and all his house.

7:11 now there came a dearth over all the land of egypt and chanaan,
and great affliction: and our fathers found no sustenance.

7:12 but when jacob heard that there was corn in egypt, he sent out
our fathers first.

7:13 and at the second time joseph was made known to his bre
 
 ___________________________
 
thren; and
joseph's kindred was made known unto pharaoh.

7:14 then sent joseph, and called his father jacob to him, and all his
kindred, threescore and fifteen souls.

7:15 so jacob went down into egypt, and died, he, and our fathers,
7:16 and were carried over into sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that
abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of emmor the father of
sychem.

7:17 but when the time of the promise drew nigh, which god had sworn
to abraham, the people grew and multiplied in egypt, 7:18 till another
king arose, which knew not joseph.

7:19 t
 
 ___________________________
 
h
prepared for them a city.

11:17 by faith abraham, when he was tried, offered up isaac: and he
that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son, 11:18
of whom it was said, that in isaac shall thy seed be called: 11:19
accounting that god was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from
whence also he received him in a figure.

11:20 by faith isaac blessed jacob and esau concerning things to come.

11:21 by faith jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of
joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.

11:22 by faith joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of
the children of israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones.

11:23 by faith moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his
parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not
afraid of the king's commandment.

11:24 by faith moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of pharaoh's daughter; 11:25 choosing rather to su
 
 ___________________________
 
f
reuben were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of gad were sealed
twelve thousand.

7:6 of the tribe of aser were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of
nephthalim were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of manasses were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:7 of the tribe of simeon were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe
of levi were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of issachar were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:8 of the tribe of zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe
of joseph were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of benjamin were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:9 after this i beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues,
stood before the throne, and before the lamb, clothed with white
robes, and palms in their hands; 7:10 and cried with a loud voice,
saying, salvation to our god which sitteth upon the throne, and unto
the lamb.

7:11 and all the angels stood round about the throne, and 