r thy speech bewrayeth
thee.

26:74 then began he to curse and to swear, saying, i know not the man.
and immediately the cock crew.

26:75 and peter remembered the word of jesus, which said unto him,
before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. and he went out, and
wept bitterly.

27:1 when the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of
the people took counsel against jesus to put him to death: 27:2 and
when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to
pontius pilate the governor.

27:3 then judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of
silver to the chief priests and elders, 27:4 saying, i have sinned in
that i have betrayed the innocent blood. and they said, what is that
to us? see thou to that.

27:5 and he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself.

27:6 and the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, it is not
l
 
 ___________________________
 
ard that, they lifted up their voice to god with
one accord, and said, lord, thou art god, which hast made heaven, and
earth, and the sea, and all that in them is: 4:25 who by the mouth of
thy servant david hast said, why did the heathen rage, and the people
imagine vain things?  4:26 the kings of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were gathered together against the lord, and against his
christ.

4:27 for of a truth against thy holy child jesus, whom thou hast
anointed, both herod, and pontius pilate, with the gentiles, and the
people of israel, were gathered together, 4:28 for to do whatsoever
thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.

4:29 and now, lord, behold their threatenings: and grant unto thy
servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy word, 4:30 by
stretching forth thine hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be
done by the name of thy holy child jesus.

4:31 and when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
assembled together; and
 
 ___________________________
 
e
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows.

6:11 but thou, o man of god, flee these things; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.

6:12 fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life,
whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession
before many witnesses.

6:13 i give thee charge in the sight of god, who quickeneth all
things, and before christ jesus, who before pontius pilate witnessed a
good confession; 6:14 that thou keep this commandment without spot,
unrebukable, until the appearing of our lord jesus christ: 6:15 which
in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only potentate, the
king of kings, and lord of lords; 6:16 who only hath immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath
seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. amen.

6:17 charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
hi