 called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave
them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
manner of sickness and all manner of disease.

10:2 now the names of the twelve apostles are these; the first, simon,
who is called peter, and andrew his brother; james the son of zebedee,
and john his brother; 10:3 philip, and bartholomew; thomas, and
matthew the publican; james the son of alphaeus, and lebbaeus, whose
surname was thaddaeus; 10:4 simon the canaanite, and judas iscariot,
who also betrayed him.

10:5 these twelve jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, go not
into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the samaritans
enter ye not: 10:6 but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
israel.

10:7 and as ye go, preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

10:8 heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out
devils: freely ye have received, freely give.

10:9 provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, 1
 
 ___________________________
 
6:10 when jesus understood it, he said unto them, why trouble ye the
woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.

26:11 for ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.

26:12 for in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it
for my burial.

26:13 verily i say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done,
be told for a memorial of her.

26:14 then one of the twelve, called judas iscariot, went unto the
chief priests, 26:15 and said unto them, what will ye give me, and i
will deliver him unto you? and they covenanted with him for thirty
pieces of silver.

26:16 and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

26:17 now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples
came to jesus, saying unto him, where wilt thou that we prepare for
thee to eat the passover?  26:18 and he said, go into the city to such
a man, and say unto him, the master saith, my 
 
 ___________________________
 
him.

3:14 and he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach, 3:15 and to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 3:16 and simon he surnamed peter;
3:17 and james the son of zebedee, and john the brother of james; and
he surnamed them boanerges, which is, the sons of thunder: 3:18 and
andrew, and philip, and bartholomew, and matthew, and thomas, and
james the son of alphaeus, and thaddaeus, and simon the canaanite,
3:19 and judas iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into
an house.

3:20 and the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread.

3:21 and when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him: for they said, he is beside himself.

3:22 and the scribes which came down from jerusalem said, he hath
beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils.

3:23 and he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, how
can satan cast out satan
 
 ___________________________
 
er.

14:6 and jesus said, let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath
wrought a good work on me.

14:7 for ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye
may do them good: but me ye have not always.

14:8 she hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my
body to the burying.

14:9 verily i say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be
spoken of for a memorial of her.

14:10 and judas iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief
priests, to betray him unto them.

14:11 and when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him
money. and he sought how he might conveniently betray him.

14:12 and the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples said unto him, where wilt thou that we go and
prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?  14:13 and he sendeth forth
two of his disciples, and saith unto them, go ye into the city, and
there sh
 
 ___________________________
 
hey might do to jesus.

6:12 and it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to god.

6:13 and when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles; 6:14 simon, (whom
he also named peter,) and andrew his brother, james and john, philip
and bartholomew, 6:15 matthew and thomas, james the son of alphaeus,
and simon called zelotes, 6:16 and judas the brother of james, and
judas iscariot, which also was the traitor.

6:17 and he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all
judaea and jerusalem, and from the sea coast of tyre and sidon, which
came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 6:18 and they
that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed.

6:19 and the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went
virtue out of him, and healed them all.

6:20 and he lifted 
 
 ___________________________
 
to
me, except it were given unto him of my father.

6:66 from that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no
more with him.

6:67 then said jesus unto the twelve, will ye also go away?  6:68 then
simon peter answered him, lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the
words of eternal life.

6:69 and we believe and are sure that thou art that christ, the son of
the living god.

6:70 jesus answered them, have not i chosen you twelve, and one of you
is a devil?  6:71 he spake of judas iscariot the son of simon: for he
it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.

7:1 after these things jesus walked in galilee: for he would not walk
in jewry, because the jews sought to kill him.

7:2 now the jew's feast of tabernacles was at hand.

7:3 his brethren therefore said unto him, depart hence, and go into
judaea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest.

7:4 for there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself
seeketh to be known openly.
 
 ___________________________
 
take him.

12:1 then jesus six days before the passover came to bethany, where
lazarus was, which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.

12:2 there they made him a supper; and martha served: but lazarus was
one of them that sat at the table with him.

12:3 then took mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and
anointed the feet of jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the
house was filled with the odour of the ointment.

12:4 then saith one of his disciples, judas iscariot, simon's son,
which should betray him, 12:5 why was not this ointment sold for three
hundred pence, and given to the poor?  12:6 this he said, not that he
cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and
bare what was put therein.

12:7 then said jesus, let her alone: against the day of my burying
hath she kept this.

12:8 for the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always.

12:9 much people of the jews therefore knew that he was there: and
they came
 
 ___________________________
 
gave me a commandment, what i should say, and what i should speak.

12:50 and i know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever
i speak therefore, even as the father said unto me, so i speak.

13:1 now before the feast of the passover, when jesus knew that his
hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the father,
having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the
end.

13:2 and supper being ended, the devil having now put into the heart
of judas iscariot, simon's son, to betray him; 13:3 jesus knowing that
the father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come
from god, and went to god; 13:4 he riseth from supper, and laid aside
his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.

13:5 after that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the
disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was
girded.

13:6 then cometh he to simon peter: and peter saith unto him, lord,
dost thou wash my feet?  13:7 je