e fulfilled which was spoken by esaias
the prophet, saying, 4:15 the land of zabulon, and the land of
nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond jordan, galilee of the
gentiles; 4:16 the people which sat in darkness saw great light; and
to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung
up.

4:17 from that time jesus began to preach, and to say, repent: for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.

4:18 and jesus, walking by the sea of galilee, saw two brethren, simon
called peter, and andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for
they were fishers.

4:19 and he saith unto them, follow me, and i will make you fishers of
men.

4:20 and they straightway left their nets, and followed him.

4:21 and going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, james the
son of zebedee, and john his brother, in a ship with zebedee their
father, mending their nets; and he called them.

4:22 and they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed
him.

4:23 an
 
 ___________________________
 
h, no,
not in israel.

8:11 and i say unto you, that many shall come from the east and west,
and shall sit down with abraham, and isaac, and jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven.

8:12 but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer
darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

8:13 and jesus said unto the centurion, go thy way; and as thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee. and his servant was healed in the
selfsame hour.

8:14 and when jesus was come into peter's house, he saw his wife's
mother laid, and sick of a fever.

8:15 and he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose,
and ministered unto them.

8:16 when the even was come, they brought unto him many that were
possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and
healed all that were sick: 8:17 that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by esaias the prophet, saying, himself took our infirmities,
and bare our sicknesses.

8:18 now when jesus saw great 
 
 ___________________________
 
aving
no shepherd.

9:37 then saith he unto his disciples, the harvest truly is plenteous,
but the labourers are few; 9:38 pray ye therefore the lord of the
harvest, that he will send forth labourers into his harvest.

10:1 and when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave
them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
manner of sickness and all manner of disease.

10:2 now the names of the twelve apostles are these; the first, simon,
who is called peter, and andrew his brother; james the son of zebedee,
and john his brother; 10:3 philip, and bartholomew; thomas, and
matthew the publican; james the son of alphaeus, and lebbaeus, whose
surname was thaddaeus; 10:4 simon the canaanite, and judas iscariot,
who also betrayed him.

10:5 these twelve jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, go not
into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the samaritans
enter ye not: 10:6 but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
israel.

 
 ___________________________
 
t to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there
alone.

14:24 but the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves:
for the wind was contrary.

14:25 and in the fourth watch of the night jesus went unto them,
walking on the sea.

14:26 and when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were
troubled, saying, it is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.

14:27 but straightway jesus spake unto them, saying, be of good cheer;
it is i; be not afraid.

14:28 and peter answered him and said, lord, if it be thou, bid me
come unto thee on the water.

14:29 and he said, come. and when peter was come down out of the ship,
he walked on the water, to go to jesus.

14:30 but when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and
beginning to sink, he cried, saying, lord, save me.

14:31 and immediately jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him,
and said unto him, o thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
14:32 and when they were come into the 
 
 ___________________________
 
at which goeth into the mouth defileth a man;
but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.

15:12 then came his disciples, and said unto him, knowest thou that
the pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?  15:13 but
he answered and said, every plant, which my heavenly father hath not
planted, shall be rooted up.

15:14 let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. and if the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

15:15 then answered peter and said unto him, declare unto us this
parable.

15:16 and jesus said, are ye also yet without understanding?  15:17 do
not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth
into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?  15:18 but those
things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and
they defile the man.

15:19 for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies: 15:20 these are the
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the sadducees?  16:12 then understood they how
that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the
doctrine of the pharisees and of the sadducees.

16:13 when jesus came into the coasts of caesarea philippi, he asked
his disciples, saying, whom do men say that i the son of man am?
16:14 and they said, some say that thou art john the baptist: some,
elias; and others, jeremias, or one of the prophets.

16:15 he saith unto them, but whom say ye that i am?  16:16 and simon
peter answered and said, thou art the christ, the son of the living
god.

16:17 and jesus answered and said unto him, blessed art thou, simon
barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my
father which is in heaven.

16:18 and i say also unto thee, that thou art peter, and upon this
rock i will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.

16:19 and i will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth
 
 ___________________________
 
 shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

16:20 then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that
he was jesus the christ.

16:21 from that time forth began jesus to shew unto his disciples, how
that he must go unto jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders
and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the
third day.

16:22 then peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, be it far
from thee, lord: this shall not be unto thee.

16:23 but he turned, and said unto peter, get thee behind me, satan:
thou art an offence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be
of god, but those that be of men.

16:24 then said jesus unto his disciples, if any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

16:25 for whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever
will lose h
 
 ___________________________
 
 my sake shall find it.

16:26 for what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul?  16:27 for the son of man shall come in the glory of his father
with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his
works.

16:28 verily i say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall
not taste of death, till they see the son of man coming in his
kingdom.

17:1 and after six days jesus taketh peter, james, and john his
brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, 17:2 and
was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and
his raiment was white as the light.

17:3 and, behold, there appeared unto them moses and elias talking
with him.

17:4 then answered peter, and said unto jesus, lord, it is good for us
to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for
thee, and one for moses, and one for elias.

17:5 while he yet spake, beh
 
 ___________________________
 
to this mountain, remove hence to yonder
place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.

17:21 howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.

17:22 and while they abode in galilee, jesus said unto them, the son
of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men: 17:23 and they shall
kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again.

and they were exceeding sorry.

17:24 and when they were come to capernaum, they that received tribute
money came to peter, and said, doth not your master pay tribute?
17:25 he saith, yes. and when he was come into the house, jesus
prevented him, saying, what thinkest thou, simon? of whom do the kings
of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of
strangers?  17:26 peter saith unto him, of strangers. jesus saith unto
him, then are the children free.

17:27 notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea,
and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when
 
 ___________________________
 
 unto thee as an
heathen man and a publican.

18:18 verily i say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven.

18:19 again i say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of
my father which is in heaven.

18:20 for where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am i in the midst of them.

18:21 then came peter to him, and said, lord, how oft shall my brother
sin against me, and i forgive him? till seven times?  18:22 jesus
saith unto him, i say not unto thee, until seven times: but, until
seventy times seven.

18:23 therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king,
which would take account of his servants.

18:24 and when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which
owed him ten thousand talents.

18:25 but forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to 
 
 ___________________________
 
unto his disciples, verily i say unto you, that
a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

19:24 and again i say unto you, it is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
god.

19:25 when his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed,
saying, who then can be saved?  19:26 but jesus beheld them, and said
unto them, with men this is impossible; but with god all things are
possible.

19:27 then answered peter and said unto him, behold, we have forsaken
all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?  19:28 and jesus
said unto them, verily i say unto you, that ye which have followed me,
in the regeneration when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of israel.

19:29 and every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my
name's sake, sha
 
 ___________________________
 
9 but i say unto you, i will not drink henceforth of this fruit of
the vine, until that day when i drink it new with you in my father's
kingdom.

26:30 and when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
olives.

26:31 then saith jesus unto them, all ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, i will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.

26:32 but after i am risen again, i will go before you into galilee.

26:33 peter answered and said unto him, though all men shall be
offended because of thee, yet will i never be offended.

26:34 jesus said unto him, verily i say unto thee, that this night,
before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.

26:35 peter said unto him, though i should die with thee, yet will i
not deny thee. likewise also said all the disciples.

26:36 then cometh jesus with them unto a place called gethsemane, and
saith unto the disciples, sit ye here, while i go and pray yonder.

 
 ___________________________
 

26:37 and he took with him peter and the two sons of zebedee, and
began to be sorrowful and very heavy.

26:38 then saith he unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even
unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

26:39 and he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, o my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as i will, but as thou wilt.

26:40 and he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and
saith unto peter, what, could ye not watch with me one hour?  26:41
watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.

26:42 he went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, o my
father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except i drink it, thy
will be done.

26:43 and he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were
heavy.

26:44 and he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third
time, saying the same words.

26:45 
 
 ___________________________
 
 must be?  26:55
in that same hour said jesus to the multitudes, are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? i sat daily
with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

26:56 but all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled. then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

26:57 and they that had laid hold on jesus led him away to caiaphas
the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.

26:58 but peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace,
and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.

26:59 now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought
false witness against jesus, to put him to death; 26:60 but found
none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. at
the last came two false witnesses, 26:61 and said, this fellow said, i
am able to destroy the temple of god, and to build it in three days.

26:62 and the high priest arose, an
 
 ___________________________
 
ng on the right hand
of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

26:65 then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, he hath spoken
blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have
heard his blasphemy.

26:66 what think ye? they answered and said, he is guilty of death.

26:67 then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others
smote him with the palms of their hands, 26:68 saying, prophesy unto
us, thou christ, who is he that smote thee?  26:69 now peter sat
without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, thou also
wast with jesus of galilee.

26:70 but he denied before them all, saying, i know not what thou
sayest.

26:71 and when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him,
and said unto them that were there, this fellow was also with jesus of
nazareth.

26:72 and again he denied with an oath, i do not know the man.

26:73 and after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to
peter, surely thou also
 
 ___________________________
 
 art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth
thee.

26:74 then began he to curse and to swear, saying, i know not the man.
and immediately the cock crew.

26:75 and peter remembered the word of jesus, which said unto him,
before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. and he went out, and
wept bitterly.

27:1 when the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of
the people took counsel against jesus to put him to death: 27:2 and
when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to
pontius pilate the governor.

27:3 then judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirt
 
 ___________________________
 
gues.

3:11 and unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and
cried, saying, thou art the son of god.

3:12 and he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.

3:13 and he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he
would: and they came unto him.

3:14 and he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach, 3:15 and to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 3:16 and simon he surnamed peter;
3:17 and james the son of zebedee, and john the brother of james; and
he surnamed them boanerges, which is, the sons of thunder: 3:18 and
andrew, and philip, and bartholomew, and matthew, and thomas, and
james the son of alphaeus, and thaddaeus, and simon the canaanite,
3:19 and judas iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into
an house.

3:20 and the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread.

3:21 and when his friends heard of it, they 
 
 ___________________________
 
 before him, and told him all the truth.

5:34 and he said unto her, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole;
go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.

5:35 while he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's
house certain which said, thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the
master any further?  5:36 as soon as jesus heard the word that was
spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, be not afraid, only
believe.

5:37 and he suffered no man to follow him, save peter, and james, and
john the brother of james.

5:38 and he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and
seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.

5:39 and when he was come in, he saith unto them, why make ye this
ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.

5:40 and they laughed him to scorn. but when he had put them all out,
he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were
with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.

5
 
 ___________________________
 

look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly.

8:26 and he sent him away to his house, saying, neither go into the
town, nor tell it to any in the town.

8:27 and jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of caesarea
philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them,
whom do men say that i am?  8:28 and they answered, john the baptist;
but some say, elias; and others, one of the prophets.

8:29 and he saith unto them, but whom say ye that i am? and peter
answereth and saith unto him, thou art the christ.

8:30 and he charged them that they should tell no man of him.

8:31 and he began to teach them, that the son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.

8:32 and he spake that saying openly. and peter took him, and began to
rebuke him.

8:33 but when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he
rebuked peter, saying, g
 
 ___________________________
 
t shall a man give in exchange for
his soul?  8:38 whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the
son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his father with
the holy angels.

9:1 and he said unto them, verily i say unto you, that there be some
of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they
have seen the kingdom of god come with power.

9:2 and after six days jesus taketh with him peter, and james, and
john, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves:
and he was transfigured before them.

9:3 and his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no
fuller on earth can white them.

9:4 and there appeared unto them elias with moses: and they were
talking with jesus.

9:5 and peter answered and said to jesus, master, it is good for us to
be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
moses, and one for elias.

9:6 f
 
 ___________________________
 
t jesus
answereth again, and saith unto them, children, how hard is it for
them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of god!  10:25 it
is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.

10:26 and they were astonished out of measure, saying among
themselves, who then can be saved?  10:27 and jesus looking upon them
saith, with men it is impossible, but not with god: for with god all
things are possible.

10:28 then peter began to say unto him, lo, we have left all, and have
followed thee.

10:29 and jesus answered and said, verily i say unto you, there is no
man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's,
10:30 but he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.

10:31 but many that a
 
 ___________________________
 


11:17 and he taught, saying unto them, is it not written, my house
shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made
it a den of thieves.

11:18 and the scribes and chief priests heard it, and sought how they
might destroy him: for they feared him, because all the people was
astonished at his doctrine.

11:19 and when even was come, he went out of the city.

11:20 and in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree
dried up from the roots.

11:21 and peter calling to remembrance saith unto him, master, behold,
the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away.

11:22 and jesus answering saith unto them, have faith in god.

11:23 for verily i say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this
mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall
not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he
saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith.

11:24 therefore i say unto you, what things soever y
 
 ___________________________
 
y: 12:44 for all they did
cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that
she had, even all her living.

13:1 and as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto
him, master, see what manner of stones and what buildings are here!
13:2 and jesus answering said unto him, seest thou these great
buildings?  there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall
not be thrown down.

13:3 and as he sat upon the mount of olives over against the temple,
peter and james and john and andrew asked him privately, 13:4 tell us,
when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when all these
things shall be fulfilled?  13:5 and jesus answering them began to
say, take heed lest any man deceive you: 13:6 for many shall come in
my name, saying, i am christ; and shall deceive many.

13:7 and when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not
troubled: for such things must needs be; but the end shall not be yet.

13:8 for nation shall ris
 
 ___________________________
 
,
which is shed for many.

14:25 verily i say unto you, i will drink no more of the fruit of the
vine, until that day that i drink it new in the kingdom of god.

14:26 and when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
olives.

14:27 and jesus saith unto them, all ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, i will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered.

14:28 but after that i am risen, i will go before you into galilee.

14:29 but peter said unto him, although all shall be offended, yet
will not i.

14:30 and jesus saith unto him, verily i say unto thee, that this day,
even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me
thrice.

14:31 but he spake the more vehemently, if i should die with thee, i
will not deny thee in any wise. likewise also said they all.

14:32 and they came to a place which was named gethsemane: and he
saith to his disciples, sit ye here, while i shall pray.

14:33 and he taketh 
 
 ___________________________
 
with him peter and james and john, and began to be
sore amazed, and to be very heavy; 14:34 and saith unto them, my soul
is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch.

14:35 and he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.

14:36 and he said, abba, father, all things are possible unto thee;
take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what i will, but what
thou wilt.

14:37 and he cometh, and findeth them sleepi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng, and saith unto peter,
simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?  14:38 watch
ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. the spirit truly is ready,
but the flesh is weak.

14:39 and again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words.

14:40 and when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their
eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him.

14:41 and he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, sleep on now,
and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold,
 
 ___________________________
 
 i was
daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but the
scriptures must be fulfilled.

14:50 and they all forsook him, and fled.

14:51 and there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth
cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him: 14:52
and he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.

14:53 and they led jesus away to the high priest: and with him were
assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.

14:54 and peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the
high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the
fire.

14:55 and the chief priests and all the council sought for witness
against jesus to put him to death; and found none.

14:56 for many bare false witness against him, but their witness
agreed not together.

14:57 and there arose certain, and bare false witness against him,
saying, 14:58 we heard him say, i will destroy this temple that is
made with hands, and
 
 ___________________________
 
: and ye shall see the son
of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven.

14:63 then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, what need we
any further witnesses?  14:64 ye have heard the blasphemy: what think
ye? and they all condemned him to be guilty of death.

14:65 and some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to
buffet him, and to say unto him, prophesy: and the servants did strike
him with the palms of their hands.

14:66 and as peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the
maids of the high priest: 14:67 and when she saw peter warming
himself, she looked upon him, and said, and thou also wast with jesus
of nazareth.

14:68 but he denied, saying, i know not, neither understand i what
thou sayest. and he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.

14:69 and a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood
by, this is one of them.

14:70 and he denied it again. and a little after, they that stoo
 
 ___________________________
 
d by
said again to peter, surely thou art one of them: for thou art a
galilaean, and thy speech agreeth thereto.

14:71 but he began to curse and to swear, saying, i know not this man
of whom ye speak.

14:72 and the second time the cock crew. and peter called to mind the
word that jesus said unto him, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt
deny me thrice. and when he thought thereon, he wept.

15:1 and straightway in the morning the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and
bound jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to pilate.

15:2 and pilate asked him, art thou the king of the jews? and he
answering said unto them, thou sayest it.

15:3 and the chief priests accused him of 
 
 ___________________________
 
e stone
from the door of the sepulchre?  16:4 and when they looked, they saw
that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great.

16:5 and entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on
the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were
affrighted.

16:6 and he saith unto them, be not affrighted: ye seek jesus of
nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the
place where they laid him.

16:7 but go your way, tell his disciples and peter that he goeth
before you into galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

16:8 and they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they
trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for
they were afraid.

16:9 now when jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to mary magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven
devils.

16:10 and she went and told them that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept.

16:11 and they, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
, and let down your nets for a draught.

5:5 and simon answering said unto him, master, we have toiled all the
night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word i will let
down the net.

5:6 and when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of
fishes: and their net brake.

5:7 and they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other
ship, that they should come and help them. and they came, and filled
both the ships, so that they began to sink.

5:8 when simon peter saw it, he fell down at jesus' knees, saying,
depart from me; for i am a sinful man, o lord.

5:9 for he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught
of the fishes which they had taken: 5:10 and so was also james, and
john, the sons of zebedee, which were partners with simon. and jesus
said unto simon, fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.

5:11 and when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all,
and followed him.

5:12 and it came to pass, when h
 
 ___________________________
 
all, he said unto
the man, stretch forth thy hand. and he did so: and his hand was
restored whole as the other.

6:11 and they were filled with madness; and communed one with another
what they might do to jesus.

6:12 and it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to god.

6:13 and when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles; 6:14 simon, (whom
he also named peter,) and andrew his brother, james and john, philip
and bartholomew, 6:15 matthew and thomas, james the son of alphaeus,
and simon called zelotes, 6:16 and judas the brother of james, and
judas iscariot, which also was the traitor.

6:17 and he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all
judaea and jerusalem, and from the sea coast of tyre and sidon, which
came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 6:1
 
 ___________________________
 
 at jesus' feet, and besought him that
he would come into his house: 8:42 for he had one only daughter, about
twelve years of age, and she lay a dying. but as he went the people
thronged him.

8:43 and a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had
spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any,
8:44 came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and
immediately her issue of blood stanched.

8:45 and jesus said, who touched me? when all denied, peter and they
that were with him said, master, the multitude throng thee and press
thee, and sayest thou, who touched me?  8:46 and jesus said, somebody
hath touched me: for i perceive that virtue is gone out of me.

8:47 and when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling,
and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the
people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed
immediately.

8:48 and he said unto her, daughter, be of good comfort: thy 
 
 ___________________________
 
faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace.

8:49 while he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the
synagogue's house, saying to him, thy daughter is dead; trouble not
the master.

8:50 but when jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, fear not:
believe only, and she shall be made whole.

8:51 and when he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in,
save peter, and james, and john, and the father and the mother of the
maiden.

8:52 and all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, weep not; she is not
dead, but sleepeth.

8:53 and they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

8:54 and he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called,
saying, maid, arise.

8:55 and her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he
commanded to give her meat.

8:56 and her parents were astonished: but he charged them that they
should 
 
 ___________________________
 
d gave to the disciples to
set before the multitude.

9:17 and they did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them twelve baskets.

9:18 and it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were
with him: and he asked them, saying, whom say the people that i am?
9:19 they answering said, john the baptist; but some say, elias; and
others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again.

9:20 he said unto them, but whom say ye that i am? peter answering
said, the christ of god.

9:21 and he straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell no man
that thing; 9:22 saying, the son of man must suffer many things, and
be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain,
and be raised the third day.

9:23 and he said to them all, if any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

9:24 for whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever
will lose his lif
 
 ___________________________
 
it.

9:25 for what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and
lose himself, or be cast away?  9:26 for whosoever shall be ashamed of
me and of my words, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and in his father's, and of the holy
angels.

9:27 but i tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which
shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of god.

9:28 and it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he
took peter and john and james, and went up into a mountain to pray.

9:29 and as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and
his raiment was white and glistering.

9:30 and, behold, there talked with him two men, which were moses and
elias: 9:31 who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he
should accomplish at jerusalem.

9:32 but peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and
when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him.
 
 ___________________________
 


9:33 and it came to pass, as they departed from him, peter said unto
jesus, master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for moses, and one for elias: not
knowing what he said.

9:34 while he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them:
and they feared as they entered into the cloud.

9:35 and there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, this is my
beloved son: hear him.

9:36 and when the voice was past, jesus was found alone. and they kept
it close, and told no man in those days 
 
 ___________________________
 
l gird himself, and
make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

12:38 and if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third
watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.

12:39 and this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what
hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his house to be broken through.

12:40 be ye therefore ready also: for the son of man cometh at an hour
when ye think not.

12:41 then peter said unto him, lord, speakest thou this parable unto
us, or even to all?  12:42 and the lord said, who then is that
faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall make ruler over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?  12:43
blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.

12:44 of a truth i say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all
that he hath.

12:45 but and if that servant say in his heart, my lord delayeth his
coming;
 
 ___________________________
 
e.

18:23 and when he heard this, he was very sorrowful: for he was very
rich.

18:24 and when jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, how
hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of god!
18:25 for it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.

18:26 and they that heard it said, who then can be saved?  18:27 and
he said, the things which are impossible with men are possible with
god.

18:28 then peter said, lo, we have left all, and followed thee.

18:29 and he said unto them, verily i say unto you, there is no man
that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children,
for the kingdom of god's sake, 18:30 who shall not receive manifold
more in this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting.

18:31 then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, behold, we
go up to jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets
concerning the son of man s
 
 ___________________________
 
ey feared the people.

22:3 then entered satan into judas surnamed iscariot, being of the
number of the twelve.

22:4 and he went his way, and communed with the chief priests and
captains, how he might betray him unto them.

22:5 and they were glad, and covenanted to give him money.

22:6 and he promised, and sought opportunity to betray him unto them
in the absence of the multitude.

22:7 then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be
killed.

22:8 and he sent peter and john, saying, go and prepare us the
passover, that we may eat.

22:9 and they said unto him, where wilt thou that we prepare?  22:10
and he said unto them, behold, when ye are entered into the city,
there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him
into the house where he entereth in.

22:11 and ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, the master saith
unto thee, where is the guestchamber, where i shall eat the passover
with my disciples?  22:12 and he shall sh
 
 ___________________________
 
h appointed
unto me; 22:30 that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom,
and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of israel.

22:31 and the lord said, simon, simon, behold, satan hath desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat: 22:32 but i have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen
thy brethren.

22:33 and he said unto him, lord, i am ready to go with thee, both
into prison, and to death.

22:34 and he said, i tell thee, peter, the cock shall not crow this
day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.

22:35 and he said unto them, when i sent you without purse, and scrip,
and shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said, nothing.

22:36 then said he unto them, but now, he that hath a purse, let him
take it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him
sell his garment, and buy one.

22:37 for i say unto you, that this that is written must yet be
accomplished in me, and he was rec
 
 ___________________________
 
d jesus answered and said, suffer ye thus far. and he touched
his ear, and healed him.

22:52 then jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains of the
temple, and the elders, which were come to him, be ye come out, as
against a thief, with swords and staves?  22:53 when i was daily with
you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me: but this is
your hour, and the power of darkness.

22:54 then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high
priest's house. and peter followed afar off.

22:55 and when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and
were set down together, peter sat down among them.

22:56 but a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and
earnestly looked upon him, and said, this man was also with him.

22:57 and he denied him, saying, woman, i know him not.

22:58 and after a little while another saw him, and said, thou art
also of them. and peter said, man, i am not.

22:59 and about the space of one hour after an
 
 ___________________________
 
other confidently
affirmed, saying, of a truth this fellow also was with him: for he is
a galilaean.

22:60 and peter said, man, i know not what thou sayest. and
immediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew.

22:61 and the lord turned, and looked upon peter. and peter remembered
the word of the lord, how he had said unto him, before the cock crow,
thou shalt deny me thrice.

22:62 and peter went out, and wept bitterly.

22:63 and the men that held jesus mocked him, and smote him.

22:64 and when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face,
and asked him, saying, prophesy, who is it that smote thee?  22:65 and
many other things blasphemously spake they against him.

22:66 and as soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the
chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their
council, saying, 22:67 art thou the christ? tell us. and he said 
 
 ___________________________
 
 must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

24:8 and they remembered his words, 24:9 and returned from the
sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to all the
rest.

24:10 it was mary magdalene and joanna, and mary the mother of james,
and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the
apostles.

24:11 and their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed
them not.

24:12 then arose peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stooping down,
he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed,
wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.

24:13 and, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called
emmaus, which was from jerusalem about threescore furlongs.

24:14 and they talked together of all these things which had happened.

24:15 and it came to pass, that, while they communed together and
reasoned, jesus himself drew near, and went with them.

 
 ___________________________
 
behold the lamb of
god!  1:37 and the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed
jesus.

1:38 then jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them,
what seek ye? they said unto him, rabbi, (which is to say, being
interpreted, master,) where dwellest thou?  1:39 he saith unto them,
come and see. they came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him
that day: for it was about the tenth hour.

1:40 one of the two which heard john speak, and followed him, was
andrew, simon peter's brother.

1:41 he first findeth his own brother simon, and saith unto him, we
have found the messias, which is, being interpreted, the christ.

1:42 and he brought him to jesus. and when jesus beheld him, he said,
thou art simon the son of jona: thou shalt be called cephas, which is
by interpretation, a stone.

1:43 the day following jesus would go forth into galilee, and findeth
philip, and saith unto him, follow me.

1:44 now philip was of bethsaida, the city of andrew and peter
 
 ___________________________
 
in, and there he sat with his
disciples.

6:4 and the passover, a feast of the jews, was nigh.

6:5 when jesus then lifted up his eyes, and saw a great company come
unto him, he saith unto philip, whence shall we buy bread, that these
may eat?  6:6 and this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what
he would do.

6:7 philip answered him, two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little.

6:8 one of his disciples, andrew, simon peter's brother, saith unto
him, 6:9 there is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two
small fishes: but what are they among so many?  6:10 and jesus said,
make the men sit down. now there was much grass in the place. so the
men sat down, in number about five thousand.

6:11 and jesus took the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set
down; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would.

6:12 when they were fi
 
 ___________________________
 
s that i speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life.

6:64 but there are some of you that believe not. for jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray
him.

6:65 and he said, therefore said i unto you, that no man can come unto
me, except it were given unto him of my father.

6:66 from that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no
more with him.

6:67 then said jesus unto the twelve, will ye also go away?  6:68 then
simon peter answered him, lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the
words of eternal life.

6:69 and we believe and are sure that thou art that christ, the son of
the living god.

6:70 jesus answered them, have not i chosen you twelve, and one of you
is a devil?  6:71 he spake of judas iscariot the son of simon: for he
it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.

7:1 after these things jesus walked in galilee: for he would not walk
in jewry, because the jews sought to kill him.

7:2
 
 ___________________________
 
 being ended, the devil having now put into the heart
of judas iscariot, simon's son, to betray him; 13:3 jesus knowing that
the father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come
from god, and went to god; 13:4 he riseth from supper, and laid aside
his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.

13:5 after that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the
disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was
girded.

13:6 then cometh he to simon peter: and peter saith unto him, lord,
dost thou wash my feet?  13:7 jesus answered and said unto him, what i
do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

13:8 peter saith unto him, thou shalt never wash my feet. jesus
answered him, if i wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.

13:9 simon peter saith unto him, lord, not my feet only, but also my
hands and my head.

13:10 jesus saith to him, he that is washed needeth not save to wash
his feet, but is clean every whit: and ye a
 
 ___________________________
 
eve that i am he.

13:20 verily, verily, i say unto you, he that receiveth whomsoever i
send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent
me.

13:21 when jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and
testified, and said, verily, verily, i say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me.

13:22 then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he
spake.

13:23 now there was leaning on jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom
jesus loved.

13:24 simon peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spake.

13:25 he then lying on jesus' breast saith unto him, lord, who is it?
13:26 jesus answered, he it is, to whom i shall give a sop, when i
have dipped it. and when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to judas
iscariot, the son of simon.

13:27 and after the sop satan entered into him. then said jesus unto
him, that thou doest, do quickly.

13:28 now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unt
 
 ___________________________
 
:32 if god be glorified in him, god shall also glorify him in
himself, and shall straightway glorify him.

13:33 little children, yet a little while i am with you. ye shall seek
me: and as i said unto the jews, whither i go, ye cannot come; so now
i say to you.

13:34 a new commandment i give unto you, that ye love one another; as
i have loved you, that ye also love one another.

13:35 by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

13:36 simon peter said unto him, lord, whither goest thou? jesus
answered him, whither i go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou
shalt follow me afterwards.

13:37 peter said unto him, lord, why cannot i follow thee now? i will
lay down my life for thy sake.

13:38 jesus answered him, wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?
verily, verily, i say unto thee, the cock shall not crow, till thou
hast denied me thrice.

14:1 let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in god, believe also
in me.

14:2
 
 ___________________________
 
sus saith unto them, i am he.

and judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.

18:6 as soon then as he had said unto them, i am he, they went
backward, and fell to the ground.

18:7 then asked he them again, whom seek ye? and they said, jesus of
nazareth.

18:8 jesus answered, i have told you that i am he: if therefore ye
seek me, let these go their way: 18:9 that the saying might be
fulfilled, which he spake, of them which thou gavest me have i lost
none.

18:10 then simon peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high
priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. the servant's name was
malchus.

18:11 then said jesus unto peter, put up thy sword into the sheath:
the cup which my father hath given me, shall i not drink it?  18:12
then the band and the captain and officers of the jews took jesus, and
bound him, 18:13 and led him away to annas first; for he was father in
law to caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.

18:14 now caiaphas was he, whi
 
 ___________________________
 
ch gave counsel to the jews, that it was
expedient that one man should die for the people.

18:15 and simon peter followed jesus, and so did another disciple:
that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with jesus
into the palace of the high priest.

18:16 but peter stood at the door without. then went out that other
disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her
that kept the door, and brought in peter.

18:17 then saith the damsel that kept the door unto peter, art not
thou also one of this man's disciples? he saith, i am not.

18:18 and the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire
of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and peter stood
with them, and warmed himself.

18:19 the high priest then asked jesus of his disciples, and of his
doctrine.

18:20 jesus answered him, i spake openly to the world; i ever taught
in the synagogue, and in the temple, 
 
 ___________________________
 
n secret have i said nothing.

18:21 why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what i have said
unto them: behold, they know what i said.

18:22 and when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by
struck jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, answerest thou the
high priest so?  18:23 jesus answered him, if i have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?  18:24 now
annas had sent him bound unto caiaphas the high priest.

18:25 and simon peter stood and warmed himself. they said therefore
unto him, art not thou also one of his disciples? he denied it, and
said, i am not.

18:26 one of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose
ear peter cut off, saith, did not i see thee in the garden with him?
18:27 peter then denied again: and immediately the cock crew.

18:28 then led they jesus from caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: and
it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall,
lest they should b
 
 ___________________________
 
ces, as the manner of the jews is to bury.

19:41 now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and
in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.

19:42 there laid they jesus therefore because of the jews' preparation
day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.

20:1 the first day of the week cometh mary magdalene early, when it
was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from
the sepulchre.

20:2 then she runneth, and cometh to simon peter, and to the other
disciple, whom jesus loved, and saith unto them, they have taken away
the lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid
him.

20:3 peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to
the sepulchre.

20:4 so they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun
peter, and came first to the sepulchre.

20:5 and he stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes
lying; yet went he not in.

20:6 then cometh simon peter followin
 
 ___________________________
 
ved: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed.

20:30 and many other signs truly did jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book: 20:31 but these are
written, that ye might believe that jesus is the christ, the son of
god; and that believing ye might have life through his name.

21:1 after these things jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at
the sea of tiberias; and on this wise shewed he himself.

21:2 there were together simon peter, and thomas called didymus, and
nathanael of cana in galilee, and the sons of zebedee, and two other
of his disciples.

21:3 simon peter saith unto them, i go a fishing. they say unto him,
we also go with thee. they went forth, and entered into a ship
immediately; and that night they caught nothing.

21:4 but when the morning was now come, jesus stood on the shore: but
the disciples knew not that it was jesus.

21:5 then jesus saith unto them, children, have ye any meat? they
answer
 
 ___________________________
 
ed him, no.

21:6 and he said unto them, cast the net on the right side of the
ship, and ye shall find. they cast therefore, and now they were not
able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.

21:7 therefore that disciple whom jesus loved saith unto peter, it is
the lord. now when simon peter heard that it was the lord, he girt his
fisher's coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into
the sea.

21:8 and the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not
far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net
with fishes.

21:9 as soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals
there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.

21:10 jesus saith unto them, bring of the fish which ye have now
caught.

21:11 simon peter went up,
 
 ___________________________
 
f great
fishes, an hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so
many, yet was not the net broken.

21:12 jesus saith unto them, come and dine. and none of the disciples
durst ask him, who art thou? knowing that it was the lord.

21:13 jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish
likewise.

21:14 this is now the third time that jesus shewed himself to his
disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.

21:15 so when they had dined, jesus saith to simon peter, simon, son
of jonas, lovest thou me more than these? he saith unto him, yea,
lord; thou knowest that i love thee. he saith unto him, feed my lambs.

21:16 he saith to him again the second time, simon, son of jonas,
lovest thou me? he saith unto him, yea, lord; thou knowest that i love
thee. he saith unto him, feed my sheep.

21:17 he saith unto him the third time, simon, son of jonas, lovest
thou me? peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time,
lovest thou me? and he sa
 
 ___________________________
 
thou knowest all things;
thou knowest that i love thee. jesus saith unto him, feed my sheep.

21:18 verily, verily, i say unto thee, when thou wast young, thou
girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou
shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall
gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.

21:19 this spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify god.
and when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, follow me.

21:20 then peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom jesus loved
following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, lord,
which is he that betrayeth thee?  21:21 peter seeing him saith to
jesus, lord, and what shall this man do?  21:22 jesus saith unto him,
if i will that he tarry till i come, what is that to thee? follow thou
me.

21:23 then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that
disciple should not die: yet jesus said not unto him, he shall not
die; but, if i will that
 
 ___________________________
 
stedfastly toward heaven as he went up,
behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; 1:11 which also said,
ye men of galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same
jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

1:12 then returned they unto jerusalem from the mount called olivet,
which is from jerusalem a sabbath day's journey.

1:13 and when they were come in, they went up into an upper room,
where abode both peter, and james, and john, and andrew, philip, and
thomas, bartholomew, and matthew, james the son of alphaeus, and simon
zelotes, and judas the brother of james.

1:14 these all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication,
with the women, and mary the mother of jesus, and with his brethren.

1:15 and in those days peter stood up in the midst of the disciples,
and said, (the number of names together were about an hundred and
twenty,) 1:16 men and brethren, this scripture must needs
 
 ___________________________
 
s, and
medes, and elamites, and the dwellers in mesopotamia, and in judaea,
and cappadocia, in pontus, and asia, 2:10 phrygia, and pamphylia, in
egypt, and in the parts of libya about cyrene, and strangers of rome,
jews and proselytes, 2:11 cretes and arabians, we do hear them speak
in our tongues the wonderful works of god.

2:12 and they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to
another, what meaneth this?  2:13 others mocking said, these men are
full of new wine.

2:14 but peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and
said unto them, ye men of judaea, and all ye that dwell at jerusalem,
be this known unto you, and hearken to my words: 2:15 for these are
not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the
day.

2:16 but this is that which was spoken by the prophet joel; 2:17 and
it shall come to pass in the last days, saith god, i will pour out of
my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, and your y
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the father the promise of the holy ghost, he hath shed
forth this, which ye now see and hear.

2:34 for david is not ascended into the heavens: but he saith himself,
the lord said unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand, 2:35 until i
make thy foes thy footstool.

2:36 therefore let all the house of israel know assuredly, that god
hath made the same jesus, whom ye have crucified, both lord and
christ.

2:37 now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and
said unto peter and to the rest of the apostles, men and brethren,
what shall we do?  2:38 then peter said unto them, repent, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of jesus christ for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.

2:39 for the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the lord our god shall call.

2:40 and with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, save
yourselves from this untoward generatio
 
 ___________________________
 
ns were
done by the apostles.

2:44 and all that believed were together, and had all things common;
2:45 and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men,
as every man had need.

2:46 and they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness
and singleness of heart, 2:47 praising god, and having favour with all
the people. and the lord added to the church daily such as should be
saved.

3:1 now peter and john went up together into the temple at the hour of
prayer, being the ninth hour.

3:2 and a certain man lame from his mother's womb was carried, whom
they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called beautiful,
to ask alms of them that entered into the temple; 3:3 who seeing peter
and john about to go into the temple asked an alms.

3:4 and peter, fastening his eyes upon him with john, said, look on
us.

3:5 and he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of
 
 ___________________________
 

them.

3:6 then peter said, silver and gold have i none; but such as i have
give i thee: in the name of jesus christ of nazareth rise up and walk.

3:7 and he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up: and
immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.

3:8 and he leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into
the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising god.

3:9 and all the people saw him walking and praising god: 3:10 and they
knew that it was he which sat for alms at the beauti
 
 ___________________________
 
ful gate of the
temple: and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which
had happened unto him.

3:11 and as the lame man which was healed held peter and john, all the
people ran together unto them in the porch that is called solomon's,
greatly wondering.

3:12 and when peter saw it, he answered unto the people, ye men of
israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as
though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk?
3:13 the god of abraham, and of isaac, and of jacob, the god of our
fathers, hath glorified his son jesus; whom ye delivered up, and
denied him in the presence of pilate, when he was determined to let
him go.

3:14 but ye denied the holy one and the just, and desired a murderer
to be granted unto you; 3:15 
 
 ___________________________
 
s now eventide.

4:4 howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; and the number
of the men was about five thousand.

4:5 and it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders,
and scribes, 4:6 and annas the high priest, and caiaphas, and john,
and alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest,
were gathered together at jerusalem.

4:7 and when they had set them in the midst, they asked, by what
power, or by what name, have ye done this?  4:8 then peter, filled
with the holy ghost, said unto them, ye rulers of the people, and
elders of israel, 4:9 if we this day be examined of the good deed done
to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; 4:10 be it known
unto you all, and to all the people of israel, that by the name of
jesus christ of nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom god raised from the
dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.

4:11 this is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which
is bec
 
 ___________________________
 
ome the head of the corner.

4:12 neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

4:13 now when they saw the boldness of peter and john, and perceived
that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they
took knowledge of them, that they had been with jesus.

4:14 and beholding the man which was healed standing with them, they
could say nothing against it.

4:15 but when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council,
they conferred among themselves, 4:16 saying, what shall we do to
these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is
manifest to all them that dwell in
 
 ___________________________
 
 jerusalem; and we cannot deny it.

4:17 but that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly
threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this name.

4:18 and they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor
teach in the name of jesus.

4:19 but peter and john answered and said unto them, whether it be
right in the sight of god to hearken unto you more than unto god,
judge ye.

4:20 for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.

4:21 so when they had further threatened them, they let them go,
finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people: for
all men glorified god for that which was done.

4:22 for the man was above forty years old, on whom this miracle of
healing was shewed.

4:23 and bein
 
 ___________________________
 
ccording as he had need.

4:36 and joses, who by the apostles was surnamed barnabas, (which is,
being interpreted, the son of consolation,) a levite, and of the
country of cyprus, 4:37 having land, sold it, and brought the money,
and laid it at the apostles' feet.

5:1 but a certain man named ananias, with sapphira his wife, sold a
possession, 5:2 and kept back part of the price, his wife also being
privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles'
feet.

5:3 but peter said, ananias, why hath satan filled thine heart to lie
to the holy ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?
5:4 whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold,
was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in
thine heart?  thou hast not lied unto men, but unto god.

5:5 and ananias hearing these words fell down, and gave up the ghost:
and great fear came on all them that heard these things.

5:6 and the young men arose, wound him up, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and carried him out, and
buried him.

5:7 and it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife,
not knowing what was done, came in.

5:8 and peter answered unto her, tell me whether ye sold the land for
so much? and she said, yea, for so much.

5:9 then peter said unto her, how is it that ye have agreed together
to tempt the spirit of the lord? behold, the feet of them which have
buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out.

5:10 then fell she down straightway at his feet, and yielded up the
ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, carrying
her forth, buried her by her husband.

5:11 and great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as
heard these things.

5:12 and by the hands of the apostles we
 
 ___________________________
 
re many signs and wonders
wrought among the people; (and they were all with one accord in
solomon's porch.

5:13 and of the rest durst no man join himself to them: but the people
magnified them.

5:14 and believers were the more added to the lord, multitudes both of
men and women.)  5:15 insomuch that they brought forth the sick into
the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the
shadow of peter passing by might overshadow some of them.

5:16 there came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto
jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean
spirits: and they were healed every one.

5:17 then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him,
(which is the sect of the sadducees,) and were filled with
indignation, 5:18 and laid their hands on the apostles, and put them
in the common prison.

5:19 but the angel of the lord by night opene
 
 ___________________________
 
in the temple, and teaching the people.

5:26 then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without
violence: for they feared the people, lest they should have been
stoned.

5:27 and when they had brought them, they set them before the council:
and the high priest asked them, 5:28 saying, did not we straitly
command you that ye should not teach in this name? and, behold, ye
have filled jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this
man's blood upon us.

5:29 then peter and the other apostles answered and said, we ought to
obey god rather than men.

5:30 the god of our fathers raised up jesus, whom ye slew and hanged
on a tree.

5:31 him hath god exalted with his right hand to be a prince and a
saviour, for to give repentance to israel, and forgiveness of sins.

5:32 and we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the holy
ghost, whom god hath given to them that obey him.

5:33 when they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took
co
 
 ___________________________
 
t of long time he had
bewitched them with sorceries.

8:12 but when they believed philip preaching the things concerning the
kingdom of god, and the name of jesus christ, they were baptized, both
men and women.

8:13 then simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he
continued with philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs
which were done.

8:14 now when the apostles which were at jerusalem heard that samaria
had received the word of god, they sent unto them peter and john: 8:15
who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might
receive the holy ghost: 8:16 (for as yet he was fallen upon none of
them: only they were baptized in the name of the lord jesus.)  8:17
then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy ghost.

8:18 and when simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands
the holy ghost was given, he offered them money, 8:19 saying, give me
also this power, that on whomsoever i lay hands, he may receive t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
holy ghost.

8:20 but peter said unto him, thy money perish with thee, because thou
hast thought that the gift of god may be purchased with money.

8:21 thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is
not right in the sight of god.

8:22 repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray god, if perhaps
the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

8:23 for i perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity.

8:24 then answered simon, and said, pray ye to the lor
 
 ___________________________
 
hem coming in and going out at jerusalem.

9:29 and he spake boldly in the name of the lord jesus, and disputed
against the grecians: but they went about to slay him.

9:30 which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to caesarea,
and sent him forth to tarsus.

9:31 then had the churches rest throughout all judaea and galilee and
samaria, and were edified; and walking in the fear of the lord, and in
the comfort of the holy ghost, were multiplied.

9:32 and it came to pass, as peter passed throughout all quarters, he
came down also to the saints which dwelt at lydda.

9:33 and there he found a certain man named aeneas, which had kept his
bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy.

9:34 and peter said unto him, aeneas, jesus christ maketh thee whole:
arise, and make thy bed. and he arose immediately.

9:35 and all that dwelt at lydda and saron saw him, and turned to the
lord.

9:36 now there was at joppa a certain disciple named tabitha, which by
interpretatio
 
 ___________________________
 
n is called dorcas: this woman was full of good works and
almsdeeds which she did.

9:37 and it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died:
whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber.

9:38 and forasmuch as lydda was nigh to joppa, and the disciples had
heard that peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him
that he would not delay to come to them.

9:39 then peter arose and went with them. when he was come, they
brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him
weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which dorcas made, while
she was with them.

9:40 but peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and
turning him to the body said, tabitha, arise. and she opened her eyes:
and when she saw peter, she sat up.

9:41 and he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had
called the saints and widows, presented 
 
 ___________________________
 
evout man, and one that
feared god with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and
prayed to god alway.

10:3 he saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an
angel of god coming in to him, and saying unto him, cornelius.

10:4 and when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, what is it,
lord?  and he said unto him, thy prayers and thine alms are come up
for a memorial before god.

10:5 and now send men to joppa, and call for one simon, whose surname
is peter: 10:6 he lodgeth with one simon a tanner, whose house is by
the sea side: he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.

10:7 and when the angel which spake unto cornelius was departed, he
called two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them
that waited on him continually; 10:8 and when he had declared all
these things unto them, he sent them to joppa.

10:9 on the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto
the city, peter went up upon the housetop to pray a
 
 ___________________________
 
bout the sixth
hour: 10:10 and he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while
they made ready, he fell into a trance, 10:11 and saw heaven opened,
and a certain vessel descending upon him, as it had been a great sheet
knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth: 10:12 wherein
were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping things, and fowls of the air.

10:13 and there came a voice to him, rise, peter; kill, and eat.

10:14 but peter said, not so, lord; for i have never eaten any thing
that is common or unclean.

10:15 and the voice spake unto him again the second time, what god
hath cleansed, that call not thou common.

10:16 this was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into
heaven.

10:17 now while peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had
seen should mean, behold, the men which were sent from cornelius had
made enquiry for simon's house, and stood before the gate, 10:18 and
called, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and asked whether simon, which was surnamed peter, were lodged
there.

10:19 while peter thought on the vision, the spirit said unto him,
behold, three men seek thee.

10:20 arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting
nothing: for i have sent them.

10:21 then peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from
cornelius; and said, behold, i am he whom ye seek: what is the cause
wherefore ye are come?  10:22 and they said, cornelius the centurion,
a just man, and one that feareth god, and of good report among all the
nation of the jews, was warned from god by an holy angel to send for
thee into his house, and to hear words of thee.

10:23 then called he them in, and lodged them. and on the morrow peter
went away with them, and certain brethren
 
 ___________________________
 
 from joppa accompanied him.

10:24 and the morrow after they entered into caesarea. and cornelius
waited for them, and he had called together his kinsmen and near
friends.

10:25 and as peter was coming in, cornelius met him, and fell down at
his feet, and worshipped him.

10:26 but peter took him up, saying, stand up; i myself also am a man.

10:27 and as he talked with him, he went in, and found many that were
come together.

10:28 and he said unto them, ye know how that it is an unlawful thing
for a man that is a jew to keep company, or come unto one of another
nation; but god hath shewed me that i should not call any man common
or unclean.

10:29 therefore came i unto you without gainsaying, as soon as i was
sent for: i ask therefore for what intent ye have sent f
 
 ___________________________
 
or me?  10:30
and cornelius said, four days ago i was fasting until this hour; and
at the ninth hour i prayed in my house, and, behold, a man stood
before me in bright clothing, 10:31 and said, cornelius, thy prayer is
heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of god.

10:32 send therefore to joppa, and call hither simon, whose surname is
peter; he is lodged in the house of one simon a tanner by the sea
side: who, when he cometh, shall speak unto thee.

10:33 immediately therefore i sent to thee; and thou hast well done
that thou art come. now therefore are we all here present before god,
to hear all things that are commanded thee of god.

10:34 then peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth i perceive
that god is no respecter of persons: 10:35 but in every nation he that
feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted
 
 ___________________________
 
e:
10:40 him god raised up the third day, and shewed him openly; 10:41
not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before god, even to
us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.

10:42 and he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify
that it is he which was ordained of god to be the judge of quick and
dead.

10:43 to him give all the prophets witness, that through his name
whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.

10:44 while peter yet spake these words, the holy ghost fell on all
them which heard the word.

10:45 and they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as
many as came with peter, because that on the gentiles also was poured
out the gift of the holy ghost.

10:46 for they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify god. then
answered peter, 10:47 can any man forbid water, that these should not
be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well as we?  10:48
and he commanded them to be ba
 
 ___________________________
 
ptized in the name of the lord. then
prayed they him to tarry certain days.

11:1 and the apostles and brethren that were in judaea heard that the
gentiles had also received the word of god.

11:2 and when peter was come up to jerusalem, they that were of the
circumcision contended with him, 11:3 saying, thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.

11:4 but peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded
it by order unto them, saying, 11:5 i was in the city of joppa
praying: and in a trance i saw a vision, a certain vessel descend, as
it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by four corners; and
it came even to me: 11:6 upon the which when i had fastened mine eyes,
i considered, and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping things, and fowls of the air.

11:7 and i heard a voice saying unto me, arise, 
 
 ___________________________
 
peter; slay and eat.

11:8 but i said, not so, lord: for nothing common or unclean hath at
any time entered into my mouth.

11:9 but the voice answered me again from heaven, what god hath
cleansed, that call not thou common.

11:10 and this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into
heaven.

11:11 and, behold, immediately there were three men already come unto
the house where i was, sent from caesarea unto me.

11:12 and the spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. mor
 
 ___________________________
 
eover
these six brethren accompanied me, and we entered into the man's
house: 11:13 and he shewed us how he had seen an angel in his house,
which stood and said unto him, send men to joppa, and call for simon,
whose surname is peter; 11:14 who shall tell thee words, whereby thou
and all thy house shall be saved.

11:15 and as i began to speak, the holy ghost fell on them, as on us
at the beginning.

11:16 then remembered i the word of the lord, how that he said, john
indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the holy
ghost.

11:17 forasmuch then as god gave them the like gift as he did unto us,
who believed on the lord jesus christ; what was i, that i could
withstand god?  11:18 when they heard 
 
 ___________________________
 
ss in the days of claudius caesar.

11:29 then the disciples, every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in judaea:
11:30 which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of
barnabas and saul.

12:1 now about that time herod the king stretched forth his hands to
vex certain of the church.

12:2 and he killed james the brother of john with the sword.

12:3 and because he saw it pleased the jews, he proceeded further to
take peter also. (then were the days of unleavened bread.)  12:4 and
when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him
to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after easter to
bring him forth to the people.

12:5 peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without
ceasing of the church unto god for him.

12:6 and when herod would have brought him forth, the same night peter
was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the
keepers befo
 
 ___________________________
 
re the door kept the prison.

12:7 and, behold, the angel of the lord came upon him, and a light
shined in the prison: and he smote peter on the side, and raised him
up, saying, arise up quickly. and his chains fell off from his hands.

12:8 and the angel said unto him, gird thyself, and bind on thy
sandals.

and so he did. and he saith unto him, cast thy garment about thee, and
follow me.

12:9 and he went out, and followed him; and wist not that it was true
which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision.

12:10 when they were past the first and the second ward, they came
unto the iron gate that leadeth un
 
 ___________________________
 
to the city; which opened to them of
his own accord: and they went out, and passed on through one street;
and forthwith the angel departed from him.

12:11 and when peter was come to himself, he said, now i know of a
surety, that the lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out
of the hand of herod, and from all the expectation of the people of
the jews.

12:12 and when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of
mary the mother of john, whose surname was mark; where many were
gathered together praying.

12:13 and as peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to
hearken, named rhoda.

12:14 and when she knew peter's voice, s
 
 ___________________________
 
he opened not the gate for
gladness, but ran in, and told how peter stood before the gate.

12:15 and they said unto her, thou art mad. but she constantly
affirmed that it was even so. then said they, it is his angel.

12:16 but peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door,
and saw him, they were astonished.

12:17 but he, beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace,
declared unto them how the lord had brought him out of the prison. and
he said, go shew these things unto james, and to the brethren. and he
departed, and went into another place.

12:18 now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the
soldiers, what was become of peter.

12:19 and when herod had sought for him, an
 
 ___________________________
 
nto all the brethren.

15:4 and when they were come to jerusalem, they were received of the
church, and of the apostles and elders, and they declared all things
that god had done with them.

15:5 but there rose up certain of the sect of the pharisees which
believed, saying, that it was needful to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the law of moses.

15:6 and the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this
matter.

15:7 and when there had been much disputing, peter rose up, and said
unto them, men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago god
made choice among us, that the gentiles by my mouth should hear the
word of the gospel, and believe.

15:8 and god, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them
the holy ghost, even as he did unto us; 15:9 and put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.

15:10 now therefore why tempt ye god, to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples, which neither our fathers
 
 ___________________________
 
own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the
traditions of my fathers.

1:15 but when it pleased god, who separated me from my mother's womb,
and called me by his grace, 1:16 to reveal his son in me, that i might
preach him among the heathen; immediately i conferred not with flesh
and blood: 1:17 neither went i up to jerusalem to them which were
apostles before me; but i went into arabia, and returned again unto
damascus.

1:18 then after three years i went up to jerusalem to see peter, and
abode with him fifteen days.

1:19 but other of the apostles saw i none, save james the lord's
brother.

1:20 now the things which i write unto you, behold, before god, i lie
not.

1:21 afterwards i came into the regions of syria and cilicia; 1:22 and
was unknown by face unto the churches of judaea which were in christ:
1:23 but they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times
past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed.

1:24 and they glorified god in me.

 
 ___________________________
 
that they might bring us into bondage: 2:5 to whom we
gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the
gospel might continue with you.

2:6 but of these who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it
maketh no matter to me: god accepteth no man's person:) for they who
seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me: 2:7 but
contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the gospel of the circumcision was unto peter;
2:8 (for he that wrought effectually in peter to the apostleship of
the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the gentiles:) 2:9
and when james, cephas, and john, who seemed to be pillars, perceived
the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and barnabas the
right hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and
they unto the circumcision.

2:10 only they would that we should remember the poor; the same which
i also was forward to do.

2:11 but when peter
 
 ___________________________
 
was come to antioch, i withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed.

2:12 for before that certain came from james, he did eat with the
gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the circumcision.

2:13 and the other jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that
barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.

2:14 but when i saw that they walked not uprightly according to the
truth of the gospel, i said unto peter before them all, if thou, being
a jew, livest after the manner of gentiles, and not as do the jews,
why compellest thou the gentiles to live as do the jews?  2:15 we who
are jews by nature, and not sinners of the gentiles, 2:16 knowing that
a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of
jesus christ, even we have believed in jesus christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of christ, and not by the works of the law: for
by the works of the law shall no flesh be 
 
 ___________________________
 
ions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by
the space of three years and six months.

5:18 and he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.

5:19 brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert
him; 5:20 let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins.




the first epistle general of peter


1:1 peter, an apostle of jesus christ, to the strangers scattered
throughout pontus, galatia, cappadocia, asia, and bithynia, 1:2 elect
according to the foreknowledge of god the father, through
sanctification of the spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the
blood of jesus christ: grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied.

1:3 blessed be the god and father of our lord jesus christ, which
according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively
hope by the resurrection
 
 ___________________________
 
, settle you.

5:11 to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. amen.

5:12 by silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as i suppose, i have
written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace
of god wherein ye stand.

5:13 the church that is at babylon, elected together with you,
saluteth you; and so doth marcus my son.

5:14 greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. peace be with you
all that are in christ jesus. amen.




the second general epistle of peter


1:1 simon peter, a servant and an apostle of jesus christ, to them
that have obtained like precious faith with us through the
righteousness of god and our saviour jesus christ: 1:2 grace and peace
be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of god, and of jesus our
lord, 1:3 according as his divine power hath given unto us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him
that hath called us to glory and virtue: 1:4 whereby are given unto us
exceeding gr
 
 ___________________________
 
ere
made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness!
for in one hour is she made desolate.

18:20 rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and
prophets; for god hath avenged you on her.

18:21 and a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
cast it into the sea, saying, thus with violence shall that great city
babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

18:22 and the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman,
of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the
sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; 18:23 and
the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the
voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all
in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy
sorceries were all nations deceived.

18:24 and in her was found the blood of prophets