east of these, ye did it not to me.

25:46 and these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
righteous into life eternal.

26:1 and it came to pass, when jesus had finished all these sayings,
he said unto his disciples, 26:2 ye know that after two days is the
feast of the passover, and the son of man is betrayed to be crucified.

26:3 then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and
the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was
called caiaphas, 26:4 and consulted that they might take jesus by
subtilty, and kill him.

26:5 but they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar
among the people.

26:6 now when jesus was in bethany, in the house of simon the leper,
26:7 there came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very
precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat.

26:8 but when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, to
what purpose is this waste?  26:9 for this ointment might h
 
 ___________________________
 
e legions of angels?  26:54 but how
then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?  26:55
in that same hour said jesus to the multitudes, are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? i sat daily
with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

26:56 but all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled. then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

26:57 and they that had laid hold on jesus led him away to caiaphas
the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.

26:58 but peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace,
and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.

26:59 now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought
false witness against jesus, to put him to death; 26:60 but found
none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. at
the last came two false witnesses, 26:61 and said, this fellow said, i
am able to destroy th
 
 ___________________________
 


2:51 and he went down with them, and came to nazareth, and was subject
unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

2:52 and jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with god
and man.

3:1 now in the fifteenth year of the reign of tiberius caesar, pontius
pilate being governor of judaea, and herod being tetrarch of galilee,
and his brother philip tetrarch of ituraea and of the region of
trachonitis, and lysanias the tetrarch of abilene, 3:2 annas and
caiaphas being the high priests, the word of god came unto john the
son of zacharias in the wilderness.

3:3 and he came into all the country about jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; 3:4 as it is written
in the book of the words of esaias the prophet, saying, the voice of
one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the lord, make his
paths straight.

3:5 every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low; and the crooked s
 
 ___________________________
 
1:45 then many of the jews which came to mary, and had seen the
things which jesus did, believed on him.

11:46 but some of them went their ways to the pharisees, and told them
what things jesus had done.

11:47 then gathered the chief priests and the pharisees a council, and
said, what do we? for this man doeth many miracles.

11:48 if we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him: and the
romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.

11:49 and one of them, named caiaphas, being the high priest that same
year, said unto them, ye know nothing at all, 11:50 nor consider that
it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and
that the whole nation perish not.

11:51 and this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that
year, he prophesied that jesus should die for that nation; 11:52 and
not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in
one the children of god that were scattered abroad.

11:53 then from that day 
 
 ___________________________
 
h he spake, of them which thou gavest me have i lost
none.

18:10 then simon peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high
priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. the servant's name was
malchus.

18:11 then said jesus unto peter, put up thy sword into the sheath:
the cup which my father hath given me, shall i not drink it?  18:12
then the band and the captain and officers of the jews took jesus, and
bound him, 18:13 and led him away to annas first; for he was father in
law to caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.

18:14 now caiaphas was he, which gave counsel to the jews, that it was
expedient that one man should die for the people.

18:15 and simon peter followed jesus, and so did another disciple:
that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with jesus
into the palace of the high priest.

18:16 but peter stood at the door without. then went out that other
disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her
that kept the 
 
 ___________________________
 
emple, whither the jews always resort;
and in secret have i said nothing.

18:21 why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what i have said
unto them: behold, they know what i said.

18:22 and when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by
struck jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, answerest thou the
high priest so?  18:23 jesus answered him, if i have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?  18:24 now
annas had sent him bound unto caiaphas the high priest.

18:25 and simon peter stood and warmed himself. they said therefore
unto him, art not thou also one of his disciples? he denied it, and
said, i am not.

18:26 one of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose
ear peter cut off, saith, did not i see thee in the garden with him?
18:27 peter then denied again: and immediately the cock crew.

18:28 then led they jesus from caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: and
it was early; and they themselves went not i
 
 ___________________________
 
ptain of
the temple, and the sadducees, came upon them, 4:2 being grieved that
they taught the people, and preached through jesus the resurrection
from the dead.

4:3 and they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next
day: for it was now eventide.

4:4 howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; and the number
of the men was about five thousand.

4:5 and it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders,
and scribes, 4:6 and annas the high priest, and caiaphas, and john,
and alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest,
were gathered together at jerusalem.

4:7 and when they had set them in the midst, they asked, by what
power, or by what name, have ye done this?  4:8 then peter, filled
with the holy ghost, said unto them, ye rulers of the people, and
elders of israel, 4:9 if we this day be examined of the good deed done
to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; 4:10 be it known
unto you all, and to all the peo