 but they had all things common.

4:33 and with great power gave the apostles witness of the
resurrection of the lord jesus: and great grace was upon them all.

4:34 neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were
possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold, 4:35 and laid them down at the apostles' feet:
and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need.

4:36 and joses, who by the apostles was surnamed barnabas, (which is,
being interpreted, the son of consolation,) a levite, and of the
country of cyprus, 4:37 having land, sold it, and brought the money,
and laid it at the apostles' feet.

5:1 but a certain man named ananias, with sapphira his wife, sold a
possession, 5:2 and kept back part of the price, his wife also being
privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles'
feet.

5:3 but peter said, ananias, why hath satan filled thine heart to lie
to the holy ghost, and
 
 ___________________________
 
t damascus, proving that this is very christ.

9:23 and after that many days were fulfilled, the jews took counsel to
kill him: 9:24 but their laying await was known of saul. and they
watched the gates day and night to kill him.

9:25 then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the
wall in a basket.

9:26 and when saul was come to jerusalem, he assayed to join himself
to the disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not
that he was a disciple.

9:27 but barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and
declared unto them how he had seen the lord in the way, and that he
had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at damascus in the
name of jesus.

9:28 and he was with them coming in and going out at jerusalem.

9:29 and he spake boldly in the name of the lord jesus, and disputed
against the grecians: but they went about to slay him.

9:30 which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to caesarea,
and sent him forth to tarsus
 
 ___________________________
 
at
arose about stephen travelled as far as phenice, and cyprus, and
antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the jews only.

11:20 and some of them were men of cyprus and cyrene, which, when they
were come to antioch, spake unto the grecians, preaching the lord
jesus.

11:21 and the hand of the lord was with them: and a great number
believed, and turned unto the lord.

11:22 then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church
which was in jerusalem: and they sent forth barnabas, that he should
go as far as antioch.

11:23 who, when he came, and had seen the grace of god, was glad, and
exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto
the lord.

11:24 for he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and of faith:
and much people was added unto the lord.

11:25 then departed barnabas to tarsus, for to seek saul: 11:26 and
when he had found him, he brought him unto antioch. and it came to
pass, that a whole year they assembled themselves w
 
 ___________________________
 
 christians first in
antioch.

11:27 and in these days came prophets from jerusalem unto antioch.

11:28 and there stood up one of them named agabus, and signified by
the spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world:
which came to pass in the days of claudius caesar.

11:29 then the disciples, every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in judaea:
11:30 which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of
barnabas and saul.

12:1 now about that time herod the king stretched forth his hands to
vex certain of the church.

12:2 and he killed james the brother of john with the sword.

12:3 and because he saw it pleased the jews, he proceeded further to
take peter also. (then were the days of unleavened bread.)  12:4 and
when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him
to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after easter to
bring him forth to the people.

12:5 p
 
 ___________________________
 
heir friend, desired peace; because their country was
nourished by the king's country.

12:21 and upon a set day herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his
throne, and made an oration unto them.

12:22 and the people gave a shout, saying, it is the voice of a god,
and not of a man.

12:23 and immediately the angel of the lord smote him, because he gave
not god the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.

12:24 but the word of god grew and multiplied.

12:25 and barnabas and saul returned from jerusalem, when they had
fulfilled their ministry, and took with them john, whose surname was
mark.

13:1 now there were in the church that was at antioch certain prophets
and teachers; as barnabas, and simeon that was called niger, and
lucius of cyrene, and manaen, which had been brought up with herod the
tetrarch, and saul.

13:2 as they ministered to the lord, and fasted, the holy ghost said,
separate me barnabas and saul for the work whereunto i have called
 
 ___________________________
 
y.

13:4 so they, being sent forth by the holy ghost, departed unto
seleucia; and from thence they sailed to cyprus.

13:5 and when they were at salamis, they preached the word of god in
the synagogues of the jews: and they had also john to their minister.

13:6 and when they had gone through the isle unto paphos, they found a
certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a jew, whose name was barjesus:
13:7 which was with the deputy of the country, sergius paulus, a
prudent man; who called for barnabas and saul, and desired to hear the
word of god.

13:8 but elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation)
withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.

13:9 then saul, (who also is called paul,) filled with the holy ghost,
set his eyes on him.

13:10 and said, o full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of
the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the lord?  13:11 and now, behold, the hand
of the
 
 ___________________________
 
:40 beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in
the prophets; 13:41 behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for
i work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe,
though a man declare it unto you.

13:42 and when the jews were gone out of the synagogue, the gentiles
besought that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath.

13:43 now when the congregation was broken up, many of the jews and
religious proselytes followed paul and barnabas: who, speaking to
them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of god.

13:44 and the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to
hear the word of god.

13:45 but when the jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with
envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by paul,
contradicting and blaspheming.

13:46 then paul and barnabas waxed bold, and said, it was necessary
that the word of god should first have been spoken to you: but seeing
ye put it from you, a
 
 ___________________________
 
manded us, saying, i have set thee to be
a light of the gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the
ends of the earth.

13:48 and when the gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified
the word of the lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life
believed.

13:49 and the word of the lord was published throughout all the
region.

13:50 but the jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the
chief men of the city, and raised persecution against paul and
barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts.

13:51 but they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came
unto iconium.

13:52 and the disciples were filled with joy, and with the holy ghost.

14:1 and it came to pass in iconium, that they went both together into
the synagogue of the jews, and so spake, that a great multitude both
of the jews and also of the greeks believed.

14:2 but the unbelieving jews stirred up the gentiles, and made their
minds evil affected against the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 certain man at lystra, impotent in his feet,
being a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked: 14:9 the
same heard paul speak: who stedfastly beholding him, and perceiving
that he had faith to be healed, 14:10 said with a loud voice, stand
upright on thy feet. and he leaped and walked.

14:11 and when the people saw what paul had done, they lifted up their
voices, saying in the speech of lycaonia, the gods are come down to us
in the likeness of men.

14:12 and they called barnabas, jupiter; and paul, mercurius, because
he was the chief speaker.

14:13 then the priest of jupiter, which was before their city, brought
oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with
the people.

14:14 which when the apostles, barnabas and paul, heard of, they rent
their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, 14:15 and
saying, sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men of like passions
with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these va
 
 ___________________________
 
in from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness.

14:18 and with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that
they had not done sacrifice unto them.

14:19 and there came thither certain jews from antioch and iconium,
who persuaded the people, and having stoned paul, drew him out of the
city, supposing he had been dead.

14:20 howbeit, as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and
came into the city: and the next day he departed with barnabas to
derbe.

14:21 and when they had preached the gospel to that city, and had
taught many, they returned again to lystra, and to iconium, and
antioch, 14:22 confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting
them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much
tribulation enter into the kingdom of god.

14:23 and when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had
prayed with fasting, they commended them to the lord, on whom they
believed.

14:24 and after they had
 
 ___________________________
 
n recommended to the grace of god for the work which they
fulfilled.

14:27 and when they were come, and had gathered the church together,
they rehearsed all that god had done with them, and how he had opened
the door of faith unto the gentiles.

14:28 and there they abode long time with the disciples.

15:1 and certain men which came down from judaea taught the brethren,
and said, except ye be circumcised after the manner of moses, ye
cannot be saved.

15:2 when therefore paul and barnabas had no small dissension and
disputation with them, they determined that paul and barnabas, and
certain other of them, should go up to jerusalem unto the apostles and
elders about this question.

15:3 and being brought on their way by the church, they passed through
phenice and samaria, declaring the conversion of the gentiles: and
they caused great joy unto all the brethren.

15:4 and when they were come to jerusalem, they were received of the
church, and of the apostles and elders, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd god, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them
the holy ghost, even as he did unto us; 15:9 and put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.

15:10 now therefore why tempt ye god, to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
15:11 but we believe that through the grace of the lord jesus christ
we shall be saved, even as they.

15:12 then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to
barnabas and paul, declaring what miracles and wonders god had wrought
among the gentiles by them.

15:13 and after they had held their peace, james answered, saying, men
and brethren, hearken unto me: 15:14 simeon hath declared how god at
the first did visit the gentiles, to take out of them a people for his
name.

15:15 and to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written,
15:16 after this i will return, and will build again the tabernacle of
david, which is fallen down; and i will 
 
 ___________________________
 
e my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from
among the gentiles are turned to god: 15:20 but that we write unto
them, that they abstain from pollutions of idols, and from
fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood.

15:21 for moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him,
being read in the synagogues every sabbath day.

15:22 then pleased it the apostles and elders with the whole church,
to send chosen men of their own company to antioch with paul and
barnabas; namely, judas surnamed barsabas and silas, chief men among
the brethren: 15:23 and they wrote letters by them after this manner;
the apostles and elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren
which are of the gentiles in antioch and syria and cilicia.

15:24 forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us
have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, ye must
be circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no such commandment:
15:25 it seemed good 
 
 ___________________________
 
unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send
chosen men unto you with our beloved barnabas and paul, 15:26 men that
have hazarded their lives for the name of our lord jesus christ.

15:27 we have sent therefore judas and silas, who shall also tell you
the same things by mouth.

15:28 for it seemed good to the holy ghost, and to us, to lay upon you
no greater burden than these necessary things; 15:29 that ye abstain
from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye
shall do well. fare ye well.

 
 ___________________________
 
ssed, they came to antioch: and when they
had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle: 15:31
which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.

15:32 and judas and silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted
the brethren with many words, and confirmed them.

15:33 and after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in
peace from the brethren unto the apostles.

15:34 notwithstanding it pleased silas to abide there still.

15:35 paul also and barnabas continued in antioch, teaching and
preaching the word of the lord, with many others also.

15:36 and some days after paul said unto barnabas, let us go again and
visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of
the lord, and see how they do.

15:37 and barnabas determined to take with them john, whose surname
was mark.

15:38 but paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed
from them from pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.

15:39 and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
contention was so sharp between them, that they departed
asunder one from the other: and so barnabas took mark, and sailed unto
cyprus; 15:40 and paul chose silas, and departed, being recommended by
the brethren unto the grace of god.

15:41 and he went through syria and cilicia, confirming the churches.

16:1 then came he to derbe and lystra: and, behold, a certain disciple
was there, named timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a
jewess, and believed; but his father was a greek: 16:2 which was well
reported of by the brethren that were at lystra and iconium.

16:3 him wo
 
 ___________________________
 
her to offend.

9:1 am i not an apostle? am i not free? have i not seen jesus christ
our lord? are not ye my work in the lord?  9:2 if i be not an apostle
unto others, yet doubtless i am to you: for the seal of mine
apostleship are ye in the lord.

9:3 mine answer to them that do examine me is this, 9:4 have we not
power to eat and to drink?  9:5 have we not power to lead about a
sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the
lord, and cephas?  9:6 or i only and barnabas, have not we power to
forbear working?  9:7 who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges?
who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who
feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?  9:8 say i
these things as a man? or saith not the law the same also?  9:9 for it
is written in the law of moses, thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the
ox that treadeth out the corn. doth god take care for oxen?  9:10 or
saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sake
 
 ___________________________
 
es saw i none, save james the lord's
brother.

1:20 now the things which i write unto you, behold, before god, i lie
not.

1:21 afterwards i came into the regions of syria and cilicia; 1:22 and
was unknown by face unto the churches of judaea which were in christ:
1:23 but they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times
past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed.

1:24 and they glorified god in me.

2:1 then fourteen years after i went up again to jerusalem with
barnabas, and took titus with me also.

2:2 and i went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that
gospel which i preach among the gentiles, but privately to them which
were of reputation, lest by any means i should run, or had run, in
vain.

2:3 but neither titus, who was with me, being a greek, was compelled
to be circumcised: 2:4 and that because of false brethren unawares
brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have
in christ jesus, that they might bring us in
 
 ___________________________
 
an's person:) for they who
seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me: 2:7 but
contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the gospel of the circumcision was unto peter;
2:8 (for he that wrought effectually in peter to the apostleship of
the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the gentiles:) 2:9
and when james, cephas, and john, who seemed to be pillars, perceived
the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and barnabas the
right hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and
they unto the circumcision.

2:10 only they would that we should remember the poor; the same which
i also was forward to do.

2:11 but when peter was come to antioch, i withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed.

2:12 for before that certain came from james, he did eat with the
gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the circumcision.

2:13 a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd the other jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that
barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.

2:14 but when i saw that they walked not uprightly according to the
truth of the gospel, i said unto peter before them all, if thou, being
a jew, livest after the manner of gentiles, and not as do the jews,
why compellest thou the gentiles to live as do the jews?  2:15 we who
are jews by nature, and not sinners of the gentiles, 2:16 knowing that
a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of
jesus christ, even we have
 
 ___________________________
 
how ye ought to answer every man.

4:7  all my state shall tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved
brother, and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the lord:
4:8  whom i have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know
your estate, and comfort your hearts;
4:9  with onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. they
shall make known unto you all things which are done here.

4:10  aristarchus my fellowprisoner saluteth you, and marcus, sister's son
to barnabas, (touching whom ye received commandments: if he come unto you,
receive him;)
4:11  and jesus, which is called justus, who are of the circumcision. these
only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom of god, which have been a comfort
unto me.

4:12  epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of christ, saluteth you,
always labouring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
complete in all the will of god.

4:13  for i bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and 