bedees children.

27:57 when the even was come, there came a rich man of arimathaea,
named joseph, who also himself was jesus' disciple: 27:58 he went to
pilate, and begged the body of jesus. then pilate commanded the body
to be delivered.

27:59 and when joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean
linen cloth, 27:60 and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn
out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the
sepulchre, and departed.

27:61 and there was mary magdalene, and the other mary, sitting over
against the sepulchre.

27:62 now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the
chief priests and pharisees came together unto pilate, 27:63 saying,
sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
after three days i will rise again.

27:64 command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the
third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and
say unto the people, he is risen from the dead: so the
 
 ___________________________
 
 last error
shall be worse than the first.

27:65 pilate said unto them, ye have a watch: go your way, make it as
sure as ye can.

27:66 so they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone,
and setting a watch.

28:1 in the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first
day of the week, came mary magdalene and the other mary to see the
sepulchre.

28:2 and, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the
lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door, and sat upon it.

28:3 his countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as
snow: 28:4 and for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as
dead men.

28:5 and the angel answered and said unto the women, fear not ye: for
i know that ye seek jesus, which was crucified.

28:6 he is not
 
 ___________________________
 
 god, came,
and went in boldly unto pilate, and craved the body of jesus.

15:44 and pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto
him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.

15:45 and when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to
joseph.

15:46 and he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock,
and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.

15:47 and mary magdalene and mary the mother of joses beheld where he
was laid.

16:1 and when the sabbath was past, mary magdalene, and mary the
mother of james, and salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might
come and anoint him.

16:2 and very early in the morning the first day of the week, they
came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.

16:3 and they said among themselves, who shall roll us away the stone
from the door of the sepulchre?  16:4 and when they looked, they saw
that the stone wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 jesus of
nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the
place where they laid him.

16:7 but go your way, tell his disciples and peter that he goeth
before you into galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

16:8 and they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they
trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for
they were afraid.

16:9 now when jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to mary magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven
devils.

16:10 and she went and told them that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept.

16:11 and they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been
seen of her, believed not.

16:12 after that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they
walked, and went into the country.

16:13 and they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed
they them.

16:14 afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and
upbraide
 
 ___________________________
 
ey
were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto
them, why seek ye the living among the dead?  24:6 he is not here, but
is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in galilee,
24:7 saying, the son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

24:8 and they remembered his words, 24:9 and returned from the
sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to all the
rest.

24:10 it was mary magdalene and joanna, and mary the mother of james,
and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the
apostles.

24:11 and their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed
them not.

24:12 then arose peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stooping down,
he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed,
wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.

24:13 and, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called
emmaus, which was from jer
 
 ___________________________
 
o every soldier a part; and also his
coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.

19:24 they said therefore among themselves, let us not rend it, but
cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be
fulfilled, which saith, they parted my raiment among them, and for my
vesture they did cast lots. these things therefore the soldiers did.

19:25 now there stood by the cross of jesus his mother, and his
mother's sister, mary the wife of cleophas, and mary magdalene.

19:26 when jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing
by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, woman, behold thy son!
19:27 then saith he to the disciple, behold thy mother! and from that
hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

19:28 after this, jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, i thirst.

19:29 now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a
spunge with vinegar, and put it upo
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred
pound weight.

19:40 then took they the body of jesus, and wound it in linen clothes
with the spices, as the manner of the jews is to bury.

19:41 now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and
in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.

19:42 there laid they jesus therefore because of the jews' preparation
day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.

20:1 the first day of the week cometh mary magdalene early, when it
was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from
the sepulchre.

20:2 then she runneth, and cometh to simon peter, and to the other
disciple, whom jesus loved, and saith unto them, they have taken away
the lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid
him.

20:3 peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to
the sepulchre.

20:4 so they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun
peter, and came first 
 
 ___________________________
 
thou? whom seekest
thou?  she, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, sir, if
thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and i
will take him away.

20:16 jesus saith unto her, mary. she turned herself, and saith unto
him, rabboni; which is to say, master.

20:17 jesus saith unto her, touch me not; for i am not yet ascended to
my father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, i ascend unto my
father, and your father; and to my god, and your god.

20:18 mary magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the
lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her.

20:19 then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week,
when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear
of the jews, came jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them,
peace be unto you.

20:20 and when he had so said, he shewed unto them his hands and his
side.

then were the disciples glad, when they saw the lord.

20:21 then said jesus to 