the gospel according to saint matthew


1:1 the book of the generation of jesus christ, the son of david, the
son of abraham.

1:2 abraham begat isaac; and isaac begat jacob; and jacob begat judas
and his brethren; 1:3 and judas begat phares and zara of thamar; and
phares begat esrom; and esrom begat aram; 1:4 and aram begat aminadab;
and aminadab begat naasson; and naasson begat salmon; 1:5 and salmon
begat booz of rachab; and booz begat obed of ruth; and obed begat
jesse; 1:6 and jesse begat david the king; and david the king begat
solomon of her that had been the wife of urias; 1:7 and solomon begat
roboam; and roboam begat abia; and abia begat asa; 1:8 and asa begat
josaphat; and josaphat begat joram; and joram begat ozias; 1:9 and
ozias begat joatham; and joatham begat achaz; and achaz begat ezekias;
1:10 and ezekias begat manasses; and manasses begat amon; and amon
begat josias; 1:11 and josias begat jechonias and his brethren, about
the time they were carried away to babylon: 1:12 and after they were
brought to babylon, jechonias begat salathiel; and salathiel begat
zorobabel; 1:13 and zorobabel begat abiud; and abiud begat eliakim;
and eliakim begat azor; 1:14 and azor begat sadoc; and sadoc begat
achim; and achim begat eliud; 1:15 and eliud begat eleazar; and
eleazar begat matthan; and matthan begat jacob; 1:16 and jacob begat
joseph the husband of mary, of whom was born jesus, who is called
christ.

1:17 so all the generations from abraham to david are fourteen
generations; and from david until the carrying away into babylon are
fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into babylon unto
christ are fourteen generations.

1:18 now the birth of jesus christ was on this wise: when as his
mother mary was espoused to joseph, before they came together, she was
found with child of the holy ghost.

1:19 then joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to
make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.

1:20 but while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the
lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, joseph, thou son of david,
fear not to take unto thee mary thy wife: for that which is conceived
in her is of the holy ghost.

1:21 and she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name
jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.

1:22 now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the lord by the prophet, saying, 1:23 behold, a virgin shall
be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his
name emmanuel, which being interpreted is, god with us.

1:24 then joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the lord
had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: 1:25 and knew her not till
she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name jesus.

2:1 now when jesus was born in bethlehem of judaea in the days of
herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to
jerusalem, 2:2 saying, where is he that is born king of the jews? for
we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him.

2:3 when herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and
all jerusalem with him.

2:4 and when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the
people together, he demanded of them where christ should be born.

2:5 and they said unto him, in bethlehem of judaea: for thus it is
written by the prophet, 2:6 and thou bethlehem, in the land of juda,
art not the least among the princes of juda: for out of thee shall
come a governor, that shall rule my people israel.

2:7 then herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of
them diligently what time the star appeared.

2:8 and he sent them to bethlehem, and said, go and search diligently
for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again,
that i may come and worship him also.

2:9 when they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star,
which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood
over where the young child was.

2:10 when they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

2:11 and when they were come into the house, they saw the young child
with mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they
had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and
frankincense and myrrh.

2:12 and being warned of god in a dream that they should not return to
herod, they departed into their own country another way.

2:13 and when they were departed, behold, the angel of the lord
appeareth to joseph in a dream, saying, arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and flee into egypt, and be thou there until i
bring thee word: for herod will seek the young child to destroy him.

2:14 when he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night,
and departed into egypt: 2:15 and was there until the death of herod:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the
prophet, saying, out of egypt have i called my son.

2:16 then herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was
exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were
in bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and
under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the
wise men.

2:17 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by jeremy the prophet,
saying, 2:18 in rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and
weeping, and great mourning, rachel weeping for her children, and
would not be comforted, because they are not.

2:19 but when herod was dead, behold, an angel of the lord appeareth
in a dream to joseph in egypt, 2:20 saying, arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and go into the land of israel: for they are
dead which sought the young child's life.

2:21 and he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came
into the land of israel.

2:22 but when he heard that archelaus did reign in judaea in the room
of his father herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding,
being warned of god in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of
galilee: 2:23 and he came and dwelt in a city called nazareth: that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, he shall be
called a nazarene.

3:1 in those days came john the baptist, preaching in the wilderness
of judaea, 3:2 and saying, repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand.

3:3 for this is he that was spoken of by the prophet esaias, saying,
the voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the
lord, make his paths straight.

3:4 and the same john had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leathern
girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey.

3:5 then went out to him jerusalem, and all judaea, and all the region
round about jordan, 3:6 and were baptized of him in jordan, confessing
their sins.

3:7 but when he saw many of the pharisees and sadducees come to his
baptism, he said unto them, o generation of vipers, who hath warned
you to flee from the wrath to come?  3:8 bring forth therefore fruits
meet for repentance: 3:9 and think not to say within yourselves, we
have abraham to our father: for i say unto you, that god is able of
these stones to raise up children unto abraham.

3:10 and now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees:
therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down,
and cast into the fire.

3:11 i indeed baptize you with water unto repentance. but he that
cometh after me is mightier than i, whose shoes i am not worthy to
bear: he shall baptize you with the holy ghost, and with fire: 3:12
whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and
gather his wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire.

3:13 then cometh jesus from galilee to jordan unto john, to be
baptized of him.

3:14 but john forbad him, saying, i have need to be baptized of thee,
and comest thou to me?  3:15 and jesus answering said unto him, suffer
it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness.
then he suffered him.

3:16 and jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the
water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
spirit of god descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: 3:17 and
lo a voice from heaven, saying, this is my beloved son, in whom i am
well pleased.

4:1 then was jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of the devil.

4:2 and when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungred.

4:3 and when the tempter came to him, he said, if thou be the son of
god, command that these stones be made bread.

4:4 but he answered and said, it is written, man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
god.

4:5 then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him
on a pinnacle of the temple, 4:6 and saith unto him, if thou be the
son of god, cast thyself down: for it is written, he shall give his
angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee
up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

4:7 jesus said unto him, it is written again, thou shalt not tempt the
lord thy god.

4:8 again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain,
and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;
4:9 and saith unto him, all these things will i give thee, if thou
wilt fall down and worship me.

4:10 then saith jesus unto him, get thee hence, satan: for it is
written, thou shalt worship the lord thy god, and him only shalt thou
serve.

4:11 then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and
ministered unto him.

4:12 now when jesus had heard that john was cast into prison, he
departed into galilee; 4:13 and leaving nazareth, he came and dwelt in
capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of zabulon and
nephthalim: 4:14 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by esaias
the prophet, saying, 4:15 the land of zabulon, and the land of
nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond jordan, galilee of the
gentiles; 4:16 the people which sat in darkness saw great light; and
to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung
up.

4:17 from that time jesus began to preach, and to say, repent: for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.

4:18 and jesus, walking by the sea of galilee, saw two brethren, simon
called peter, and andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for
they were fishers.

4:19 and he saith unto them, follow me, and i will make you fishers of
men.

4:20 and they straightway left their nets, and followed him.

4:21 and going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, james the
son of zebedee, and john his brother, in a ship with zebedee their
father, mending their nets; and he called them.

4:22 and they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed
him.

4:23 and jesus went about all galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of
sickness and all manner of disease among the people.

4:24 and his fame went throughout all syria: and they brought unto him
all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and
those which were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatick,
and those that had the palsy; and he healed them.

4:25 and there followed him great multitudes of people from galilee,
and from decapolis, and from jerusalem, and from judaea, and from
beyond jordan.

5:1 and seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he
was set, his disciples came unto him: 5:2 and he opened his mouth, and
taught them, saying, 5:3 blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven.

5:4 blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

5:5 blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

5:6 blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness:
for they shall be filled.

5:7 blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

5:8 blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see god.

5:9 blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children
of god.

5:10 blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake:
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

5:11 blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.

5:12 rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in
heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

5:13 ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his
savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.

5:14 ye are the light of the world. a city that is set on an hill
cannot be hid.

5:15 neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on
a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.

5:16 let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

5:17 think not that i am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: i
am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.

5:18 for verily i say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or
one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.

5:19 whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,
and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven.

5:20 for i say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed
the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the kingdom of heaven.

5:21 ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, thou shalt
not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:
5:22 but i say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever
shall say to his brother, raca, shall be in danger of the council: but
whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

5:23 therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; 5:24 leave there
thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

5:25 agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way
with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge,
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into
prison.

5:26 verily i say unto thee, thou shalt by no means come out thence,
till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.

5:27 ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, thou shalt
not commit adultery: 5:28 but i say unto you, that whosoever looketh
on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already
in his heart.

5:29 and if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

5:30 and if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

5:31 it hath been said, whosoever shall put away his wife, let him
give her a writing of divorcement: 5:32 but i say unto you, that
whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry
her that is divorced committeth adultery.

5:33 again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time,
thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the lord thine
oaths: 5:34 but i say unto you, swear not at all; neither by heaven;
for it is god's throne: 5:35 nor by the earth; for it is his
footstool: neither by jerusalem; for it is the city of the great king.

5:36 neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make
one hair white or black.

5:37 but let your communication be, yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever
is more than these cometh of evil.

5:38 ye have heard that it hath been said, an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth: 5:39 but i say unto you, that ye resist not evil:
but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also.

5:40 and if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also.

5:41 and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

5:42 give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee turn not thou away.

5:43 ye have heard that it hath been said, thou shalt love thy
neighbour, and hate thine enemy.

5:44 but i say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you, and persecute you; 5:45 that ye may be the children of your
father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.

5:46 for if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not
even the publicans the same?  5:47 and if ye salute your brethren
only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so?  5:48
be ye therefore perfect, even as your father which is in heaven is
perfect.

6:1 take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise ye have no reward of your father which is in heaven.

6:2 therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet
before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the
streets, that they may have glory of men. verily i say unto you, they
have their reward.

6:3 but when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand doeth: 6:4 that thine alms may be in secret: and thy father
which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly.

6:5 and when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are:
for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of
the streets, that they may be seen of men. verily i say unto you, they
have their reward.

6:6 but thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou
hast shut thy door, pray to thy father which is in secret; and thy
father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.

6:7 but when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

6:8 be not ye therefore like unto them: for your father knoweth what
things ye have need of, before ye ask him.

6:9 after this manner therefore pray ye: our father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name.

6:10 thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

6:11 give us this day our daily bread.

6:12 and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

6:13 and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for
thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. amen.

6:14 for if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will
also forgive you: 6:15 but if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your father forgive your trespasses.

6:16 moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto
men to fast. verily i say unto you, they have their reward.

6:17 but thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy
face; 6:18 that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy father
which is in secret: and thy father, which seeth in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

6:19 lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and
rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: 6:20 but
lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: 6:21
for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

6:22 the light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light.

6:23 but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of
darkness.

if therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness!  6:24 no man can serve two masters: for either he will hate
the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other. ye cannot serve god and mammon.

6:25 therefore i say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye
shall put on. is not the life more than meat, and the body than
raiment?  6:26 behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither
do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly father feedeth
them. are ye not much better than they?  6:27 which of you by taking
thought can add one cubit unto his stature?  6:28 and why take ye
thought for raiment? consider the lilies of the field, how they grow;
they toil not, neither do they spin: 6:29 and yet i say unto you, that
even solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

6:30 wherefore, if god so clothe the grass of the field, which to day
is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe
you, o ye of little faith?  6:31 therefore take no thought, saying,
what shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or, wherewithal shall we
be clothed?  6:32 (for after all these things do the gentiles seek:)
for your heavenly father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things.

6:33 but seek ye first the kingdom of god, and his righteousness; and
all these things shall be added unto you.

6:34 take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of itself. sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof.

7:1 judge not, that ye be not judged.

7:2 for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

7:3 and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?  7:4 or how wilt
thou say to thy brother, let me pull out the mote out of thine eye;
and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?  7:5 thou hypocrite, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

7:6 give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn
again and rend you.

7:7 ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock,
and it shall be opened unto you: 7:8 for every one that asketh
receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it
shall be opened.

7:9 or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone?  7:10 or if he ask a fish, will he give him a
serpent?  7:11 if ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your father which is in heaven
give good things to them that ask him?  7:12 therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the law and the prophets.

7:13 enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad
is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat: 7:14 because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.

7:15 beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

7:16 ye shall know them by their fruits. do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles?  7:17 even so every good tree bringeth
forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

7:18 a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.

7:19 every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

7:20 wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

7:21 not every one that saith unto me, lord, lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my father which
is in heaven.

7:22 many will say to me in that day, lord, lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in
thy name done many wonderful works?  7:23 and then will i profess unto
them, i never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

7:24 therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth
them, i will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a
rock: 7:25 and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded
upon a rock.

7:26 and every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon
the sand: 7:27 and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the
fall of it.

7:28 and it came to pass, when jesus had ended these sayings, the
people were astonished at his doctrine: 7:29 for he taught them as one
having authority, and not as the scribes.

8:1 when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed
him.

8:2 and, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, lord,
if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

8:3 and jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, i will; be
thou clean. and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.

8:4 and jesus saith unto him, see thou tell no man; but go thy way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them.

8:5 and when jesus was entered into capernaum, there came unto him a
centurion, beseeching him, 8:6 and saying, lord, my servant lieth at
home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.

8:7 and jesus saith unto him, i will come and heal him.

8:8 the centurion answered and said, lord, i am not worthy that thou
shouldest come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant
shall be healed.

8:9 for i am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and i
say to this man, go, and he goeth; and to another, come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, do this, and he doeth it.

8:10 when jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that
followed, verily i say unto you, i have not found so great faith, no,
not in israel.

8:11 and i say unto you, that many shall come from the east and west,
and shall sit down with abraham, and isaac, and jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven.

8:12 but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer
darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

8:13 and jesus said unto the centurion, go thy way; and as thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee. and his servant was healed in the
selfsame hour.

8:14 and when jesus was come into peter's house, he saw his wife's
mother laid, and sick of a fever.

8:15 and he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose,
and ministered unto them.

8:16 when the even was come, they brought unto him many that were
possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and
healed all that were sick: 8:17 that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by esaias the prophet, saying, himself took our infirmities,
and bare our sicknesses.

8:18 now when jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave
commandment to depart unto the other side.

8:19 and a certain scribe came, and said unto him, master, i will
follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

8:20 and jesus saith unto him, the foxes have holes, and the birds of
the air have nests; but the son of man hath not where to lay his head.

8:21 and another of his disciples said unto him, lord, suffer me first
to go and bury my father.

8:22 but jesus said unto him, follow me; and let the dead bury their
dead.

8:23 and when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.

8:24 and, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch
that the ship was covered with the waves: but he was asleep.

8:25 and his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, lord, save
us: we perish.

8:26 and he saith unto them, why are ye fearful, o ye of little faith?
then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a
great calm.

8:27 but the men marvelled, saying, what manner of man is this, that
even the winds and the sea obey him!  8:28 and when he was come to the
other side into the country of the gergesenes, there met him two
possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so
that no man might pass by that way.

8:29 and, behold, they cried out, saying, what have we to do with
thee, jesus, thou son of god? art thou come hither to torment us
before the time?  8:30 and there was a good way off from them an herd
of many swine feeding.

8:31 so the devils besought him, saying, if thou cast us out, suffer
us to go away into the herd of swine.

8:32 and he said unto them, go. and when they were come out, they went
into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran
violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters.

8:33 and they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city,
and told every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the
devils.

8:34 and, behold, the whole city came out to meet jesus: and when they
saw him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.

9:1 and he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own
city.

9:2 and, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on
a bed: and jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy;
son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee.

9:3 and, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, this
man blasphemeth.

9:4 and jesus knowing their thoughts said, wherefore think ye evil in
your hearts?  9:5 for whether is easier, to say, thy sins be forgiven
thee; or to say, arise, and walk?  9:6 but that ye may know that the
son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he to the
sick of the palsy,) arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.

9:7 and he arose, and departed to his house.

9:8 but when the multitudes saw it, they marvelled, and glorified god,
which had given such power unto men.

9:9 and as jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man, named
matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him,
follow me. and he arose, and followed him.

9:10 and it came to pass, as jesus sat at meat in the house, behold,
many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his
disciples.

9:11 and when the pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, why
eateth your master with publicans and sinners?  9:12 but when jesus
heard that, he said unto them, they that be whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick.

9:13 but go ye and learn what that meaneth, i will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: for i am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

9:14 then came to him the disciples of john, saying, why do we and the
pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?  9:15 and jesus said
unto them, can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the
bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.

9:16 no man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for that
which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is
made worse.

9:17 neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the bottles
break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish: but they put
new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.

9:18 while he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a
certain ruler, and worshipped him, saying, my daughter is even now
dead: but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.

9:19 and jesus arose, and followed him, and so did his disciples.

9:20 and, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood
twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment:
9:21 for she said within herself, if i may but touch his garment, i
shall be whole.

9:22 but jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said,
daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. and the
woman was made whole from that hour.

9:23 and when jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels
and the people making a noise, 9:24 he said unto them, give place: for
the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. and they laughed him to scorn.

9:25 but when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by
the hand, and the maid arose.

9:26 and the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.

9:27 and when jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him,
crying, and saying, thou son of david, have mercy on us.

9:28 and when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him:
and jesus saith unto them, believe ye that i am able to do this? they
said unto him, yea, lord.

9:29 then touched he their eyes, saying, according to your faith be it
unto you.

9:30 and their eyes were opened; and jesus straitly charged them,
saying, see that no man know it.

9:31 but they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all
that country.

9:32 as they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man
possessed with a devil.

9:33 and when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake: and the
multitudes marvelled, saying, it was never so seen in israel.

9:34 but the pharisees said, he casteth out devils through the prince
of the devils.

9:35 and jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing
every sickness and every disease among the people.

9:36 but when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on
them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having
no shepherd.

9:37 then saith he unto his disciples, the harvest truly is plenteous,
but the labourers are few; 9:38 pray ye therefore the lord of the
harvest, that he will send forth labourers into his harvest.

10:1 and when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave
them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
manner of sickness and all manner of disease.

10:2 now the names of the twelve apostles are these; the first, simon,
who is called peter, and andrew his brother; james the son of zebedee,
and john his brother; 10:3 philip, and bartholomew; thomas, and
matthew the publican; james the son of alphaeus, and lebbaeus, whose
surname was thaddaeus; 10:4 simon the canaanite, and judas iscariot,
who also betrayed him.

10:5 these twelve jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, go not
into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the samaritans
enter ye not: 10:6 but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
israel.

10:7 and as ye go, preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

10:8 heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out
devils: freely ye have received, freely give.

10:9 provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, 10:10
nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet
staves: for the workman is worthy of his meat.

10:11 and into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in
it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.

10:12 and when ye come into an house, salute it.

10:13 and if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if
it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.

10:14 and whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when
ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

10:15 verily i say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land
of sodom and gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

10:16 behold, i send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

10:17 but beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils,
and they will scourge you in their synagogues; 10:18 and ye shall be
brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony
against them and the gentiles.

10:19 but when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye
shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall
speak.

10:20 for it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which
speaketh in you.

10:21 and the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the
father the child: and the children shall rise up against their
parents, and cause them to be put to death.

10:22 and ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that
endureth to the end shall be saved.

10:23 but when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another:
for verily i say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the cities of
israel, till the son of man be come.

10:24 the disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
lord.

10:25 it is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
servant as his lord. if they have called the master of the house
beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?  10:26
fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not
be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.

10:27 what i tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye
hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops.

10:28 and fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell.

10:29 are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your father.

10:30 but the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

10:31 fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.

10:32 whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will i
confess also before my father which is in heaven.

10:33 but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will i also deny
before my father which is in heaven.

10:34 think not that i am come to send peace on earth: i came not to
send peace, but a sword.

10:35 for i am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her
mother in law.

10:36 and a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

10:37 he that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of
me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of
me.

10:38 and he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not
worthy of me.

10:39 he that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his
life for my sake shall find it.

10:40 he that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me
receiveth him that sent me.

10:41 he that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall
receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in
the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward.

10:42 and whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones
a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily i say unto
you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

11:1 and it came to pass, when jesus had made an end of commanding his
twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their
cities.

11:2 now when john had heard in the prison the works of christ, he
sent two of his disciples, 11:3 and said unto him, art thou he that
should come, or do we look for another?  11:4 jesus answered and said
unto them, go and shew john again those things which ye do hear and
see: 11:5 the blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the gospel preached to them.

11:6 and blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.

11:7 and as they departed, jesus began to say unto the multitudes
concerning john, what went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed
shaken with the wind?  11:8 but what went ye out for to see? a man
clothed in soft raiment?  behold, they that wear soft clothing are in
kings' houses.

11:9 but what went ye out for to see? a prophet? yea, i say unto you,
and more than a prophet.

11:10 for this is he, of whom it is written, behold, i send my
messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

11:11 verily i say unto you, among them that are born of women there
hath not risen a greater than john the baptist: notwithstanding he
that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

11:12 and from the days of john the baptist until now the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.

11:13 for all the prophets and the law prophesied until john.

11:14 and if ye will receive it, this is elias, which was for to come.

11:15 he that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

11:16 but whereunto shall i liken this generation? it is like unto
children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows, 11:17
and saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.

11:18 for john came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, he hath
a devil.

11:19 the son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, behold a
man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.
but wisdom is justified of her children.

11:20 then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty
works were done, because they repented not: 11:21 woe unto thee,
chorazin! woe unto thee, bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which
were done in you, had been done in tyre and sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.

11:22 but i say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for tyre and
sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.

11:23 and thou, capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be
brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in
thee, had been done in sodom, it would have remained until this day.

11:24 but i say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land
of sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.

11:25 at that time jesus answered and said, i thank thee, o father,
lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.

11:26 even so, father: for so it seemed good in thy sight.

11:27 all things are delivered unto me of my father: and no man
knoweth the son, but the father; neither knoweth any man the father,
save the son, and he to whomsoever the son will reveal him.

11:28 come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and i will
give you rest.

11:29 take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for i am meek and lowly
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

11:30 for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

12:1 at that time jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn; and
his disciples were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn and
to eat.

12:2 but when the pharisees saw it, they said unto him, behold, thy
disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day.

12:3 but he said unto them, have ye not read what david did, when he
was an hungred, and they that were with him; 12:4 how he entered into
the house of god, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for
him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for the
priests?  12:5 or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath
days the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?
12:6 but i say unto you, that in this place is one greater than the
temple.

12:7 but if ye had known what this meaneth, i will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.

12:8 for the son of man is lord even of the sabbath day.

12:9 and when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue:
12:10 and, behold, there was a man which had his hand withered. and
they asked him, saying, is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that
they might accuse him.

12:11 and he said unto them, what man shall there be among you, that
shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day,
will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?  12:12 how much then is a
man better than a sheep? wherefore it is lawful to do well on the
sabbath days.

12:13 then saith he to the man, stretch forth thine hand. and he
stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other.

12:14 then the pharisees went out, and held a council against him, how
they might destroy him.

12:15 but when jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence: and
great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all; 12:16 and
charged them that they should not make him known: 12:17 that it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by esaias the prophet, saying, 12:18
behold my servant, whom i have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is
well pleased: i will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew
judgment to the gentiles.

12:19 he shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear his
voice in the streets.

12:20 a bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.

12:21 and in his name shall the gentiles trust.

12:22 then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and
dumb: and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake
and saw.

12:23 and all the people were amazed, and said, is not this the son of
david?  12:24 but when the pharisees heard it, they said, this fellow
doth not cast out devils, but by beelzebub the prince of the devils.

12:25 and jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or
house divided against itself shall not stand: 12:26 and if satan cast
out satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom
stand?  12:27 and if i by beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your
children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.

12:28 but if i cast out devils by the spirit of god, then the kingdom
of god is come unto you.

12:29 or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil
his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil
his house.

12:30 he that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth abroad.

12:31 wherefore i say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the holy ghost shall
not be forgiven unto men.

12:32 and whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man, it shall
be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the holy ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world
to come.

12:33 either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the
tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his
fruit.

12:34 o generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good
things?  for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.

12:35 a good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth
good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth
evil things.

12:36 but i say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.

12:37 for by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

12:38 then certain of the scribes and of the pharisees answered,
saying, master, we would see a sign from thee.

12:39 but he answered and said unto them, an evil and adulterous
generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to
it, but the sign of the prophet jonas: 12:40 for as jonas was three
days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

12:41 the men of nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of jonas;
and, behold, a greater than jonas is here.

12:42 the queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost
parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of solomon; and, behold, a
greater than solomon is here.

12:43 when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.

12:44 then he saith, i will return into my house from whence i came
out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.

12:45 then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last
state of that man is worse than the first. even so shall it be also
unto this wicked generation.

12:46 while he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.

12:47 then one said unto him, behold, thy mother and thy brethren
stand without, desiring to speak with thee.

12:48 but he answered and said unto him that told him, who is my
mother?  and who are my brethren?  12:49 and he stretched forth his
hand toward his disciples, and said, behold my mother and my brethren!
12:50 for whosoever shall do the will of my father which is in heaven,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

13:1 the same day went jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea
side.

13:2 and great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he
went into a ship, and sat; and the whole multitude stood on the shore.

13:3 and he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, behold, a
sower went forth to sow; 13:4 and when he sowed, some seeds fell by
the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up: 13:5 some fell
upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they
sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth: 13:6 and when the
sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they
withered away.

13:7 and some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked
them: 13:8 but other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit,
some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.

13:9 who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:10 and the disciples came, and said unto him, why speakest thou
unto them in parables?  13:11 he answered and said unto them, because
it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,
but to them it is not given.

13:12 for whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have
more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away
even that he hath.

13:13 therefore speak i to them in parables: because they seeing see
not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

13:14 and in them is fulfilled the prophecy of esaias, which saith, by
hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall
see, and shall not perceive: 13:15 for this people's heart is waxed
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have
closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and i should heal them.

13:16 but blessed are your eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they
hear.

13:17 for verily i say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men
have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them;
and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

13:18 hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.

13:19 when any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth
it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was
sown in his heart. this is he which received seed by the way side.

13:20 but he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he
that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it; 13:21 yet hath
he not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation
or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.

13:22 he also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth
the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches,
choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.

13:23 but he that received seed into the good ground is he that
heareth the word, and understandeth it; which also beareth fruit, and
bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.

13:24 another parable put he forth unto them, saying, the kingdom of
heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field: 13:25
but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat,
and went his way.

13:26 but when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then
appeared the tares also.

13:27 so the servants of the householder came and said unto him, sir,
didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it
tares?  13:28 he said unto them, an enemy hath done this. the servants
said unto him, wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?  13:29
but he said, nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also
the wheat with them.

13:30 let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of
harvest i will say to the reapers, gather ye together first the tares,
and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my
barn.

13:31 another parable put he forth unto them, saying, the kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed
in his field: 13:32 which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when
it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so
that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.

13:33 another parable spake he unto them; the kingdom of heaven is
like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of
meal, till the whole was leavened.

13:34 all these things spake jesus unto the multitude in parables; and
without a parable spake he not unto them: 13:35 that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, i will open my
mouth in parables; i will utter things which have been kept secret
from the foundation of the world.

13:36 then jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and
his disciples came unto him, saying, declare unto us the parable of
the tares of the field.

13:37 he answered and said unto them, he that soweth the good seed is
the son of man; 13:38 the field is the world; the good seed are the
children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked
one; 13:39 the enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the
end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

13:40 as therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so
shall it be in the end of this world.

13:41 the son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity; 13:42 and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

13:43 then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
of their father. who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:44 again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a
field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof
goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

13:45 again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man,
seeking goodly pearls: 13:46 who, when he had found one pearl of great
price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

13:47 again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast
into the sea, and gathered of every kind: 13:48 which, when it was
full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into
vessels, but cast the bad away.

13:49 so shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, 13:50 and shall cast
them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of
teeth.

13:51 jesus saith unto them, have ye understood all these things? they
say unto him, yea, lord.

13:52 then said he unto them, therefore every scribe which is
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and
old.

13:53 and it came to pass, that when jesus had finished these
parables, he departed thence.

13:54 and when he was come into his own country, he taught them in
their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, whence
hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works?  13:55 is not this
the carpenter's son? is not his mother called mary? and his brethren,
james, and joses, and simon, and judas?  13:56 and his sisters, are
they not all with us? whence then hath this man all these things?
13:57 and they were offended in him. but jesus said unto them, a
prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own
house.

13:58 and he did not many mighty works there because of their
unbelief.

14:1 at that time herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of jesus, 14:2
and said unto his servants, this is john the baptist; he is risen from
the dead; and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.

14:3 for herod had laid hold on john, and bound him, and put him in
prison for herodias' sake, his brother philip's wife.

14:4 for john said unto him, it is not lawful for thee to have her.

14:5 and when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude,
because they counted him as a prophet.

14:6 but when herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of herodias
danced before them, and pleased herod.

14:7 whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she
would ask.

14:8 and she, being before instructed of her mother, said, give me
here john baptist's head in a charger.

14:9 and the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oath's sake, and
them which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given her.

14:10 and he sent, and beheaded john in the prison.

14:11 and his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel:
and she brought it to her mother.

14:12 and his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and
went and told jesus.

14:13 when jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship into a desert
place apart: and when the people had heard thereof, they followed him
on foot out of the cities.

14:14 and jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved
with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick.

14:15 and when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, this
is a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away,
that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals.

14:16 but jesus said unto them, they need not depart; give ye them to
eat.

14:17 and they say unto him, we have here but five loaves, and two
fishes.

14:18 he said, bring them hither to me.

14:19 and he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and
took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he
blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the
disciples to the multitude.

14:20 and they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the
fragments that remained twelve baskets full.

14:21 and they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside
women and children.

14:22 and straightway jesus constrained his disciples to get into a
ship, and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the
multitudes away.

14:23 and when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a
mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there
alone.

14:24 but the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves:
for the wind was contrary.

14:25 and in the fourth watch of the night jesus went unto them,
walking on the sea.

14:26 and when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were
troubled, saying, it is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.

14:27 but straightway jesus spake unto them, saying, be of good cheer;
it is i; be not afraid.

14:28 and peter answered him and said, lord, if it be thou, bid me
come unto thee on the water.

14:29 and he said, come. and when peter was come down out of the ship,
he walked on the water, to go to jesus.

14:30 but when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and
beginning to sink, he cried, saying, lord, save me.

14:31 and immediately jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him,
and said unto him, o thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
14:32 and when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.

14:33 then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying,
of a truth thou art the son of god.

14:34 and when they were gone over, they came into the land of
gennesaret.

14:35 and when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent
out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that
were diseased; 14:36 and besought him that they might only touch the
hem of his garment: and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.

15:1 then came to jesus scribes and pharisees, which were of
jerusalem, saying, 15:2 why do thy disciples transgress the tradition
of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.

15:3 but he answered and said unto them, why do ye also transgress the
commandment of god by your tradition?  15:4 for god commanded, saying,
honour thy father and mother: and, he that curseth father or mother,
let him die the death.

15:5 but ye say, whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, it
is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; 15:6 and
honour not his father or his mother, he shall be free. thus have ye
made the commandment of god of none effect by your tradition.

15:7 ye hypocrites, well did esaias prophesy of you, saying, 15:8 this
people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with
their lips; but their heart is far from me.

15:9 but in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.

15:10 and he called the multitude, and said unto them, hear, and
understand: 15:11 not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man;
but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.

15:12 then came his disciples, and said unto him, knowest thou that
the pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?  15:13 but
he answered and said, every plant, which my heavenly father hath not
planted, shall be rooted up.

15:14 let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. and if the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

15:15 then answered peter and said unto him, declare unto us this
parable.

15:16 and jesus said, are ye also yet without understanding?  15:17 do
not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth
into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?  15:18 but those
things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and
they defile the man.

15:19 for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies: 15:20 these are the
things which defile a man: but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not
a man.

15:21 then jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of tyre and
sidon.

15:22 and, behold, a woman of canaan came out of the same coasts, and
cried unto him, saying, have mercy on me, o lord, thou son of david;
my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.

15:23 but he answered her not a word. and his disciples came and
besought him, saying, send her away; for she crieth after us.

15:24 but he answered and said, i am not sent but unto the lost sheep
of the house of israel.

15:25 then came she and worshipped him, saying, lord, help me.

15:26 but he answered and said, it is not meet to take the children's
bread, and to cast it to dogs.

15:27 and she said, truth, lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which
fall from their masters' table.

15:28 then jesus answered and said unto her, o woman, great is thy
faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt. and her daughter was made
whole from that very hour.

15:29 and jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of
galilee; and went up into a mountain, and sat down there.

15:30 and great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that
were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at
jesus' feet; and he healed them: 15:31 insomuch that the multitude
wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the
lame to walk, and the blind to see: and they glorified the god of
israel.

15:32 then jesus called his disciples unto him, and said, i have
compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three
days, and have nothing to eat: and i will not send them away fasting,
lest they faint in the way.

15:33 and his disciples say unto him, whence should we have so much
bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?  15:34 and
jesus saith unto them, how many loaves have ye? and they said, seven,
and a few little fishes.

15:35 and he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground.

15:36 and he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks,
and brake them, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the
multitude.

15:37 and they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the
broken meat that was left seven baskets full.

15:38 and they that did eat were four thousand men, beside women and
children.

15:39 and he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the
coasts of magdala.

16:1 the pharisees also with the sadducees came, and tempting desired
him that he would shew them a sign from heaven.

16:2 he answered and said unto them, when it is evening, ye say, it
will be fair weather: for the sky is red.

16:3 and in the morning, it will be foul weather to day: for the sky
is red and lowering. o ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the
sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?  16:4 a wicked and
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be
given unto it, but the sign of the prophet jonas. and he left them,
and departed.

16:5 and when his disciples were come to the other side, they had
forgotten to take bread.

16:6 then jesus said unto them, take heed and beware of the leaven of
the pharisees and of the sadducees.

16:7 and they reasoned among themselves, saying, it is because we have
taken no bread.

16:8 which when jesus perceived, he said unto them, o ye of little
faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no
bread?  16:9 do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five
loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?  16:10
neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye
took up?  16:11 how is it that ye do not understand that i spake it
not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of
the pharisees and of the sadducees?  16:12 then understood they how
that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the
doctrine of the pharisees and of the sadducees.

16:13 when jesus came into the coasts of caesarea philippi, he asked
his disciples, saying, whom do men say that i the son of man am?
16:14 and they said, some say that thou art john the baptist: some,
elias; and others, jeremias, or one of the prophets.

16:15 he saith unto them, but whom say ye that i am?  16:16 and simon
peter answered and said, thou art the christ, the son of the living
god.

16:17 and jesus answered and said unto him, blessed art thou, simon
barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my
father which is in heaven.

16:18 and i say also unto thee, that thou art peter, and upon this
rock i will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.

16:19 and i will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

16:20 then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that
he was jesus the christ.

16:21 from that time forth began jesus to shew unto his disciples, how
that he must go unto jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders
and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the
third day.

16:22 then peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, be it far
from thee, lord: this shall not be unto thee.

16:23 but he turned, and said unto peter, get thee behind me, satan:
thou art an offence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be
of god, but those that be of men.

16:24 then said jesus unto his disciples, if any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

16:25 for whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever
will lose his life for my sake shall find it.

16:26 for what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul?  16:27 for the son of man shall come in the glory of his father
with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his
works.

16:28 verily i say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall
not taste of death, till they see the son of man coming in his
kingdom.

17:1 and after six days jesus taketh peter, james, and john his
brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, 17:2 and
was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and
his raiment was white as the light.

17:3 and, behold, there appeared unto them moses and elias talking
with him.

17:4 then answered peter, and said unto jesus, lord, it is good for us
to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for
thee, and one for moses, and one for elias.

17:5 while he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and
behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, this is my beloved son,
in whom i am well pleased; hear ye him.

17:6 and when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and
were sore afraid.

17:7 and jesus came and touched them, and said, arise, and be not
afraid.

17:8 and when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save
jesus only.

17:9 and as they came down from the mountain, jesus charged them,
saying, tell the vision to no man, until the son of man be risen again
from the dead.

17:10 and his disciples asked him, saying, why then say the scribes
that elias must first come?  17:11 and jesus answered and said unto
them, elias truly shall first come, and restore all things.

17:12 but i say unto you, that elias is come already, and they knew
him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. likewise shall
also the son of man suffer of them.

17:13 then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of john
the baptist.

17:14 and when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a
certain man, kneeling down to him, and saying, 17:15 lord, have mercy
on my son: for he is lunatick, and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth
into the fire, and oft into the water.

17:16 and i brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

17:17 then jesus answered and said, o faithless and perverse
generation, how long shall i be with you? how long shall i suffer you?
bring him hither to me.

17:18 and jesus rebuked the devil; and he departed out of him: and the
child was cured from that very hour.

17:19 then came the disciples to jesus apart, and said, why could not
we cast him out?  17:20 and jesus said unto them, because of your
unbelief: for verily i say unto you, if ye have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, remove hence to yonder
place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.

17:21 howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.

17:22 and while they abode in galilee, jesus said unto them, the son
of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men: 17:23 and they shall
kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again.

and they were exceeding sorry.

17:24 and when they were come to capernaum, they that received tribute
money came to peter, and said, doth not your master pay tribute?
17:25 he saith, yes. and when he was come into the house, jesus
prevented him, saying, what thinkest thou, simon? of whom do the kings
of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of
strangers?  17:26 peter saith unto him, of strangers. jesus saith unto
him, then are the children free.

17:27 notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea,
and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when
thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money: that
take, and give unto them for me and thee.

18:1 at the same time came the disciples unto jesus, saying, who is
the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?  18:2 and jesus called a little
child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, 18:3 and said,
verily i say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

18:4 whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child,
the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

18:5 and whoso shall receive one such little child in my name
receiveth me.

18:6 but whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in
me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

18:7 woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that
offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!  18:8
wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast
them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into
everlasting fire.

18:9 and if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather
than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

18:10 take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for i
say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of
my father which is in heaven.

18:11 for the son of man is come to save that which was lost.

18:12 how think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be
gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the
mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?  18:13 and if so be
that he find it, verily i say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that
sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.

18:14 even so it is not the will of your father which is in heaven,
that one of these little ones should perish.

18:15 moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell
him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou
hast gained thy brother.

18:16 but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established.

18:17 and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church:
but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an
heathen man and a publican.

18:18 verily i say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven.

18:19 again i say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of
my father which is in heaven.

18:20 for where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am i in the midst of them.

18:21 then came peter to him, and said, lord, how oft shall my brother
sin against me, and i forgive him? till seven times?  18:22 jesus
saith unto him, i say not unto thee, until seven times: but, until
seventy times seven.

18:23 therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king,
which would take account of his servants.

18:24 and when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which
owed him ten thousand talents.

18:25 but forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be
sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to
be made.

18:26 the servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying,
lord, have patience with me, and i will pay thee all.

18:27 then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and
loosed him, and forgave him the debt.

18:28 but the same servant went out, and found one of his
fellowservants, which owed him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on
him, and took him by the throat, saying, pay me that thou owest.

18:29 and his fellowservant fell down at his feet, and besought him,
saying, have patience with me, and i will pay thee all.

18:30 and he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he
should pay the debt.

18:31 so when his fellowservants saw what was done, they were very
sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.

18:32 then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, o
thou wicked servant, i forgave thee all that debt, because thou
desiredst me: 18:33 shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellowservant, even as i had pity on thee?  18:34 and his lord was
wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all
that was due unto him.

18:35 so likewise shall my heavenly father do also unto you, if ye
from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

19:1 and it came to pass, that when jesus had finished these sayings,
he departed from galilee, and came into the coasts of judaea beyond
jordan; 19:2 and great multitudes followed him; and he healed them
there.

19:3 the pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto
him, is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?
19:4 and he answered and said unto them, have ye not read, that he
which made them at the beginning made them male and female, 19:5 and
said, for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?  19:6 wherefore
they are no more twain, but one flesh. what therefore god hath joined
together, let not man put asunder.

19:7 they say unto him, why did moses then command to give a writing
of divorcement, and to put her away?  19:8 he saith unto them, moses
because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your
wives: but from the beginning it was not so.

19:9 and i say unto you, whosoever shall put away his wife, except it
be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and
whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.

19:10 his disciples say unto him, if the case of the man be so with
his wife, it is not good to marry.

19:11 but he said unto them, all men cannot receive this saying, save
they to whom it is given.

19:12 for there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their
mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of
men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven's sake. he that is able to receive it, let him
receive it.

19:13 then were there brought unto him little children, that he should
put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.

19:14 but jesus said, suffer little children, and forbid them not, to
come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

19:15 and he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.

19:16 and, behold, one came and said unto him, good master, what good
thing shall i do, that i may have eternal life?  19:17 and he said
unto him, why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that
is, god: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.

19:18 he saith unto him, which? jesus said, thou shalt do no murder,
thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not
bear false witness, 19:19 honour thy father and thy mother: and, thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

19:20 the young man saith unto him, all these things have i kept from
my youth up: what lack i yet?  19:21 jesus said unto him, if thou wilt
be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me.

19:22 but when the young man heard that saying, he went away
sorrowful: for he had great possessions.

19:23 then said jesus unto his disciples, verily i say unto you, that
a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

19:24 and again i say unto you, it is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
god.

19:25 when his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed,
saying, who then can be saved?  19:26 but jesus beheld them, and said
unto them, with men this is impossible; but with god all things are
possible.

19:27 then answered peter and said unto him, behold, we have forsaken
all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?  19:28 and jesus
said unto them, verily i say unto you, that ye which have followed me,
in the regeneration when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of israel.

19:29 and every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my
name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit
everlasting life.

19:30 but many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be
first.

20:1 for the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers
into his vineyard.

20:2 and when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he
sent them into his vineyard.

20:3 and he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing
idle in the marketplace, 20:4 and said unto them; go ye also into the
vineyard, and whatsoever is right i will give you. and they went their
way.

20:5 again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did
likewise.

20:6 and about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others
standing idle, and saith unto them, why stand ye here all the day
idle?  20:7 they say unto him, because no man hath hired us. he saith
unto them, go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, that
shall ye receive.

20:8 so when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his
steward, call the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning from
the last unto the first.

20:9 and when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they
received every man a penny.

20:10 but when the first came, they supposed that they should have
received more; and they likewise received every man a penny.

20:11 and when they had received it, they murmured against the goodman
of the house, 20:12 saying, these last have wrought but one hour, and
thou hast made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and
heat of the day.

20:13 but he answered one of them, and said, friend, i do thee no
wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a penny?  20:14 take that
thine is, and go thy way: i will give unto this last, even as unto
thee.

20:15 is it not lawful for me to do what i will with mine own? is
thine eye evil, because i am good?  20:16 so the last shall be first,
and the first last: for many be called, but few chosen.

20:17 and jesus going up to jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart
in the way, and said unto them, 20:18 behold, we go up to jerusalem;
and the son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto
the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, 20:19 and shall
deliver him to the gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify
him: and the third day he shall rise again.

20:20 then came to him the mother of zebedees children with her sons,
worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him.

20:21 and he said unto her, what wilt thou? she saith unto him, grant
that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the
other on the left, in thy kingdom.

20:22 but jesus answered and said, ye know not what ye ask. are ye
able to drink of the cup that i shall drink of, and to be baptized
with the baptism that i am baptized with? they say unto him, we are
able.

20:23 and he saith unto them, ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be
baptized with the baptism that i am baptized with: but to sit on my
right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given
to them for whom it is prepared of my father.

20:24 and when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation
against the two brethren.

20:25 but jesus called them unto him, and said, ye know that the
princes of the gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are
great exercise authority upon them.

20:26 but it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great
among you, let him be your minister; 20:27 and whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your servant: 20:28 even as the son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
ransom for many.

20:29 and as they departed from jericho, a great multitude followed
him.

20:30 and, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they
heard that jesus passed by, cried out, saying, have mercy on us, o
lord, thou son of david.

20:31 and the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their
peace: but they cried the more, saying, have mercy on us, o lord, thou
son of david.

20:32 and jesus stood still, and called them, and said, what will ye
that i shall do unto you?  20:33 they say unto him, lord, that our
eyes may be opened.

20:34 so jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and
immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.

21:1 and when they drew nigh unto jerusalem, and were come to
bethphage, unto the mount of olives, then sent jesus two disciples,
21:2 saying unto them, go into the village over against you, and
straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose
them, and bring them unto me.

21:3 and if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, the lord hath
need of them; and straightway he will send them.

21:4 all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the prophet, saying, 21:5 tell ye the daughter of sion, behold, thy
king cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the
foal of an ass.

21:6 and the disciples went, and did as jesus commanded them, 21:7 and
brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they
set him thereon.

21:8 and a very great multitude spread their garments in the way;
others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way.

21:9 and the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried,
saying, hosanna to the son of david: blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the lord; hosanna in the highest.

21:10 and when he was come into jerusalem, all the city was moved,
saying, who is this?  21:11 and the multitude said, this is jesus the
prophet of nazareth of galilee.

21:12 and jesus went into the temple of god, and cast out all them
that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the
moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves, 21:13 and said
unto them, it is written, my house shall be called the house of
prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.

21:14 and the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he
healed them.

21:15 and when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things
that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying,
hosanna to the son of david; they were sore displeased, 21:16 and said
unto him, hearest thou what these say? and jesus saith unto them, yea;
have ye never read, out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast
perfected praise?  21:17 and he left them, and went out of the city
into bethany; and he lodged there.

21:18 now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered.

21:19 and when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found
nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, let no fruit grow
on thee henceforward for ever. and presently the fig tree withered
away.

21:20 and when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, how soon
is the fig tree withered away!  21:21 jesus answered and said unto
them, verily i say unto you, if ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall
not only do this which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye shall
say unto this mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast into the
sea; it shall be done.

21:22 and all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye
shall receive.

21:23 and when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the
elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, by
what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this
authority?  21:24 and jesus answered and said unto them, i also will
ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, i in like wise will tell you
by what authority i do these things.

21:25 the baptism of john, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? and
they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say, from heaven;
he will say unto us, why did ye not then believe him?  21:26 but if we
shall say, of men; we fear the people; for all hold john as a prophet.

21:27 and they answered jesus, and said, we cannot tell. and he said
unto them, neither tell i you by what authority i do these things.

21:28 but what think ye? a certain man had two sons; and he came to
the first, and said, son, go work to day in my vineyard.

21:29 he answered and said, i will not: but afterward he repented, and
went.

21:30 and he came to the second, and said likewise. and he answered
and said, i go, sir: and went not.

21:31 whether of them twain did the will of his father? they say unto
him, the first. jesus saith unto them, verily i say unto you, that the
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of god before you.

21:32 for john came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye
believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and
ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe
him.

21:33 hear another parable: there was a certain householder, which
planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress
in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into
a far country: 21:34 and when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent
his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of
it.

21:35 and the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed
another, and stoned another.

21:36 again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did
unto them likewise.

21:37 but last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, they will
reverence my son.

21:38 but when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves,
this is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his
inheritance.

21:39 and they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew
him.

21:40 when the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do
unto those husbandmen?  21:41 they say unto him, he will miserably
destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other
husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.

21:42 jesus saith unto them, did ye never read in the scriptures, the
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner: this is the lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
21:43 therefore say i unto you, the kingdom of god shall be taken from
you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.

21:44 and whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

21:45 and when the chief priests and pharisees had heard his parables,
they perceived that he spake of them.

21:46 but when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the
multitude, because they took him for a prophet.

22:1 and jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and
said, 22:2 the kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which
made a marriage for his son, 22:3 and sent forth his servants to call
them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come.

22:4 again, he sent forth other servants, saying, tell them which are
bidden, behold, i have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are
killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage.

22:5 but they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm,
another to his merchandise: 22:6 and the remnant took his servants,
and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.

22:7 but when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth
his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.

22:8 then saith he to his servants, the wedding is ready, but they
which were bidden were not worthy.

22:9 go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find,
bid to the marriage.

22:10 so those servants went out into the highways, and gathered
together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding
was furnished with guests.

22:11 and when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man
which had not on a wedding garment: 22:12 and he saith unto him,
friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? and he
was speechless.

22:13 then said the king to the servants, bind him hand and foot, and
take him away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

22:14 for many are called, but few are chosen.

22:15 then went the pharisees, and took counsel how they might
entangle him in his talk.

22:16 and they sent out unto him their disciples with the herodians,
saying, master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of
god in truth, neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not
the person of men.

22:17 tell us therefore, what thinkest thou? is it lawful to give
tribute unto caesar, or not?  22:18 but jesus perceived their
wickedness, and said, why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?  22:19 shew me
the tribute money. and they brought unto him a penny.

22:20 and he saith unto them, whose is this image and superscription?
22:21 they say unto him, caesar's. then saith he unto them, render
therefore unto caesar the things which are caesar's; and unto god the
things that are god's.

22:22 when they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him,
and went their way.

22:23 the same day came to him the sadducees, which say that there is
no resurrection, and asked him, 22:24 saying, master, moses said, if a
man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and
raise up seed unto his brother.

22:25 now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he
had married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto
his brother: 22:26 likewise the second also, and the third, unto the
seventh.

22:27 and last of all the woman died also.

22:28 therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the
seven?  for they all had her.

22:29 jesus answered and said unto them, ye do err, not knowing the
scriptures, nor the power of god.

22:30 for in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angels of god in heaven.

22:31 but as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read
that which was spoken unto you by god, saying, 22:32 i am the god of
abraham, and the god of isaac, and the god of jacob?  god is not the
god of the dead, but of the living.

22:33 and when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his
doctrine.

22:34 but when the pharisees had heard that he had put the sadducees
to silence, they were gathered together.

22:35 then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question,
tempting him, and saying, 22:36 master, which is the great commandment
in the law?  22:37 jesus said unto him, thou shalt love the lord thy
god with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

22:38 this is the first and great commandment.

22:39 and the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.

22:40 on these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

22:41 while the pharisees were gathered together, jesus asked them,
22:42 saying, what think ye of christ? whose son is he? they say unto
him, the son of david.

22:43 he saith unto them, how then doth david in spirit call him lord,
saying, 22:44 the lord said unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand,
till i make thine enemies thy footstool?  22:45 if david then call him
lord, how is he his son?  22:46 and no man was able to answer him a
word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more
questions.

23:1 then spake jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, 23:2
saying the scribes and the pharisees sit in moses' seat: 23:3 all
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do
not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.

23:4 for they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay
them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with
one of their fingers.

23:5 but all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make
broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,
23:6 and love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in
the synagogues, 23:7 and greetings in the markets, and to be called of
men, rabbi, rabbi.

23:8 but be not ye called rabbi: for one is your master, even christ;
and all ye are brethren.

23:9 and call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your
father, which is in heaven.

23:10 neither be ye called masters: for one is your master, even
christ.

23:11 but he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.

23:12 and whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that
shall humble himself shall be exalted.

23:13 but woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut
up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves,
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

23:14 woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour
widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye
shall receive the greater damnation.

23:15 woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass
sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him
twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.

23:16 woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, whosoever shall swear
by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of
the temple, he is a debtor!  23:17 ye fools and blind: for whether is
greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?  23:18
and, whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever
sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.

23:19 ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the
altar that sanctifieth the gift?  23:20 whoso therefore shall swear by
the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon.

23:21 and whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him
that dwelleth therein.

23:22 and he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of
god, and by him that sitteth thereon.

23:23 woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay
tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier
matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone.

23:24 ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.

23:25 woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are
full of extortion and excess.

23:26 thou blind pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup
and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

23:27 woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like
unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.

23:28 even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within
ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

23:29 woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! because ye
build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the
righteous, 23:30 and say, if we had been in the days of our fathers,
we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
prophets.

23:31 wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the
children of them which killed the prophets.

23:32 fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

23:33 ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of hell?  23:34 wherefore, behold, i send unto you prophets,
and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill and crucify;
and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute
them from city to city: 23:35 that upon you may come all the righteous
blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous abel unto the
blood of zacharias son of barachias, whom ye slew between the temple
and the altar.

23:36 verily i say unto you, all these things shall come upon this
generation.

23:37 o jerusalem, jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would i have gathered
thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not!  23:38 behold, your house is left unto you
desolate.

23:39 for i say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye
shall say, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.

24:1 and jesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his
disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple.

24:2 and jesus said unto them, see ye not all these things? verily i
say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down.

24:3 and as he sat upon the mount of olives, the disciples came unto
him privately, saying, tell us, when shall these things be? and what
shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?  24:4
and jesus answered and said unto them, take heed that no man deceive
you.

24:5 for many shall come in my name, saying, i am christ; and shall
deceive many.

24:6 and ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars: see that ye be not
troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not
yet.

24:7 for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes,
in divers places.

24:8 all these are the beginning of sorrows.

24:9 then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill
you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake.

24:10 and then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another,
and shall hate one another.

24:11 and many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.

24:12 and because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
cold.

24:13 but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

24:14 and this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.

24:15 when ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation,
spoken of by daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso
readeth, let him understand:) 24:16 then let them which be in judaea
flee into the mountains: 24:17 let him which is on the housetop not
come down to take any thing out of his house: 24:18 neither let him
which is in the field return back to take his clothes.

24:19 and woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give
suck in those days!  24:20 but pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter, neither on the sabbath day: 24:21 for then shall be great
tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this
time, no, nor ever shall be.

24:22 and except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh
be saved: but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened.

24:23 then if any man shall say unto you, lo, here is christ, or
there; believe it not.

24:24 for there shall arise false christs, and false prophets, and
shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were
possible, they shall deceive the very elect.

24:25 behold, i have told you before.

24:26 wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the
desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it
not.

24:27 for as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even
unto the west; so shall also the coming of the son of man be.

24:28 for wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be
gathered together.

24:29 immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: 24:30
and then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven: and then
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the son of
man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.

24:31 and he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet,
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one
end of heaven to the other.

24:32 now learn a parable of the fig tree; when his branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: 24:33
so likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is
near, even at the doors.

24:34 verily i say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all
these things be fulfilled.

24:35 heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away.

24:36 but of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of
heaven, but my father only.

24:37 but as the days of noe were, so shall also the coming of the son
of man be.

24:38 for as in the days that were before the flood they were eating
and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that noe
entered into the ark, 24:39 and knew not until the flood came, and
took them all away; so shall also the coming of the son of man be.

24:40 then shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the
other left.

24:41 two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken,
and the other left.

24:42 watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your lord doth come.

24:43 but know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not
have suffered his house to be broken up.

24:44 therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not
the son of man cometh.

24:45 who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made
ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?  24:46
blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.

24:47 verily i say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his
goods.

24:48 but and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my lord
delayeth his coming; 24:49 and shall begin to smite his
fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; 24:50 the lord
of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and
in an hour that he is not aware of, 24:51 and shall cut him asunder,
and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

25:1 then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins,
which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.

25:2 and five of them were wise, and five were foolish.

25:3 they that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with
them: 25:4 but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.

25:5 while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.

25:6 and at midnight there was a cry made, behold, the bridegroom
cometh; go ye out to meet him.

25:7 then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.

25:8 and the foolish said unto the wise, give us of your oil; for our
lamps are gone out.

25:9 but the wise answered, saying, not so; lest there be not enough
for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves.

25:10 and while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that
were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.

25:11 afterward came also the other virgins, saying, lord, lord, open
to us.

25:12 but he answered and said, verily i say unto you, i know you not.

25:13 watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour
wherein the son of man cometh.

25:14 for the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far
country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his
goods.

25:15 and unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to
another one; to every man according to his several ability; and
straightway took his journey.

25:16 then he that had received the five talents went and traded with
the same, and made them other five talents.

25:17 and likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two.

25:18 but he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and
hid his lord's money.

25:19 after a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and
reckoneth with them.

25:20 and so he that had received five talents came and brought other
five talents, saying, lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents:
behold, i have gained beside them five talents more.

25:21 his lord said unto him, well done, thou good and faithful
servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, i will make thee
ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:22 he also that had received two talents came and said, lord, thou
deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, i have gained two other
talents beside them.

25:23 his lord said unto him, well done, good and faithful servant;
thou hast been faithful over a few things, i will make thee ruler over
many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:24 then he which had received the one talent came and said, lord, i
knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown,
and gathering where thou hast not strawed: 25:25 and i was afraid, and
went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is
thine.

25:26 his lord answered and said unto him, thou wicked and slothful
servant, thou knewest that i reap where i sowed not, and gather where
i have not strawed: 25:27 thou oughtest therefore to have put my money
to the exchangers, and then at my coming i should have received mine
own with usury.

25:28 take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which
hath ten talents.

25:29 for unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that
which he hath.

25:30 and cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

25:31 when the son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: 25:32
and before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the
goats: 25:33 and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
goats on the left.

25:34 then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, come, ye
blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: 25:35 for i was an hungred, and ye gave me
meat: i was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: i was a stranger, and ye
took me in: 25:36 naked, and ye clothed me: i was sick, and ye visited
me: i was in prison, and ye came unto me.

25:37 then shall the righteous answer him, saying, lord, when saw we
thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?  25:38
when saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed
thee?  25:39 or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto
thee?  25:40 and the king shall answer and say unto them, verily i say
unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these
my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

25:41 then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels: 25:42 for i was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: i was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: 25:43 i was a stranger, and ye took
me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye
visited me not.

25:44 then shall they also answer him, saying, lord, when saw we thee
an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and did not minister unto thee?  25:45 then shall he answer
them, saying, verily i say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one
of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

25:46 and these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
righteous into life eternal.

26:1 and it came to pass, when jesus had finished all these sayings,
he said unto his disciples, 26:2 ye know that after two days is the
feast of the passover, and the son of man is betrayed to be crucified.

26:3 then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and
the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was
called caiaphas, 26:4 and consulted that they might take jesus by
subtilty, and kill him.

26:5 but they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar
among the people.

26:6 now when jesus was in bethany, in the house of simon the leper,
26:7 there came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very
precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat.

26:8 but when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, to
what purpose is this waste?  26:9 for this ointment might have been
sold for much, and given to the poor.

26:10 when jesus understood it, he said unto them, why trouble ye the
woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.

26:11 for ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.

26:12 for in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it
for my burial.

26:13 verily i say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done,
be told for a memorial of her.

26:14 then one of the twelve, called judas iscariot, went unto the
chief priests, 26:15 and said unto them, what will ye give me, and i
will deliver him unto you? and they covenanted with him for thirty
pieces of silver.

26:16 and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

26:17 now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples
came to jesus, saying unto him, where wilt thou that we prepare for
thee to eat the passover?  26:18 and he said, go into the city to such
a man, and say unto him, the master saith, my time is at hand; i will
keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.

26:19 and the disciples did as jesus had appointed them; and they made
ready the passover.

26:20 now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.

26:21 and as they did eat, he said, verily i say unto you, that one of
you shall betray me.

26:22 and they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them
to say unto him, lord, is it i?  26:23 and he answered and said, he
that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.

26:24 the son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that
man by whom the son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man
if he had not been born.

26:25 then judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, master, is it
i?  he said unto him, thou hast said.

26:26 and as they were eating, jesus took bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, take, eat; this is
my body.

26:27 and he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, drink ye all of it; 26:28 for this is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.

26:29 but i say unto you, i will not drink henceforth of this fruit of
the vine, until that day when i drink it new with you in my father's
kingdom.

26:30 and when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
olives.

26:31 then saith jesus unto them, all ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, i will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.

26:32 but after i am risen again, i will go before you into galilee.

26:33 peter answered and said unto him, though all men shall be
offended because of thee, yet will i never be offended.

26:34 jesus said unto him, verily i say unto thee, that this night,
before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.

26:35 peter said unto him, though i should die with thee, yet will i
not deny thee. likewise also said all the disciples.

26:36 then cometh jesus with them unto a place called gethsemane, and
saith unto the disciples, sit ye here, while i go and pray yonder.

26:37 and he took with him peter and the two sons of zebedee, and
began to be sorrowful and very heavy.

26:38 then saith he unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even
unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

26:39 and he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, o my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as i will, but as thou wilt.

26:40 and he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and
saith unto peter, what, could ye not watch with me one hour?  26:41
watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.

26:42 he went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, o my
father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except i drink it, thy
will be done.

26:43 and he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were
heavy.

26:44 and he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third
time, saying the same words.

26:45 then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, sleep on
now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the son of
man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

26:46 rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray
me.

26:47 and while he yet spake, lo, judas, one of the twelve, came, and
with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief
priests and elders of the people.

26:48 now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, whomsoever i
shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.

26:49 and forthwith he came to jesus, and said, hail, master; and
kissed him.

26:50 and jesus said unto him, friend, wherefore art thou come? then
came they, and laid hands on jesus and took him.

26:51 and, behold, one of them which were with jesus stretched out his
hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's,
and smote off his ear.

26:52 then said jesus unto him, put up again thy sword into his place:
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

26:53 thinkest thou that i cannot now pray to my father, and he shall
presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?  26:54 but how
then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?  26:55
in that same hour said jesus to the multitudes, are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? i sat daily
with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

26:56 but all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled. then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

26:57 and they that had laid hold on jesus led him away to caiaphas
the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.

26:58 but peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace,
and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.

26:59 now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought
false witness against jesus, to put him to death; 26:60 but found
none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. at
the last came two false witnesses, 26:61 and said, this fellow said, i
am able to destroy the temple of god, and to build it in three days.

26:62 and the high priest arose, and said unto him, answerest thou
nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?  26:63 but jesus
held his peace, and the high priest answered and said unto him, i
adjure thee by the living god, that thou tell us whether thou be the
christ, the son of god.

26:64 jesus saith unto him, thou hast said: nevertheless i say unto
you, hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the right hand
of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

26:65 then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, he hath spoken
blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have
heard his blasphemy.

26:66 what think ye? they answered and said, he is guilty of death.

26:67 then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others
smote him with the palms of their hands, 26:68 saying, prophesy unto
us, thou christ, who is he that smote thee?  26:69 now peter sat
without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, thou also
wast with jesus of galilee.

26:70 but he denied before them all, saying, i know not what thou
sayest.

26:71 and when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him,
and said unto them that were there, this fellow was also with jesus of
nazareth.

26:72 and again he denied with an oath, i do not know the man.

26:73 and after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to
peter, surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth
thee.

26:74 then began he to curse and to swear, saying, i know not the man.
and immediately the cock crew.

26:75 and peter remembered the word of jesus, which said unto him,
before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. and he went out, and
wept bitterly.

27:1 when the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of
the people took counsel against jesus to put him to death: 27:2 and
when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to
pontius pilate the governor.

27:3 then judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of
silver to the chief priests and elders, 27:4 saying, i have sinned in
that i have betrayed the innocent blood. and they said, what is that
to us? see thou to that.

27:5 and he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself.

27:6 and the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, it is not
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of
blood.

27:7 and they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field,
to bury strangers in.

27:8 wherefore that field was called, the field of blood, unto this
day.

27:9 then was fulfilled that which was spoken by jeremy the prophet,
saying, and they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him
that was valued, whom they of the children of israel did value; 27:10
and gave them for the potter's field, as the lord appointed me.

27:11 and jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him,
saying, art thou the king of the jews? and jesus said unto him, thou
sayest.

27:12 and when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he
answered nothing.

27:13 then said pilate unto him, hearest thou not how many things they
witness against thee?  27:14 and he answered him to never a word;
insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.

27:15 now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the
people a prisoner, whom they would.

27:16 and they had then a notable prisoner, called barabbas.

27:17 therefore when they were gathered together, pilate said unto
them, whom will ye that i release unto you? barabbas, or jesus which
is called christ?  27:18 for he knew that for envy they had delivered
him.

27:19 when he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto
him, saying, have thou nothing to do with that just man: for i have
suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.

27:20 but the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that
they should ask barabbas, and destroy jesus.

27:21 the governor answered and said unto them, whether of the twain
will ye that i release unto you? they said, barabbas.

27:22 pilate saith unto them, what shall i do then with jesus which is
called christ? they all say unto him, let him be crucified.

27:23 and the governor said, why, what evil hath he done? but they
cried out the more, saying, let him be crucified.

27:24 when pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a
tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the
multitude, saying, i am innocent of the blood of this just person: see
ye to it.

27:25 then answered all the people, and said, his blood be on us, and
on our children.

27:26 then released he barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged
jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.

27:27 then the soldiers of the governor took jesus into the common
hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.

27:28 and they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

27:29 and when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon
his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before
him, and mocked him, saying, hail, king of the jews!  27:30 and they
spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.

27:31 and after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from
him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

27:32 and as they came out, they found a man of cyrene, simon by name:
him they compelled to bear his cross.

27:33 and when they were come unto a place called golgotha, that is to
say, a place of a skull, 27:34 they gave him vinegar to drink mingled
with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.

27:35 and they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, they
parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.

27:36 and sitting down they watched him there; 27:37 and set up over
his head his accusation written, this is jesus the king of the jews.

27:38 then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right
hand, and another on the left.

27:39 and they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, 27:40
and saying, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thyself. if thou be the son of god, come down from the
cross.

27:41 likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes
and elders, said, 27:42 he saved others; himself he cannot save. if he
be the king of israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we
will believe him.

27:43 he trusted in god; let him deliver him now, if he will have him:
for he said, i am the son of god.

27:44 the thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same
in his teeth.

27:45 now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land
unto the ninth hour.

27:46 and about the ninth hour jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
eli, eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, my god, my god, why hast
thou forsaken me?  27:47 some of them that stood there, when they
heard that, said, this man calleth for elias.

27:48 and straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled
it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.

27:49 the rest said, let be, let us see whether elias will come to
save him.

27:50 jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the
ghost.

27:51 and, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the
top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; 27:52
and the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept
arose, 27:53 and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and
went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.

27:54 now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching
jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they
feared greatly, saying, truly this was the son of god.

27:55 and many women were there beholding afar off, which followed
jesus from galilee, ministering unto him: 27:56 among which was mary
magdalene, and mary the mother of james and joses, and the mother of
zebedees children.

27:57 when the even was come, there came a rich man of arimathaea,
named joseph, who also himself was jesus' disciple: 27:58 he went to
pilate, and begged the body of jesus. then pilate commanded the body
to be delivered.

27:59 and when joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean
linen cloth, 27:60 and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn
out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the
sepulchre, and departed.

27:61 and there was mary magdalene, and the other mary, sitting over
against the sepulchre.

27:62 now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the
chief priests and pharisees came together unto pilate, 27:63 saying,
sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
after three days i will rise again.

27:64 command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the
third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and
say unto the people, he is risen from the dead: so the last error
shall be worse than the first.

27:65 pilate said unto them, ye have a watch: go your way, make it as
sure as ye can.

27:66 so they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone,
and setting a watch.

28:1 in the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first
day of the week, came mary magdalene and the other mary to see the
sepulchre.

28:2 and, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the
lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door, and sat upon it.

28:3 his countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as
snow: 28:4 and for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as
dead men.

28:5 and the angel answered and said unto the women, fear not ye: for
i know that ye seek jesus, which was crucified.

28:6 he is not here: for he is risen, as he said. come, see the place
where the lord lay.

28:7 and go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the
dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into galilee; there shall ye
see him: lo, i have told you.

28:8 and they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great
joy; and did run to bring his disciples word.

28:9 and as they went to tell his disciples, behold, jesus met them,
saying, all hail. and they came and held him by the feet, and
worshipped him.

28:10 then said jesus unto them, be not afraid: go tell my brethren
that they go into galilee, and there shall they see me.

28:11 now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into
the city, and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were
done.

28:12 and when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken
counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, 28:13 saying, say
ye, his disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept.

28:14 and if this come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him,
and secure you.

28:15 so they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this
saying is commonly reported among the jews until this day.

28:16 then the eleven disciples went away into galilee, into a
mountain where jesus had appointed them.

28:17 and when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.

28:18 and jesus came and spake unto them, saying, all power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth.

28:19 go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost: 28:20
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever i have commanded you:
and, lo, i am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. amen.




the gospel according to saint mark


1:1 the beginning of the gospel of jesus christ, the son of god; 1:2
as it is written in the prophets, behold, i send my messenger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

1:3 the voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of
the lord, make his paths straight.

1:4 john did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins.

1:5 and there went out unto him all the land of judaea, and they of
jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of jordan,
confessing their sins.

1:6 and john was clothed with camel's hair, and with a girdle of a
skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey; 1:7 and
preached, saying, there cometh one mightier than i after me, the
latchet of whose shoes i am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.

1:8 i indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you
with the holy ghost.

1:9 and it came to pass in those days, that jesus came from nazareth
of galilee, and was baptized of john in jordan.

1:10 and straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens
opened, and the spirit like a dove descending upon him: 1:11 and there
came a voice from heaven, saying, thou art my beloved son, in whom i
am well pleased.

1:12 and immediately the spirit driveth him into the wilderness.

1:13 and he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of satan;
and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him.

1:14 now after that john was put in prison, jesus came into galilee,
preaching the gospel of the kingdom of god, 1:15 and saying, the time
is fulfilled, and the kingdom of god is at hand: repent ye, and
believe the gospel.

1:16 now as he walked by the sea of galilee, he saw simon and andrew
his brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.

1:17 and jesus said unto them, come ye after me, and i will make you
to become fishers of men.

1:18 and straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him.

1:19 and when he had gone a little farther thence, he saw james the
son of zebedee, and john his brother, who also were in the ship
mending their nets.

1:20 and straightway he called them: and they left their father
zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.

1:21 and they went into capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day
he entered into the synagogue, and taught.

1:22 and they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as
one that had authority, and not as the scribes.

1:23 and there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit;
and he cried out, 1:24 saying, let us alone; what have we to do with
thee, thou jesus of nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? i know thee
who thou art, the holy one of god.

1:25 and jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of
him.

1:26 and when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud
voice, he came out of him.

1:27 and they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among
themselves, saying, what thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for
with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him.

1:28 and immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region
round about galilee.

1:29 and forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they
entered into the house of simon and andrew, with james and john.

1:30 but simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell
him of her.

1:31 and he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and
immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.

1:32 and at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that
were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils.

1:33 and all the city was gathered together at the door.

1:34 and he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast
out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they
knew him.

1:35 and in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went
out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.

1:36 and simon and they that were with him followed after him.

1:37 and when they had found him, they said unto him, all men seek for
thee.

1:38 and he said unto them, let us go into the next towns, that i may
preach there also: for therefore came i forth.

1:39 and he preached in their synagogues throughout all galilee, and
cast out devils.

1:40 and there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down
to him, and saying unto him, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

1:41 and jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched
him, and saith unto him, i will; be thou clean.

1:42 and as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed
from him, and he was cleansed.

1:43 and he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away; 1:44
and saith unto him, see thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things
which moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

1:45 but he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze
abroad the matter, insomuch that jesus could no more openly enter into
the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from
every quarter.

2:1 and again he entered into capernaum after some days; and it was
noised that he was in the house.

2:2 and straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there
was no room to receive them, no, not so much as about the door: and he
preached the word unto them.

2:3 and they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was
borne of four.

2:4 and when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they
uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they
let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.

2:5 when jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy,
son, thy sins be forgiven thee.

2:6 but there was certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning
in their hearts, 2:7 why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can
forgive sins but god only?  2:8 and immediately when jesus perceived
in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto
them, why reason ye these things in your hearts?  2:9 whether is it
easier to say to the sick of the palsy, thy sins be forgiven thee; or
to say, arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?  2:10 but that ye may
know that the son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he
saith to the sick of the palsy,) 2:11 i say unto thee, arise, and take
up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house.

2:12 and immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before
them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified god,
saying, we never saw it on this fashion.

2:13 and he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude
resorted unto him, and he taught them.

2:14 and as he passed by, he saw levi the son of alphaeus sitting at
the receipt of custom, and said unto him, follow me. and he arose and
followed him.

2:15 and it came to pass, that, as jesus sat at meat in his house,
many publicans and sinners sat also together with jesus and his
disciples: for there were many, and they followed him.

2:16 and when the scribes and pharisees saw him eat with publicans and
sinners, they said unto his disciples, how is it that he eateth and
drinketh with publicans and sinners?  2:17 when jesus heard it, he
saith unto them, they that are whole have no need of the physician,
but they that are sick: i came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance.

2:18 and the disciples of john and of the pharisees used to fast: and
they come and say unto him, why do the disciples of john and of the
pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?  2:19 and jesus said unto
them, can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom
is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they
cannot fast.

2:20 but the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

2:21 no man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else
the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent
is made worse.

2:22 and no man putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new wine
doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will
be marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles.

2:23 and it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the
sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears
of corn.

2:24 and the pharisees said unto him, behold, why do they on the
sabbath day that which is not lawful?  2:25 and he said unto them,
have ye never read what david did, when he had need, and was an
hungred, he, and they that were with him?  2:26 how he went into the
house of god in the days of abiathar the high priest, and did eat the
shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave
also to them which were with him?  2:27 and he said unto them, the
sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: 2:28 therefore
the son of man is lord also of the sabbath.

3:1 and he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there
which had a withered hand.

3:2 and they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath
day; that they might accuse him.

3:3 and he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, stand
forth.

3:4 and he saith unto them, is it lawful to do good on the sabbath
days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? but they held their
peace.

3:5 and when he had looked round about on them with anger, being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man,
stretch forth thine hand. and he stretched it out: and his hand was
restored whole as the other.

3:6 and the pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with
the herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

3:7 but jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a
great multitude from galilee followed him, and from judaea, 3:8 and
from jerusalem, and from idumaea, and from beyond jordan; and they
about tyre and sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what
great things he did, came unto him.

3:9 and he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on
him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.

3:10 for he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for
to touch him, as many as had plagues.

3:11 and unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and
cried, saying, thou art the son of god.

3:12 and he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.

3:13 and he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he
would: and they came unto him.

3:14 and he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach, 3:15 and to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 3:16 and simon he surnamed peter;
3:17 and james the son of zebedee, and john the brother of james; and
he surnamed them boanerges, which is, the sons of thunder: 3:18 and
andrew, and philip, and bartholomew, and matthew, and thomas, and
james the son of alphaeus, and thaddaeus, and simon the canaanite,
3:19 and judas iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into
an house.

3:20 and the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread.

3:21 and when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him: for they said, he is beside himself.

3:22 and the scribes which came down from jerusalem said, he hath
beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils.

3:23 and he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, how
can satan cast out satan?  3:24 and if a kingdom be divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.

3:25 and if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot
stand.

3:26 and if satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot
stand, but hath an end.

3:27 no man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his
house.

3:28 verily i say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons
of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: 3:29
but he that shall blaspheme against the holy ghost hath never
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation.

3:30 because they said, he hath an unclean spirit.

3:31 there came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing
without, sent unto him, calling him.

3:32 and the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, behold,
thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.

3:33 and he answered them, saying, who is my mother, or my brethren?
3:34 and he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said,
behold my mother and my brethren!  3:35 for whosoever shall do the
will of god, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

4:1 and he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was
gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship,
and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the
land.

4:2 and he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in
his doctrine, 4:3 hearken; behold, there went out a sower to sow: 4:4
and it came to pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the
fowls of the air came and devoured it up.

4:5 and some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and
immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth: 4:6 but
when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it
withered away.

4:7 and some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it,
and it yielded no fruit.

4:8 and other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up
and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and
some an hundred.

4:9 and he said unto them, he that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

4:10 and when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve
asked of him the parable.

4:11 and he said unto them, unto you it is given to know the mystery
of the kingdom of god: but unto them that are without, all these
things are done in parables: 4:12 that seeing they may see, and not
perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any
time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.

4:13 and he said unto them, know ye not this parable? and how then
will ye know all parables?  4:14 the sower soweth the word.

4:15 and these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but
when they have heard, satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the
word that was sown in their hearts.

4:16 and these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who,
when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness;
4:17 and have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time:
afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word's sake,
immediately they are offended.

4:18 and these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the
word, 4:19 and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of
riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and
it becometh unfruitful.

4:20 and these are they which are sown on good ground; such as hear
the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some
sixty, and some an hundred.

4:21 and he said unto them, is a candle brought to be put under a
bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?  4:22 for
there is nothing hid, which shall not be manifested; neither was any
thing kept secret, but that it should come abroad.

4:23 if any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

4:24 and he said unto them, take heed what ye hear: with what measure
ye mete, it shall be measured to you: and unto you that hear shall
more be given.

4:25 for he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not,
from him shall be taken even that which he hath.

4:26 and he said, so is the kingdom of god, as if a man should cast
seed into the ground; 4:27 and should sleep, and rise night and day,
and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how.

4:28 for the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade,
then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.

4:29 but when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in
the sickle, because the harvest is come.

4:30 and he said, whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of god? or with
what comparison shall we compare it?  4:31 it is like a grain of
mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all
the seeds that be in the earth: 4:32 but when it is sown, it groweth
up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great
branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of
it.

4:33 and with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they
were able to hear it.

4:34 but without a parable spake he not unto them: and when they were
alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.

4:35 and the same day, when the even was come, he saith unto them, let
us pass over unto the other side.

4:36 and when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as
he was in the ship. and there were also with him other little ships.

4:37 and there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into
the ship, so that it was now full.

4:38 and he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow:
and they awake him, and say unto him, master, carest thou not that we
perish?  4:39 and he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the
sea, peace, be still. and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.

4:40 and he said unto them, why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye
have no faith?  4:41 and they feared exceedingly, and said one to
another, what manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea
obey him?  5:1 and they came over unto the other side of the sea, into
the country of the gadarenes.

5:2 and when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him
out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, 5:3 who had his
dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with
chains: 5:4 because that he had been often bound with fetters and
chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the
fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him.

5:5 and always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the
tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones.

5:6 but when he saw jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him, 5:7 and
cried with a loud voice, and said, what have i to do with thee, jesus,
thou son of the most high god? i adjure thee by god, that thou torment
me not.

5:8 for he said unto him, come out of the man, thou unclean spirit.

5:9 and he asked him, what is thy name? and he answered, saying, my
name is legion: for we are many.

5:10 and he besought him much that he would not send them away out of
the country.

5:11 now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine
feeding.

5:12 and all the devils besought him, saying, send us into the swine,
that we may enter into them.

5:13 and forthwith jesus gave them leave. and the unclean spirits went
out, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a
steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were
choked in the sea.

5:14 and they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city, and in
the country. and they went out to see what it was that was done.

5:15 and they come to jesus, and see him that was possessed with the
devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right
mind: and they were afraid.

5:16 and they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was
possessed with the devil, and also concerning the swine.

5:17 and they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts.

5:18 and when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed
with the devil prayed him that he might be with him.

5:19 howbeit jesus suffered him not, but saith unto him, go home to
thy friends, and tell them how great things the lord hath done for
thee, and hath had compassion on thee.

5:20 and he departed, and began to publish in decapolis how great
things jesus had done for him: and all men did marvel.

5:21 and when jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side,
much people gathered unto him: and he was nigh unto the sea.

5:22 and, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue,
jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell at his feet, 5:23 and
besought him greatly, saying, my little daughter lieth at the point of
death: i pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be
healed; and she shall live.

5:24 and jesus went with him; and much people followed him, and
thronged him.

5:25 and a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years,
5:26 and had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent
all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse,
5:27 when she had heard of jesus, came in the press behind, and
touched his garment.

5:28 for she said, if i may touch but his clothes, i shall be whole.

5:29 and straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she
felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.

5:30 and jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone
out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, who touched my
clothes?  5:31 and his disciples said unto him, thou seest the
multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, who touched me?  5:32 and
he looked round about to see her that had done this thing.

5:33 but the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in
her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.

5:34 and he said unto her, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole;
go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.

5:35 while he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's
house certain which said, thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the
master any further?  5:36 as soon as jesus heard the word that was
spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, be not afraid, only
believe.

5:37 and he suffered no man to follow him, save peter, and james, and
john the brother of james.

5:38 and he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and
seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.

5:39 and when he was come in, he saith unto them, why make ye this
ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.

5:40 and they laughed him to scorn. but when he had put them all out,
he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were
with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.

5:41 and he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, talitha
cumi; which is, being interpreted, damsel, i say unto thee, arise.

5:42 and straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the
age of twelve years. and they were astonished with a great
astonishment.

5:43 and he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and
commanded that something should be given her to eat.

6:1 and he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and
his disciples follow him.

6:2 and when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the
synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying, from whence
hath this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given
unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?  6:3
is not this the carpenter, the son of mary, the brother of james, and
joses, and of juda, and simon? and are not his sisters here with us?
and they were offended at him.

6:4 but jesus, said unto them, a prophet is not without honour, but in
his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house.

6:5 and he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands
upon a few sick folk, and healed them.

6:6 and he marvelled because of their unbelief. and he went round
about the villages, teaching.

6:7 and he called unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by
two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits; 6:8 and
commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, save a
staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse: 6:9 but be
shod with sandals; and not put on two coats.

6:10 and he said unto them, in what place soever ye enter into an
house, there abide till ye depart from that place.

6:11 and whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart
thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against
them.

verily i say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for sodom and
gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

6:12 and they went out, and preached that men should repent.

6:13 and they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that
were sick, and healed them.

6:14 and king herod heard of him; (for his name was spread abroad:)
and he said, that john the baptist was risen from the dead, and
therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.

6:15 others said, that it is elias. and others said, that it is a
prophet, or as one of the prophets.

6:16 but when herod heard thereof, he said, it is john, whom i
beheaded: he is risen from the dead.

6:17 for herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon john, and
bound him in prison for herodias' sake, his brother philip's wife: for
he had married her.

6:18 for john had said unto herod, it is not lawful for thee to have
thy brother's wife.

6:19 therefore herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have
killed him; but she could not: 6:20 for herod feared john, knowing
that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when he
heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.

6:21 and when a convenient day was come, that herod on his birthday
made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of
galilee; 6:22 and when the daughter of the said herodias came in, and
danced, and pleased herod and them that sat with him, the king said
unto the damsel, ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and i will give it
thee.

6:23 and he sware unto her, whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, i will
give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.

6:24 and she went forth, and said unto her mother, what shall i ask?
and she said, the head of john the baptist.

6:25 and she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked,
saying, i will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of
john the baptist.

6:26 and the king was exceeding sorry; yet for his oath's sake, and
for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.

6:27 and immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his
head to be brought: and he went and beheaded him in the prison, 6:28
and brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the
damsel gave it to her mother.

6:29 and when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his
corpse, and laid it in a tomb.

6:30 and the apostles gathered themselves together unto jesus, and
told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had
taught.

6:31 and he said unto them, come ye yourselves apart into a desert
place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and
they had no leisure so much as to eat.

6:32 and they departed into a desert place by ship privately.

6:33 and the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran
afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together
unto him.

6:34 and jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with
compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a
shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.

6:35 and when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him,
and said, this is a desert place, and now the time is far passed: 6:36
send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and
into the villages, and buy themselves bread: for they have nothing to
eat.

6:37 he answered and said unto them, give ye them to eat. and they say
unto him, shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and
give them to eat?  6:38 he saith unto them, how many loaves have ye?
go and see. and when they knew, they say, five, and two fishes.

6:39 and he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the
green grass.

6:40 and they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.

6:41 and when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he
looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them
to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he
among them all.

6:42 and they did all eat, and were filled.

6:43 and they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and of the
fishes.

6:44 and they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men.

6:45 and straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the
ship, and to go to the other side before unto bethsaida, while he sent
away the people.

6:46 and when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to
pray.

6:47 and when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and
he alone on the land.

6:48 and he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto
them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them,
walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.

6:49 but when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had
been a spirit, and cried out: 6:50 for they all saw him, and were
troubled. and immediately he talked with them, and saith unto them, be
of good cheer: it is i; be not afraid.

6:51 and he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased: and
they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered.

6:52 for they considered not the miracle of the loaves: for their
heart was hardened.

6:53 and when they had passed over, they came into the land of
gennesaret, and drew to the shore.

6:54 and when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew
him, 6:55 and ran through that whole region round about, and began to
carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was.

6:56 and whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or
country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they
might touch if it were but the border of his garment: and as many as
touched him were made whole.

7:1 then came together unto him the pharisees, and certain of the
scribes, which came from jerusalem.

7:2 and when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled,
that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found fault.

7:3 for the pharisees, and all the jews, except they wash their hands
oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders.

7:4 and when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat
not.

and many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as
the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables.

7:5 then the pharisees and scribes asked him, why walk not thy
disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with
unwashen hands?  7:6 he answered and said unto them, well hath esaias
prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, this people honoureth
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

7:7 howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.

7:8 for laying aside the commandment of god, ye hold the tradition of
men, as the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like things
ye do.

7:9 and he said unto them, full well ye reject the commandment of god,
that ye may keep your own tradition.

7:10 for moses said, honour thy father and thy mother; and, whoso
curseth father or mother, let him die the death: 7:11 but ye say, if a
man shall say to his father or mother, it is corban, that is to say, a
gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; he shall be free.

7:12 and ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his
mother; 7:13 making the word of god of none effect through your
tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like things do ye.

7:14 and when he had called all the people unto him, he said unto
them, hearken unto me every one of you, and understand: 7:15 there is
nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him: but
the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man.

7:16 if any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

7:17 and when he was entered into the house from the people, his
disciples asked him concerning the parable.

7:18 and he saith unto them, are ye so without understanding also? do
ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the
man, it cannot defile him; 7:19 because it entereth not into his
heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all
meats?  7:20 and he said, that which cometh out of the man, that
defileth the man.

7:21 for from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, 7:22 thefts, covetousness,
wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride,
foolishness: 7:23 all these evil things come from within, and defile
the man.

7:24 and from thence he arose, and went into the borders of tyre and
sidon, and entered into an house, and would have no man know it: but
he could not be hid.

7:25 for a certain woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit,
heard of him, and came and fell at his feet: 7:26 the woman was a
greek, a syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would
cast forth the devil out of her daughter.

7:27 but jesus said unto her, let the children first be filled: for it
is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it unto the
dogs.

7:28 and she answered and said unto him, yes, lord: yet the dogs under
the table eat of the children's crumbs.

7:29 and he said unto her, for this saying go thy way; the devil is
gone out of thy daughter.

7:30 and when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out,
and her daughter laid upon the bed.

7:31 and again, departing from the coasts of tyre and sidon, he came
unto the sea of galilee, through the midst of the coasts of decapolis.

7:32 and they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment
in his speech; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him.

7:33 and he took him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers
into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue; 7:34 and looking
up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, ephphatha, that is, be
opened.

7:35 and straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his
tongue was loosed, and he spake plain.

7:36 and he charged them that they should tell no man: but the more he
charged them, so much the more a great deal they published it; 7:37
and were beyond measure astonished, saying, he hath done all things
well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

8:1 in those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing
to eat, jesus called his disciples unto him, and saith unto them, 8:2
i have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me
three days, and have nothing to eat: 8:3 and if i send them away
fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the way: for divers of
them came from far.

8:4 and his disciples answered him, from whence can a man satisfy
these men with bread here in the wilderness?  8:5 and he asked them,
how many loaves have ye? and they said, seven.

8:6 and he commanded the people to sit down on the ground: and he took
the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his
disciples to set before them; and they did set them before the people.

8:7 and they had a few small fishes: and he blessed, and commanded to
set them also before them.

8:8 so they did eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken
meat that was left seven baskets.

8:9 and they that had eaten were about four thousand: and he sent them
away.

8:10 and straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and
came into the parts of dalmanutha.

8:11 and the pharisees came forth, and began to question with him,
seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him.

8:12 and he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, why doth this
generation seek after a sign? verily i say unto you, there shall no
sign be given unto this generation.

8:13 and he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to
the other side.

8:14 now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had they
in the ship with them more than one loaf.

8:15 and he charged them, saying, take heed, beware of the leaven of
the pharisees, and of the leaven of herod.

8:16 and they reasoned among themselves, saying, it is because we have
no bread.

8:17 and when jesus knew it, he saith unto them, why reason ye,
because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand?
have ye your heart yet hardened?  8:18 having eyes, see ye not? and
having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember?  8:19 when i brake
the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up? they say unto him, twelve.

8:20 and when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up? and they said, seven.

8:21 and he said unto them, how is it that ye do not understand?  8:22
and he cometh to bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and
besought him to touch him.

8:23 and he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the
town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he
asked him if he saw ought.

8:24 and he looked up, and said, i see men as trees, walking.

8:25 after that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him
look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly.

8:26 and he sent him away to his house, saying, neither go into the
town, nor tell it to any in the town.

8:27 and jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of caesarea
philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them,
whom do men say that i am?  8:28 and they answered, john the baptist;
but some say, elias; and others, one of the prophets.

8:29 and he saith unto them, but whom say ye that i am? and peter
answereth and saith unto him, thou art the christ.

8:30 and he charged them that they should tell no man of him.

8:31 and he began to teach them, that the son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.

8:32 and he spake that saying openly. and peter took him, and began to
rebuke him.

8:33 but when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he
rebuked peter, saying, get thee behind me, satan: for thou savourest
not the things that be of god, but the things that be of men.

8:34 and when he had called the people unto him with his disciples
also, he said unto them, whosoever will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

8:35 for whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save
it.

8:36 for what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?  8:37 or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul?  8:38 whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the
son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his father with
the holy angels.

9:1 and he said unto them, verily i say unto you, that there be some
of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they
have seen the kingdom of god come with power.

9:2 and after six days jesus taketh with him peter, and james, and
john, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves:
and he was transfigured before them.

9:3 and his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no
fuller on earth can white them.

9:4 and there appeared unto them elias with moses: and they were
talking with jesus.

9:5 and peter answered and said to jesus, master, it is good for us to
be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
moses, and one for elias.

9:6 for he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid.

9:7 and there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out
of the cloud, saying, this is my beloved son: hear him.

9:8 and suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man
any more, save jesus only with themselves.

9:9 and as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they
should tell no man what things they had seen, till the son of man were
risen from the dead.

9:10 and they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with
another what the rising from the dead should mean.

9:11 and they asked him, saying, why say the scribes that elias must
first come?  9:12 and he answered and told them, elias verily cometh
first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the son of
man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought.

9:13 but i say unto you, that elias is indeed come, and they have done
unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is written of him.

9:14 and when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about
them, and the scribes questioning with them.

9:15 and straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were
greatly amazed, and running to him saluted him.

9:16 and he asked the scribes, what question ye with them?  9:17 and
one of the multitude answered and said, master, i have brought unto
thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit; 9:18 and wheresoever he taketh
him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and
pineth away: and i spake to thy disciples that they should cast him
out; and they could not.

9:19 he answereth him, and saith, o faithless generation, how long
shall i be with you? how long shall i suffer you? bring him unto me.

9:20 and they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway
the spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming.

9:21 and he asked his father, how long is it ago since this came unto
him?  and he said, of a child.

9:22 and ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters,
to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us,
and help us.

9:23 jesus said unto him, if thou canst believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth.

9:24 and straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with
tears, lord, i believe; help thou mine unbelief.

9:25 when jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked
the foul spirit, saying unto him, thou dumb and deaf spirit, i charge
thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.

9:26 and the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and
he was as one dead; insomuch that many said, he is dead.

9:27 but jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose.

9:28 and when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him
privately, why could not we cast him out?  9:29 and he said unto them,
this kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

9:30 and they departed thence, and passed through galilee; and he
would not that any man should know it.

9:31 for he taught his disciples, and said unto them, the son of man
is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after
that he is killed, he shall rise the third day.

9:32 but they understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.

9:33 and he came to capernaum: and being in the house he asked them,
what was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?  9:34 but
they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among
themselves, who should be the greatest.

9:35 and he sat down, and called the twelve, and saith unto them, if
any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant
of all.

9:36 and he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when
he had taken him in his arms, he said unto them, 9:37 whosoever shall
receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever
shall receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me.

9:38 and john answered him, saying, master, we saw one casting out
devils in thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him,
because he followeth not us.

9:39 but jesus said, forbid him not: for there is no man which shall
do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me.

9:40 for he that is not against us is on our part.

9:41 for whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name,
because ye belong to christ, verily i say unto you, he shall not lose
his reward.

9:42 and whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe
in me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and he were cast into the sea.

9:43 and if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into
the fire that never shall be quenched: 9:44 where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched.

9:45 and if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell, into
the fire that never shall be quenched: 9:46 where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched.

9:47 and if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee
to enter into the kingdom of god with one eye, than having two eyes to
be cast into hell fire: 9:48 where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched.

9:49 for every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice
shall be salted with salt.

9:50 salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith
will ye season it? have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with
another.

10:1 and he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of judaea by
the farther side of jordan: and the people resort unto him again; and,
as he was wont, he taught them again.

10:2 and the pharisees came to him, and asked him, is it lawful for a
man to put away his wife? tempting him.

10:3 and he answered and said unto them, what did moses command you?
10:4 and they said, moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and
to put her away.

10:5 and jesus answered and said unto them, for the hardness of your
heart he wrote you this precept.

10:6 but from the beginning of the creation god made them male and
female.

10:7 for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and
cleave to his wife; 10:8 and they twain shall be one flesh: so then
they are no more twain, but one flesh.

10:9 what therefore god hath joined together, let not man put asunder.

10:10 and in the house his disciples asked him again of the same
matter.

10:11 and he saith unto them, whosoever shall put away his wife, and
marry another, committeth adultery against her.

10:12 and if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to
another, she committeth adultery.

10:13 and they brought young children to him, that he should touch
them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them.

10:14 but when jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto
them, suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not:
for of such is the kingdom of god.

10:15 verily i say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom
of god as a little child, he shall not enter therein.

10:16 and he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and
blessed them.

10:17 and when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running,
and kneeled to him, and asked him, good master, what shall i do that i
may inherit eternal life?  10:18 and jesus said unto him, why callest
thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, god.

10:19 thou knowest the commandments, do not commit adultery, do not
kill, do not steal, do not bear false witness, defraud not, honour thy
father and mother.  10:20 and he answered and said unto him, master,
all these have i observed from my youth.

10:21 then jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, one thing
thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the
poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the
cross, and follow me.

10:22 and he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had
great possessions.

10:23 and jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, how
hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of god!
10:24 and the disciples were astonished at his words. but jesus
answereth again, and saith unto them, children, how hard is it for
them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of god!  10:25 it
is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.

10:26 and they were astonished out of measure, saying among
themselves, who then can be saved?  10:27 and jesus looking upon them
saith, with men it is impossible, but not with god: for with god all
things are possible.

10:28 then peter began to say unto him, lo, we have left all, and have
followed thee.

10:29 and jesus answered and said, verily i say unto you, there is no
man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's,
10:30 but he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.

10:31 but many that are first shall be last; and the last first.

10:32 and they were in the way going up to jerusalem; and jesus went
before them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were
afraid.

and he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things
should happen unto him, 10:33 saying, behold, we go up to jerusalem;
and the son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto
the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver
him to the gentiles: 10:34 and they shall mock him, and shall scourge
him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him: and the third day he
shall rise again.

10:35 and james and john, the sons of zebedee, come unto him, saying,
master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall
desire.

10:36 and he said unto them, what would ye that i should do for you?
10:37 they said unto him, grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy
right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory.

10:38 but jesus said unto them, ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink
of the cup that i drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that i am
baptized with?  10:39 and they said unto him, we can. and jesus said
unto them, ye shall indeed drink of the cup that i drink of; and with
the baptism that i am baptized withal shall ye be baptized: 10:40 but
to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but
it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared.

10:41 and when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeased with
james and john.

10:42 but jesus called them to him, and saith unto them, ye know that
they which are accounted to rule over the gentiles exercise lordship
over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them.

10:43 but so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be great
among you, shall be your minister: 10:44 and whosoever of you will be
the chiefest, shall be servant of all.

10:45 for even the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

10:46 and they came to jericho: and as he went out of jericho with his
disciples and a great number of people, blind bartimaeus, the son of
timaeus, sat by the highway side begging.

10:47 and when he heard that it was jesus of nazareth, he began to cry
out, and say, jesus, thou son of david, have mercy on me.

10:48 and many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried
the more a great deal, thou son of david, have mercy on me.

10:49 and jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called. and they
call the blind man, saying unto him, be of good comfort, rise; he
calleth thee.

10:50 and he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to jesus.

10:51 and jesus answered and said unto him, what wilt thou that i
should do unto thee? the blind man said unto him, lord, that i might
receive my sight.

10:52 and jesus said unto him, go thy way; thy faith hath made thee
whole.

and immediately he received his sight, and followed jesus in the way.

11:1 and when they came nigh to jerusalem, unto bethphage and bethany,
at the mount of olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples, 11:2
and saith unto them, go your way into the village over against you:
and as soon as ye be entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon never man sat; loose him, and bring him.

11:3 and if any man say unto you, why do ye this? say ye that the lord
hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither.

11:4 and they went their way, and found the colt tied by the door
without in a place where two ways met; and they loose him.

11:5 and certain of them that stood there said unto them, what do ye,
loosing the colt?  11:6 and they said unto them even as jesus had
commanded: and they let them go.

11:7 and they brought the colt to jesus, and cast their garments on
him; and he sat upon him.

11:8 and many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down
branches off the trees, and strawed them in the way.

11:9 and they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying,
hosanna; blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord: 11:10
blessed be the kingdom of our father david, that cometh in the name of
the lord: hosanna in the highest.

11:11 and jesus entered into jerusalem, and into the temple: and when
he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide was
come, he went out unto bethany with the twelve.

11:12 and on the morrow, when they were come from bethany, he was
hungry: 11:13 and seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came,
if haply he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he
found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not yet.

11:14 and jesus answered and said unto it, no man eat fruit of thee
hereafter for ever. and his disciples heard it.

11:15 and they come to jerusalem: and jesus went into the temple, and
began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and
overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that
sold doves; 11:16 and would not suffer that any man should carry any
vessel through the temple.

11:17 and he taught, saying unto them, is it not written, my house
shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made
it a den of thieves.

11:18 and the scribes and chief priests heard it, and sought how they
might destroy him: for they feared him, because all the people was
astonished at his doctrine.

11:19 and when even was come, he went out of the city.

11:20 and in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree
dried up from the roots.

11:21 and peter calling to remembrance saith unto him, master, behold,
the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away.

11:22 and jesus answering saith unto them, have faith in god.

11:23 for verily i say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this
mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall
not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he
saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith.

11:24 therefore i say unto you, what things soever ye desire, when ye
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

11:25 and when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against
any: that your father also which is in heaven may forgive you your
trespasses.

11:26 but if ye do not forgive, neither will your father which is in
heaven forgive your trespasses.

11:27 and they come again to jerusalem: and as he was walking in the
temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the
elders, 11:28 and say unto him, by what authority doest thou these
things? and who gave thee this authority to do these things?  11:29
and jesus answered and said unto them, i will also ask of you one
question, and answer me, and i will tell you by what authority i do
these things.

11:30 the baptism of john, was it from heaven, or of men? answer me.

11:31 and they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say, from
heaven; he will say, why then did ye not believe him?  11:32 but if we
shall say, of men; they feared the people: for all men counted john,
that he was a prophet indeed.

11:33 and they answered and said unto jesus, we cannot tell. and jesus
answering saith unto them, neither do i tell you by what authority i
do these things.

12:1 and he began to speak unto them by parables. a certain man
planted a vineyard, and set an hedge about it, and digged a place for
the winefat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went
into a far country.

12:2 and at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he
might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard.

12:3 and they caught him, and beat him, and sent him away empty.

12:4 and again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they cast
stones, and wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully
handled.

12:5 and again he sent another; and him they killed, and many others;
beating some, and killing some.

12:6 having yet therefore one son, his wellbeloved, he sent him also
last unto them, saying, they will reverence my son.

12:7 but those husbandmen said among themselves, this is the heir;
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be our's.

12:8 and they took him, and killed him, and cast him out of the
vineyard.

12:9 what shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he will come
and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others.

12:10 and have ye not read this scripture; the stone which the
builders rejected is become the head of the corner: 12:11 this was the
lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?  12:12 and they sought
to lay hold on him, but feared the people: for they knew that he had
spoken the parable against them: and they left him, and went their
way.

12:13 and they send unto him certain of the pharisees and of the
herodians, to catch him in his words.

12:14 and when they were come, they say unto him, master, we know that
thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the
person of men, but teachest the way of god in truth: is it lawful to
give tribute to caesar, or not?  12:15 shall we give, or shall we not
give? but he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, why tempt ye
me? bring me a penny, that i may see it.

12:16 and they brought it. and he saith unto them, whose is this image
and superscription? and they said unto him, caesar's.

12:17 and jesus answering said unto them, render to caesar the things
that are caesar's, and to god the things that are god's. and they
marvelled at him.

12:18 then come unto him the sadducees, which say there is no
resurrection; and they asked him, saying, 12:19 master, moses wrote
unto us, if a man's brother die, and leave his wife behind him, and
leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up
seed unto his brother.

12:20 now there were seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and
dying left no seed.

12:21 and the second took her, and died, neither left he any seed: and
the third likewise.

12:22 and the seven had her, and left no seed: last of all the woman
died also.

12:23 in the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife
shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.

12:24 and jesus answering said unto them, do ye not therefore err,
because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of god?  12:25
for when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven.

12:26 and as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in
the book of moses, how in the bush god spake unto him, saying, i am
the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and the god of jacob?  12:27
he is not the god of the dead, but the god of the living: ye therefore
do greatly err.

12:28 and one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning
together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him,
which is the first commandment of all?  12:29 and jesus answered him,
the first of all the commandments is, hear, o israel; the lord our god
is one lord: 12:30 and thou shalt love the lord thy god with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength: this is the first commandment.

12:31 and the second is like, namely this, thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. there is none other commandment greater than
these.

12:32 and the scribe said unto him, well, master, thou hast said the
truth: for there is one god; and there is none other but he: 12:33 and
to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and
with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his
neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices.

12:34 and when jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto
him, thou art not far from the kingdom of god. and no man after that
durst ask him any question.

12:35 and jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, how
say the scribes that christ is the son of david?  12:36 for david
himself said by the holy ghost, the lord said to my lord, sit thou on
my right hand, till i make thine enemies thy footstool.

12:37 david therefore himself calleth him lord; and whence is he then
his son? and the common people heard him gladly.

12:38 and he said unto them in his doctrine, beware of the scribes,
which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the
marketplaces, 12:39 and the chief seats in the synagogues, and the
uppermost rooms at feasts: 12:40 which devour widows' houses, and for
a pretence make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation.

12:41 and jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the
people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in
much.

12:42 and there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites,
which make a farthing.

12:43 and he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto them,
verily i say unto you, that this poor widow hath cast more in, than
all they which have cast into the treasury: 12:44 for all they did
cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that
she had, even all her living.

13:1 and as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto
him, master, see what manner of stones and what buildings are here!
13:2 and jesus answering said unto him, seest thou these great
buildings?  there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall
not be thrown down.

13:3 and as he sat upon the mount of olives over against the temple,
peter and james and john and andrew asked him privately, 13:4 tell us,
when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when all these
things shall be fulfilled?  13:5 and jesus answering them began to
say, take heed lest any man deceive you: 13:6 for many shall come in
my name, saying, i am christ; and shall deceive many.

13:7 and when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not
troubled: for such things must needs be; but the end shall not be yet.

13:8 for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes in divers places, and there
shall be famines and troubles: these are the beginnings of sorrows.

13:9 but take heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to
councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be
brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against
them.

13:10 and the gospel must first be published among all nations.

13:11 but when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no
thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but
whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is
not ye that speak, but the holy ghost.

13:12 now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the
father the son; and children shall rise up against their parents, and
shall cause them to be put to death.

13:13 and ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that
shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

13:14 but when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of
by daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that
readeth understand,) then let them that be in judaea flee to the
mountains: 13:15 and let him that is on the housetop not go down into
the house, neither enter therein, to take any thing out of his house:
13:16 and let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take
up his garment.

13:17 but woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck
in those days!  13:18 and pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter.

13:19 for in those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the
beginning of the creation which god created unto this time, neither
shall be.

13:20 and except that the lord had shortened those days, no flesh
should be saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he hath chosen, he
hath shortened the days.

13:21 and then if any man shall say to you, lo, here is christ; or,
lo, he is there; believe him not: 13:22 for false christs and false
prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if
it were possible, even the elect.

13:23 but take ye heed: behold, i have foretold you all things.

13:24 but in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, 13:25 and the stars
of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be
shaken.

13:26 and then shall they see the son of man coming in the clouds with
great power and glory.

13:27 and then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the
uttermost part of heaven.

13:28 now learn a parable of the fig tree; when her branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near: 13:29
so ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass,
know that it is nigh, even at the doors.

13:30 verily i say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till
all these things be done.

13:31 heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass
away.

13:32 but of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
which are in heaven, neither the son, but the father.

13:33 take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.

13:34 for the son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left
his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his
work, and commanded the porter to watch.

13:35 watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house
cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the
morning: 13:36 lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.

13:37 and what i say unto you i say unto all, watch.

14:1 after two days was the feast of the passover, and of unleavened
bread: and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might
take him by craft, and put him to death.

14:2 but they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar of
the people.

14:3 and being in bethany in the house of simon the leper, as he sat
at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of
spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, and poured it on his
head.

14:4 and there were some that had indignation within themselves, and
said, why was this waste of the ointment made?  14:5 for it might have
been sold for more than three hundred pence, and have been given to
the poor. and they murmured against her.

14:6 and jesus said, let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath
wrought a good work on me.

14:7 for ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye
may do them good: but me ye have not always.

14:8 she hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my
body to the burying.

14:9 verily i say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be
spoken of for a memorial of her.

14:10 and judas iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief
priests, to betray him unto them.

14:11 and when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him
money. and he sought how he might conveniently betray him.

14:12 and the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples said unto him, where wilt thou that we go and
prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?  14:13 and he sendeth forth
two of his disciples, and saith unto them, go ye into the city, and
there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him.

14:14 and wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the
house, the master saith, where is the guestchamber, where i shall eat
the passover with my disciples?  14:15 and he will shew you a large
upper room furnished and prepared: there make ready for us.

14:16 and his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found
as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover.

14:17 and in the evening he cometh with the twelve.

14:18 and as they sat and did eat, jesus said, verily i say unto you,
one of you which eateth with me shall betray me.

14:19 and they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one,
is it i? and another said, is it i?  14:20 and he answered and said
unto them, it is one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish.

14:21 the son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but woe to
that man by whom the son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man
if he had never been born.

14:22 and as they did eat, jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake
it, and gave to them, and said, take, eat: this is my body.

14:23 and he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to
them: and they all drank of it.

14:24 and he said unto them, this is my blood of the new testament,
which is shed for many.

14:25 verily i say unto you, i will drink no more of the fruit of the
vine, until that day that i drink it new in the kingdom of god.

14:26 and when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
olives.

14:27 and jesus saith unto them, all ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, i will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered.

14:28 but after that i am risen, i will go before you into galilee.

14:29 but peter said unto him, although all shall be offended, yet
will not i.

14:30 and jesus saith unto him, verily i say unto thee, that this day,
even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me
thrice.

14:31 but he spake the more vehemently, if i should die with thee, i
will not deny thee in any wise. likewise also said they all.

14:32 and they came to a place which was named gethsemane: and he
saith to his disciples, sit ye here, while i shall pray.

14:33 and he taketh with him peter and james and john, and began to be
sore amazed, and to be very heavy; 14:34 and saith unto them, my soul
is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch.

14:35 and he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.

14:36 and he said, abba, father, all things are possible unto thee;
take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what i will, but what
thou wilt.

14:37 and he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto peter,
simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?  14:38 watch
ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. the spirit truly is ready,
but the flesh is weak.

14:39 and again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words.

14:40 and when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their
eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him.

14:41 and he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, sleep on now,
and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the son of
man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

14:42 rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand.

14:43 and immediately, while he yet spake, cometh judas, one of the
twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from
the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.

14:44 and he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying,
whomsoever i shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead him away
safely.

14:45 and as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to him, and
saith, master, master; and kissed him.

14:46 and they laid their hands on him, and took him.

14:47 and one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant
of the high priest, and cut off his ear.

14:48 and jesus answered and said unto them, are ye come out, as
against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me?  14:49 i was
daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but the
scriptures must be fulfilled.

14:50 and they all forsook him, and fled.

14:51 and there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth
cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him: 14:52
and he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.

14:53 and they led jesus away to the high priest: and with him were
assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.

14:54 and peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the
high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the
fire.

14:55 and the chief priests and all the council sought for witness
against jesus to put him to death; and found none.

14:56 for many bare false witness against him, but their witness
agreed not together.

14:57 and there arose certain, and bare false witness against him,
saying, 14:58 we heard him say, i will destroy this temple that is
made with hands, and within three days i will build another made
without hands.

14:59 but neither so did their witness agree together.

14:60 and the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked jesus,
saying, answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against
thee?  14:61 but he held his peace, and answered nothing. again the
high priest asked him, and said unto him, art thou the christ, the son
of the blessed?  14:62 and jesus said, i am: and ye shall see the son
of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven.

14:63 then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, what need we
any further witnesses?  14:64 ye have heard the blasphemy: what think
ye? and they all condemned him to be guilty of death.

14:65 and some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to
buffet him, and to say unto him, prophesy: and the servants did strike
him with the palms of their hands.

14:66 and as peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the
maids of the high priest: 14:67 and when she saw peter warming
himself, she looked upon him, and said, and thou also wast with jesus
of nazareth.

14:68 but he denied, saying, i know not, neither understand i what
thou sayest. and he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.

14:69 and a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood
by, this is one of them.

14:70 and he denied it again. and a little after, they that stood by
said again to peter, surely thou art one of them: for thou art a
galilaean, and thy speech agreeth thereto.

14:71 but he began to curse and to swear, saying, i know not this man
of whom ye speak.

14:72 and the second time the cock crew. and peter called to mind the
word that jesus said unto him, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt
deny me thrice. and when he thought thereon, he wept.

15:1 and straightway in the morning the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and
bound jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to pilate.

15:2 and pilate asked him, art thou the king of the jews? and he
answering said unto them, thou sayest it.

15:3 and the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered
nothing.

15:4 and pilate asked him again, saying, answerest thou nothing?
behold how many things they witness against thee.

15:5 but jesus yet answered nothing; so that pilate marvelled.

15:6 now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever
they desired.

15:7 and there was one named barabbas, which lay bound with them that
had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the
insurrection.

15:8 and the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he
had ever done unto them.

15:9 but pilate answered them, saying, will ye that i release unto you
the king of the jews?  15:10 for he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him for envy.

15:11 but the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather
release barabbas unto them.

15:12 and pilate answered and said again unto them, what will ye then
that i shall do unto him whom ye call the king of the jews?  15:13 and
they cried out again, crucify him.

15:14 then pilate said unto them, why, what evil hath he done? and
they cried out the more exceedingly, crucify him.

15:15 and so pilate, willing to content the people, released barabbas
unto them, and delivered jesus, when he had scourged him, to be
crucified.

15:16 and the soldiers led him away into the hall, called praetorium;
and they call together the whole band.

15:17 and they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns,
and put it about his head, 15:18 and began to salute him, hail, king
of the jews!  15:19 and they smote him on the head with a reed, and
did spit upon him, and bowing their knees worshipped him.

15:20 and when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him,
and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.

15:21 and they compel one simon a cyrenian, who passed by, coming out
of the country, the father of alexander and rufus, to bear his cross.

15:22 and they bring him unto the place golgotha, which is, being
interpreted, the place of a skull.

15:23 and they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he
received it not.

15:24 and when they had crucified him, they parted his garments,
casting lots upon them, what every man should take.

15:25 and it was the third hour, and they crucified him.

15:26 and the superscription of his accusation was written over, the
king of the jews.

15:27 and with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right
hand, and the other on his left.

15:28 and the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, and he was
numbered with the transgressors.

15:29 and they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and
saying, ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, 15:30 save thyself, and come down from the cross.

15:31 likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves
with the scribes, he saved others; himself he cannot save.

15:32 let christ the king of israel descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe. and they that were crucified with him reviled
him.

15:33 and when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the
whole land until the ninth hour.

15:34 and at the ninth hour jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
eloi, eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, my god, my
god, why hast thou forsaken me?  15:35 and some of them that stood by,
when they heard it, said, behold, he calleth elias.

15:36 and one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink, saying, let alone; let us see whether
elias will come to take him down.

15:37 and jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.

15:38 and the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom.

15:39 and when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that
he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, truly this man was
the son of god.

15:40 there were also women looking on afar off: among whom was mary
magdalene, and mary the mother of james the less and of joses, and
salome; 15:41 (who also, when he was in galilee, followed him, and
ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto
jerusalem.

15:42 and now when the even was come, because it was the preparation,
that is, the day before the sabbath, 15:43 joseph of arimathaea, an
honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of god, came,
and went in boldly unto pilate, and craved the body of jesus.

15:44 and pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto
him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.

15:45 and when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to
joseph.

15:46 and he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock,
and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.

15:47 and mary magdalene and mary the mother of joses beheld where he
was laid.

16:1 and when the sabbath was past, mary magdalene, and mary the
mother of james, and salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might
come and anoint him.

16:2 and very early in the morning the first day of the week, they
came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.

16:3 and they said among themselves, who shall roll us away the stone
from the door of the sepulchre?  16:4 and when they looked, they saw
that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great.

16:5 and entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on
the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were
affrighted.

16:6 and he saith unto them, be not affrighted: ye seek jesus of
nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the
place where they laid him.

16:7 but go your way, tell his disciples and peter that he goeth
before you into galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

16:8 and they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they
trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for
they were afraid.

16:9 now when jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to mary magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven
devils.

16:10 and she went and told them that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept.

16:11 and they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been
seen of her, believed not.

16:12 after that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they
walked, and went into the country.

16:13 and they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed
they them.

16:14 afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.

16:15 and he said unto them, go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature.

16:16 he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned.

16:17 and these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall
they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; 16:18 they
shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall
not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
recover.

16:19 so then after the lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of god.

16:20 and they went forth, and preached every where, the lord working
with them, and confirming the word with signs following. amen.




the gospel according to saint luke


1:1 forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us,
1:2 even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word; 1:3 it seemed good to me
also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent theophilus, 1:4
that thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou
hast been instructed.

1:5 there was in the days of herod, the king of judaea, a certain
priest named zacharias, of the course of abia: and his wife was of the
daughters of aaron, and her name was elisabeth.

1:6 and they were both righteous before god, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the lord blameless.

1:7 and they had no child, because that elisabeth was barren, and they
both were now well stricken in years.

1:8 and it came to pass, that while he executed the priest's office
before god in the order of his course, 1:9 according to the custom of
the priest's office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the
temple of the lord.

1:10 and the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the
time of incense.

1:11 and there appeared unto him an angel of the lord standing on the
right side of the altar of incense.

1:12 and when zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon
him.

1:13 but the angel said unto him, fear not, zacharias: for thy prayer
is heard; and thy wife elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt
call his name john.

1:14 and thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at
his birth.

1:15 for he shall be great in the sight of the lord, and shall drink
neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the holy
ghost, even from his mother's womb.

1:16 and many of the children of israel shall he turn to the lord
their god.

1:17 and he shall go before him in the spirit and power of elias, to
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the lord.

1:18 and zacharias said unto the angel, whereby shall i know this? for
i am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.

1:19 and the angel answering said unto him, i am gabriel, that stand
in the presence of god; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew
thee these glad tidings.

1:20 and, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the
day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not
my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.

1:21 and the people waited for zacharias, and marvelled that he
tarried so long in the temple.

1:22 and when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they
perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned
unto them, and remained speechless.

1:23 and it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his
ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.

1:24 and after those days his wife elisabeth conceived, and hid
herself five months, saying, 1:25 thus hath the lord dealt with me in
the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.

1:26 and in the sixth month the angel gabriel was sent from god unto a
city of galilee, named nazareth, 1:27 to a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was joseph, of the house of david; and the virgin's name
was mary.

1:28 and the angel came in unto her, and said, hail, thou that art
highly favoured, the lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

1:29 and when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in
her mind what manner of salutation this should be.

1:30 and the angel said unto her, fear not, mary: for thou hast found
favour with god.

1:31 and, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a
son, and shalt call his name jesus.

1:32 he shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest:
and the lord god shall give unto him the throne of his father david:
1:33 and he shall reign over the house of jacob for ever; and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.

1:34 then said mary unto the angel, how shall this be, seeing i know
not a man?  1:35 and the angel answered and said unto her, the holy
ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of
thee shall be called the son of god.

1:36 and, behold, thy cousin elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son
in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called
barren.

1:37 for with god nothing shall be impossible.

1:38 and mary said, behold the handmaid of the lord; be it unto me
according to thy word. and the angel departed from her.

1:39 and mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with
haste, into a city of juda; 1:40 and entered into the house of
zacharias, and saluted elisabeth.

1:41 and it came to pass, that, when elisabeth heard the salutation of
mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and elisabeth was filled with the
holy ghost: 1:42 and she spake out with a loud voice, and said,
blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

1:43 and whence is this to me, that the mother of my lord should come
to me?  1:44 for, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded
in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.

1:45 and blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a
performance of those things which were told her from the lord.

1:46 and mary said, my soul doth magnify the lord, 1:47 and my spirit
hath rejoiced in god my saviour.

1:48 for he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for,
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

1:49 for he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is
his name.

1:50 and his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to
generation.

1:51 he hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud
in the imagination of their hearts.

1:52 he hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of
low degree.

1:53 he hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath
sent empty away.

1:54 he hath holpen his servant israel, in remembrance of his mercy;
1:55 as he spake to our fathers, to abraham, and to his seed for ever.

1:56 and mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her
own house.

1:57 now elisabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and
she brought forth a son.

1:58 and her neighbours and her cousins heard how the lord had shewed
great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.

1:59 and it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to
circumcise the child; and they called him zacharias, after the name of
his father.

1:60 and his mother answered and said, not so; but he shall be called
john.

1:61 and they said unto her, there is none of thy kindred that is
called by this name.

1:62 and they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.

1:63 and he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, his name is
john. and they marvelled all.

1:64 and his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and
he spake, and praised god.

1:65 and fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these
sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of judaea.

1:66 and all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts,
saying, what manner of child shall this be! and the hand of the lord
was with him.

1:67 and his father zacharias was filled with the holy ghost, and
prophesied, saying, 1:68 blessed be the lord god of israel; for he
hath visited and redeemed his people, 1:69 and hath raised up an horn
of salvation for us in the house of his servant david; 1:70 as he
spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the
world began: 1:71 that we should be saved from our enemies, and from
the hand of all that hate us; 1:72 to perform the mercy promised to
our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant; 1:73 the oath which he
sware to our father abraham, 1:74 that he would grant unto us, that we
being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without
fear, 1:75 in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of
our life.

1:76 and thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the highest: for
thou shalt go before the face of the lord to prepare his ways; 1:77 to
give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their
sins, 1:78 through the tender mercy of our god; whereby the dayspring
from on high hath visited us, 1:79 to give light to them that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of
peace.

1:80 and the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the
deserts till the day of his shewing unto israel.

2:1 and it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree
from caesar augustus that all the world should be taxed.

2:2 (and this taxing was first made when cyrenius was governor of
syria.)  2:3 and all went to be taxed, every one into his own city.

2:4 and joseph also went up from galilee, out of the city of nazareth,
into judaea, unto the city of david, which is called bethlehem;
(because he was of the house and lineage of david:) 2:5 to be taxed
with mary his espoused wife, being great with child.

2:6 and so it was, that, while they were there, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered.

2:7 and she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room
for them in the inn.

2:8 and there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field,
keeping watch over their flock by night.

2:9 and, lo, the angel of the lord came upon them, and the glory of
the lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

2:10 and the angel said unto them, fear not: for, behold, i bring you
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

2:11 for unto you is born this day in the city of david a saviour,
which is christ the lord.

2:12 and this shall be a sign unto you; ye shall find the babe wrapped
in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.

2:13 and suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host praising god, and saying, 2:14 glory to god in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men.

2:15 and it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into
heaven, the shepherds said one to another, let us now go even unto
bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the lord
hath made known unto us.

2:16 and they came with haste, and found mary, and joseph, and the
babe lying in a manger.

2:17 and when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying
which was told them concerning this child.

2:18 and all they that heard it wondered at those things which were
told them by the shepherds.

2:19 but mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.

2:20 and the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising god for all
the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

2:21 and when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the
child, his name was called jesus, which was so named of the angel
before he was conceived in the womb.

2:22 and when the days of her purification according to the law of
moses were accomplished, they brought him to jerusalem, to present him
to the lord; 2:23 (as it is written in the law of the lord, every male
that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the lord;) 2:24 and to
offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the
lord, a pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.

2:25 and, behold, there was a man in jerusalem, whose name was simeon;
and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of
israel: and the holy ghost was upon him.

2:26 and it was revealed unto him by the holy ghost, that he should
not see death, before he had seen the lord's christ.

2:27 and he came by the spirit into the temple: and when the parents
brought in the child jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,
2:28 then took he him up in his arms, and blessed god, and said, 2:29
lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word: 2:30 for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, 2:31 which thou hast
prepared before the face of all people; 2:32 a light to lighten the
gentiles, and the glory of thy people israel.

2:33 and joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were
spoken of him.

2:34 and simeon blessed them, and said unto mary his mother, behold,
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in israel; and
for a sign which shall be spoken against; 2:35 (yea, a sword shall
pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed.

2:36 and there was one anna, a prophetess, the daughter of phanuel, of
the tribe of aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an
husband seven years from her virginity; 2:37 and she was a widow of
about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple,
but served god with fastings and prayers night and day.

2:38 and she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the
lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in
jerusalem.

2:39 and when they had performed all things according to the law of
the lord, they returned into galilee, to their own city nazareth.

2:40 and the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom: and the grace of god was upon him.

2:41 now his parents went to jerusalem every year at the feast of the
passover.

2:42 and when he was twelve years old, they went up to jerusalem after
the custom of the feast.

2:43 and when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child
jesus tarried behind in jerusalem; and joseph and his mother knew not
of it.

2:44 but they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day's
journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.

2:45 and when they found him not, they turned back again to jerusalem,
seeking him.

2:46 and it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and
asking them questions.

2:47 and all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers.

2:48 and when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto
him, son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and i
have sought thee sorrowing.

2:49 and he said unto them, how is it that ye sought me? wist ye not
that i must be about my father's business?  2:50 and they understood
not the saying which he spake unto them.

2:51 and he went down with them, and came to nazareth, and was subject
unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

2:52 and jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with god
and man.

3:1 now in the fifteenth year of the reign of tiberius caesar, pontius
pilate being governor of judaea, and herod being tetrarch of galilee,
and his brother philip tetrarch of ituraea and of the region of
trachonitis, and lysanias the tetrarch of abilene, 3:2 annas and
caiaphas being the high priests, the word of god came unto john the
son of zacharias in the wilderness.

3:3 and he came into all the country about jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; 3:4 as it is written
in the book of the words of esaias the prophet, saying, the voice of
one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the lord, make his
paths straight.

3:5 every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough
ways shall be made smooth; 3:6 and all flesh shall see the salvation
of god.

3:7 then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of
him, o generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the
wrath to come?  3:8 bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance,
and begin not to say within yourselves, we have abraham to our father:
for i say unto you, that god is able of these stones to raise up
children unto abraham.

3:9 and now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every
tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

3:10 and the people asked him, saying, what shall we do then?  3:11 he
answereth and saith unto them, he that hath two coats, let him impart
to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.

3:12 then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him,
master, what shall we do?  3:13 and he said unto them, exact no more
than that which is appointed you.

3:14 and the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, and what shall
we do? and he said unto them, do violence to no man, neither accuse
any falsely; and be content with your wages.

3:15 and as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their
hearts of john, whether he were the christ, or not; 3:16 john
answered, saying unto them all, i indeed baptize you with water; but
one mightier than i cometh, the latchet of whose shoes i am not worthy
to unloose: he shall baptize you with the holy ghost and with fire:
3:17 whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor,
and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn
with fire unquenchable.

3:18 and many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the
people.

3:19 but herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for herodias his
brother philip's wife, and for all the evils which herod had done,
3:20 added yet this above all, that he shut up john in prison.

3:21 now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that
jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, 3:22
and the holy ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him,
and a voice came from heaven, which said, thou art my beloved son; in
thee i am well pleased.

3:23 and jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being
(as was supposed) the son of joseph, which was the son of heli, 3:24
which was the son of matthat, which was the son of levi, which was the
son of melchi, which was the son of janna, which was the son of
joseph, 3:25 which was the son of mattathias, which was the son of
amos, which was the son of naum, which was the son of esli, which was
the son of nagge, 3:26 which was the son of maath, which was the son
of mattathias, which was the son of semei, which was the son of
joseph, which was the son of juda, 3:27 which was the son of joanna,
which was the son of rhesa, which was the son of zorobabel, which was
the son of salathiel, which was the son of neri, 3:28 which was the
son of melchi, which was the son of addi, which was the son of cosam,
which was the son of elmodam, which was the son of er, 3:29 which was
the son of jose, which was the son of eliezer, which was the son of
jorim, which was the son of matthat, which was the son of levi, 3:30
which was the son of simeon, which was the son of juda, which was the
son of joseph, which was the son of jonan, which was the son of
eliakim, 3:31 which was the son of melea, which was the son of menan,
which was the son of mattatha, which was the son of nathan, which was
the son of david, 3:32 which was the son of jesse, which was the son
of obed, which was the son of booz, which was the son of salmon, which
was the son of naasson, 3:33 which was the son of aminadab, which was
the son of aram, which was the son of esrom, which was the son of
phares, which was the son of juda, 3:34 which was the son of jacob,
which was the son of isaac, which was the son of abraham, which was
the son of thara, which was the son of nachor, 3:35 which was the son
of saruch, which was the son of ragau, which was the son of phalec,
which was the son of heber, which was the son of sala, 3:36 which was
the son of cainan, which was the son of arphaxad, which was the son of
sem, which was the son of noe, which was the son of lamech, 3:37 which
was the son of mathusala, which was the son of enoch, which was the
son of jared, which was the son of maleleel, which was the son of
cainan, 3:38 which was the son of enos, which was the son of seth,
which was the son of adam, which was the son of god.

4:1 and jesus being full of the holy ghost returned from jordan, and
was led by the spirit into the wilderness, 4:2 being forty days
tempted of the devil. and in those days he did eat nothing: and when
they were ended, he afterward hungered.

4:3 and the devil said unto him, if thou be the son of god, command
this stone that it be made bread.

4:4 and jesus answered him, saying, it is written, that man shall not
live by bread alone, but by every word of god.

4:5 and the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto
him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.

4:6 and the devil said unto him, all this power will i give thee, and
the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever i
will i give it.

4:7 if thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.

4:8 and jesus answered and said unto him, get thee behind me, satan:
for it is written, thou shalt worship the lord thy god, and him only
shalt thou serve.

4:9 and he brought him to jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the
temple, and said unto him, if thou be the son of god, cast thyself
down from hence: 4:10 for it is written, he shall give his angels
charge over thee, to keep thee: 4:11 and in their hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

4:12 and jesus answering said unto him, it is said, thou shalt not
tempt the lord thy god.

4:13 and when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from
him for a season.

4:14 and jesus returned in the power of the spirit into galilee: and
there went out a fame of him through all the region round about.

4:15 and he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all.

4:16 and he came to nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as
his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and
stood up for to read.

4:17 and there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet esaias.
and when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was
written, 4:18 the spirit of the lord is upon me, because he hath
anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal
the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, 4:19 to preach the acceptable year of the lord.

4:20 and he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and
sat down. and the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were
fastened on him.

4:21 and he began to say unto them, this day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears.

4:22 and all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth. and they said, is not this joseph's
son?  4:23 and he said unto them, ye will surely say unto me this
proverb, physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in
capernaum, do also here in thy country.

4:24 and he said, verily i say unto you, no prophet is accepted in his
own country.

4:25 but i tell you of a truth, many widows were in israel in the days
of elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when
great famine was throughout all the land; 4:26 but unto none of them
was elias sent, save unto sarepta, a city of sidon, unto a woman that
was a widow.

4:27 and many lepers were in israel in the time of eliseus the
prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving naaman the syrian.

4:28 and all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were
filled with wrath, 4:29 and rose up, and thrust him out of the city,
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built,
that they might cast him down headlong.

4:30 but he passing through the midst of them went his way, 4:31 and
came down to capernaum, a city of galilee, and taught them on the
sabbath days.

4:32 and they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with
power.

4:33 and in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an
unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice, 4:34 saying, let us
alone; what have we to do with thee, thou jesus of nazareth? art thou
come to destroy us? i know thee who thou art; the holy one of god.

4:35 and jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of
him.

and when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him,
and hurt him not.

4:36 and they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying,
what a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the
unclean spirits, and they come out.

4:37 and the fame of him went out into every place of the country
round about.

4:38 and he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into simon's
house.

and simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever; and they
besought him for her.

4:39 and he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her:
and immediately she arose and ministered unto them.

4:40 now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with
divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every
one of them, and healed them.

4:41 and devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, thou
art christ the son of god. and he rebuking them suffered them not to
speak: for they knew that he was christ.

4:42 and when it was day, he departed and went into a desert place:
and the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he
should not depart from them.

4:43 and he said unto them, i must preach the kingdom of god to other
cities also: for therefore am i sent.

4:44 and he preached in the synagogues of galilee.

5:1 and it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear
the word of god, he stood by the lake of gennesaret, 5:2 and saw two
ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them,
and were washing their nets.

5:3 and he entered into one of the ships, which was simon's, and
prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. and he sat
down, and taught the people out of the ship.

5:4 now when he had left speaking, he said unto simon, launch out into
the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.

5:5 and simon answering said unto him, master, we have toiled all the
night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word i will let
down the net.

5:6 and when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of
fishes: and their net brake.

5:7 and they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other
ship, that they should come and help them. and they came, and filled
both the ships, so that they began to sink.

5:8 when simon peter saw it, he fell down at jesus' knees, saying,
depart from me; for i am a sinful man, o lord.

5:9 for he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught
of the fishes which they had taken: 5:10 and so was also james, and
john, the sons of zebedee, which were partners with simon. and jesus
said unto simon, fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.

5:11 and when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all,
and followed him.

5:12 and it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man
full of leprosy: who seeing jesus fell on his face, and besought him,
saying, lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

5:13 and he put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, i will: be
thou clean. and immediately the leprosy departed from him.

5:14 and he charged him to tell no man: but go, and shew thyself to
the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them.

5:15 but so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great
multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their
infirmities.

5:16 and he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed.

5:17 and it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that
there were pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were
come out of every town of galilee, and judaea, and jerusalem: and the
power of the lord was present to heal them.

5:18 and, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a
palsy: and they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before
him.

5:19 and when they could not find by what way they might bring him in
because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him
down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before jesus.

5:20 and when he saw their faith, he said unto him, man, thy sins are
forgiven thee.

5:21 and the scribes and the pharisees began to reason, saying, who is
this which speaketh blasphemies? who can forgive sins, but god alone?
5:22 but when jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto
them, what reason ye in your hearts?  5:23 whether is easier, to say,
thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, rise up and walk?  5:24 but that
ye may know that the son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins,
(he said unto the sick of the palsy,) i say unto thee, arise, and take
up thy couch, and go into thine house.

5:25 and immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon
he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying god.

5:26 and they were all amazed, and they glorified god, and were filled
with fear, saying, we have seen strange things to day.

5:27 and after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named
levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, follow
me.

5:28 and he left all, rose up, and followed him.

5:29 and levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a
great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them.

5:30 but their scribes and pharisees murmured against his disciples,
saying, why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?  5:31 and
jesus answering said unto them, they that are whole need not a
physician; but they that are sick.

5:32 i came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

5:33 and they said unto him, why do the disciples of john fast often,
and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the pharisees; but
thine eat and drink?  5:34 and he said unto them, can ye make the
children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
5:35 but the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

5:36 and he spake also a parable unto them; no man putteth a piece of
a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a
rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the
old.

5:37 and no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine
will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish.

5:38 but new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are
preserved.

5:39 no man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for
he saith, the old is better.

6:1 and it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he
went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of
corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.

6:2 and certain of the pharisees said unto them, why do ye that which
is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?  6:3 and jesus answering them
said, have ye not read so much as this, what david did, when himself
was an hungred, and they which were with him; 6:4 how he went into the
house of god, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to
them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the
priests alone?  6:5 and he said unto them, that the son of man is lord
also of the sabbath.

6:6 and it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into
the synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was
withered.

6:7 and the scribes and pharisees watched him, whether he would heal
on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him.

6:8 but he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the
withered hand, rise up, and stand forth in the midst. and he arose and
stood forth.

6:9 then said jesus unto them, i will ask you one thing; is it lawful
on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to
destroy it?  6:10 and looking round about upon them all, he said unto
the man, stretch forth thy hand. and he did so: and his hand was
restored whole as the other.

6:11 and they were filled with madness; and communed one with another
what they might do to jesus.

6:12 and it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to god.

6:13 and when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles; 6:14 simon, (whom
he also named peter,) and andrew his brother, james and john, philip
and bartholomew, 6:15 matthew and thomas, james the son of alphaeus,
and simon called zelotes, 6:16 and judas the brother of james, and
judas iscariot, which also was the traitor.

6:17 and he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all
judaea and jerusalem, and from the sea coast of tyre and sidon, which
came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 6:18 and they
that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed.

6:19 and the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went
virtue out of him, and healed them all.

6:20 and he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, blessed be
ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of god.

6:21 blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. blessed
are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.

6:22 blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out
your name as evil, for the son of man's sake.

6:23 rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your
reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers
unto the prophets.

6:24 but woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your
consolation.

6:25 woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. woe unto you
that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.

6:26 woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did
their fathers to the false prophets.

6:27 but i say unto you which hear, love your enemies, do good to them
which hate you, 6:28 bless them that curse you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you.

6:29 and unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the
other; and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat
also.

6:30 give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh
away thy goods ask them not again.

6:31 and as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise.

6:32 for if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for
sinners also love those that love them.

6:33 and if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have
ye?  for sinners also do even the same.

6:34 and if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank
have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.

6:35 but love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for
nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the
children of the highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the
evil.

6:36 be ye therefore merciful, as your father also is merciful.

6:37 judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall
not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: 6:38 give, and it
shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. for with
the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you
again.

6:39 and he spake a parable unto them, can the blind lead the blind?
shall they not both fall into the ditch?  6:40 the disciple is not
above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his
master.

6:41 and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?  6:42 either how
canst thou say to thy brother, brother, let me pull out the mote that
is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in
thine own eye? thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is
in thy brother's eye.

6:43 for a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

6:44 for every tree is known by his own fruit. for of thorns men do
not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.

6:45 a good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth
that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his
heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the
heart his mouth speaketh.

6:46 and why call ye me, lord, lord, and do not the things which i
say?  6:47 whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth
them, i will shew you to whom he is like: 6:48 he is like a man which
built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock:
and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house,
and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock.

6:49 but he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a
foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did
beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house
was great.

7:1 now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the
people, he entered into capernaum.

7:2 and a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto him, was
sick, and ready to die.

7:3 and when he heard of jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the
jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.

7:4 and when they came to jesus, they besought him instantly, saying,
that he was worthy for whom he should do this: 7:5 for he loveth our
nation, and he hath built us a synagogue.

7:6 then jesus went with them. and when he was now not far from the
house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, lord,
trouble not thyself: for i am not worthy that thou shouldest enter
under my roof: 7:7 wherefore neither thought i myself worthy to come
unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.

7:8 for i also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers,
and i say unto one, go, and he goeth; and to another, come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, do this, and he doeth it.

7:9 when jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned him
about, and said unto the people that followed him, i say unto you, i
have not found so great faith, no, not in israel.

7:10 and they that were sent, returning to the house, found the
servant whole that had been sick.

7:11 and it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city
called nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people.

7:12 now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was
a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a
widow: and much people of the city was with her.

7:13 and when the lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said
unto her, weep not.

7:14 and he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood
still.

and he said, young man, i say unto thee, arise.

7:15 and he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. and he delivered
him to his mother.

7:16 and there came a fear on all: and they glorified god, saying,
that a great prophet is risen up among us; and, that god hath visited
his people.

7:17 and this rumour of him went forth throughout all judaea, and
throughout all the region round about.

7:18 and the disciples of john shewed him of all these things.

7:19 and john calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to
jesus, saying, art thou he that should come? or look we for another?
7:20 when the men were come unto him, they said, john baptist hath
sent us unto thee, saying, art thou he that should come? or look we
for another?  7:21 and in that same hour he cured many of their
infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were
blind he gave sight.

7:22 then jesus answering said unto them, go your way, and tell john
what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to
the poor the gospel is preached.

7:23 and blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.

7:24 and when the messengers of john were departed, he began to speak
unto the people concerning john, what went ye out into the wilderness
for to see?  a reed shaken with the wind?  7:25 but what went ye out
for to see? a man clothed in soft raiment?  behold, they which are
gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts.

7:26 but what went ye out for to see? a prophet? yea, i say unto you,
and much more than a prophet.

7:27 this is he, of whom it is written, behold, i send my messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

7:28 for i say unto you, among those that are born of women there is
not a greater prophet than john the baptist: but he that is least in
the kingdom of god is greater than he.

7:29 and all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified
god, being baptized with the baptism of john.

7:30 but the pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of god against
themselves, being not baptized of him.

7:31 and the lord said, whereunto then shall i liken the men of this
generation? and to what are they like?  7:32 they are like unto
children sitting in the marketplace, and calling one to another, and
saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourned to you, and ye have not wept.

7:33 for john the baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine;
and ye say, he hath a devil.

7:34 the son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, behold a
gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!
7:35 but wisdom is justified of all her children.

7:36 and one of the pharisees desired him that he would eat with him.
and he went into the pharisee's house, and sat down to meat.

7:37 and, behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she
knew that jesus sat at meat in the pharisee's house, brought an
alabaster box of ointment, 7:38 and stood at his feet behind him
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with
the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the
ointment.

7:39 now when the pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake
within himself, saying, this man, if he were a prophet, would have
known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she
is a sinner.

7:40 and jesus answering said unto him, simon, i have somewhat to say
unto thee. and he saith, master, say on.

7:41 there was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed
five hundred pence, and the other fifty.

7:42 and when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both.
tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?  7:43 simon
answered and said, i suppose that he, to whom he forgave most.

and he said unto him, thou hast rightly judged.

7:44 and he turned to the woman, and said unto simon, seest thou this
woman? i entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my
feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head.

7:45 thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman since the time i came in
hath not ceased to kiss my feet.

7:46 my head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath
anointed my feet with ointment.

7:47 wherefore i say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same
loveth little.

7:48 and he said unto her, thy sins are forgiven.

7:49 and they that sat at meat with him began to say within
themselves, who is this that forgiveth sins also?  7:50 and he said to
the woman, thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.

8:1 and it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city
and village, preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of
god: and the twelve were with him, 8:2 and certain women, which had
been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, mary called magdalene,
out of whom went seven devils, 8:3 and joanna the wife of chuza
herod's steward, and susanna, and many others, which ministered unto
him of their substance.

8:4 and when much people were gathered together, and were come to him
out of every city, he spake by a parable: 8:5 a sower went out to sow
his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was
trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it.

8:6 and some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it
withered away, because it lacked moisture.

8:7 and some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and
choked it.

8:8 and other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an
hundredfold. and when he had said these things, he cried, he that hath
ears to hear, let him hear.

8:9 and his disciples asked him, saying, what might this parable be?
8:10 and he said, unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of god: but to others in parables; that seeing they might not
see, and hearing they might not understand.

8:11 now the parable is this: the seed is the word of god.

8:12 those by the way side are they that hear; then cometh the devil,
and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe
and be saved.

8:13 they on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receive the
word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and
in time of temptation fall away.

8:14 and that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have
heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of
this life, and bring no fruit to perfection.

8:15 but that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good
heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience.

8:16 no man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel,
or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they
which enter in may see the light.

8:17 for nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither
any thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.

8:18 take heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall
be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that
which he seemeth to have.

8:19 then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come
at him for the press.

8:20 and it was told him by certain which said, thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to see thee.

8:21 and he answered and said unto them, my mother and my brethren are
these which hear the word of god, and do it.

8:22 now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship
with his disciples: and he said unto them, let us go over unto the
other side of the lake. and they launched forth.

8:23 but as they sailed he fell asleep: and there came down a storm of
wind on the lake; and they were filled with water, and were in
jeopardy.

8:24 and they came to him, and awoke him, saying, master, master, we
perish. then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the
water: and they ceased, and there was a calm.

8:25 and he said unto them, where is your faith? and they being afraid
wondered, saying one to another, what manner of man is this! for he
commandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him.

8:26 and they arrived at the country of the gadarenes, which is over
against galilee.

8:27 and when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a
certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither
abode in any house, but in the tombs.

8:28 when he saw jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and
with a loud voice said, what have i to do with thee, jesus, thou son
of god most high? i beseech thee, torment me not.

8:29 (for he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man.
for oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains
and in fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil
into the wilderness.)  8:30 and jesus asked him, saying, what is thy
name? and he said, legion: because many devils were entered into him.

8:31 and they besought him that he would not command them to go out
into the deep.

8:32 and there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the
mountain: and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter
into them. and he suffered them.

8:33 then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine:
and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were
choked.

8:34 when they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went
and told it in the city and in the country.

8:35 then they went out to see what was done; and came to jesus, and
found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the
feet of jesus, clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid.

8:36 they also which saw it told them by what means he that was
possessed of the devils was healed.

8:37 then the whole multitude of the country of the gadarenes round
about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great
fear: and he went up into the ship, and returned back again.

8:38 now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him
that he might be with him: but jesus sent him away, saying, 8:39
return to thine own house, and shew how great things god hath done
unto thee. and he went his way, and published throughout the whole
city how great things jesus had done unto him.

8:40 and it came to pass, that, when jesus was returned, the people
gladly received him: for they were all waiting for him.

8:41 and, behold, there came a man named jairus, and he was a ruler of
the synagogue: and he fell down at jesus' feet, and besought him that
he would come into his house: 8:42 for he had one only daughter, about
twelve years of age, and she lay a dying. but as he went the people
thronged him.

8:43 and a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had
spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any,
8:44 came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and
immediately her issue of blood stanched.

8:45 and jesus said, who touched me? when all denied, peter and they
that were with him said, master, the multitude throng thee and press
thee, and sayest thou, who touched me?  8:46 and jesus said, somebody
hath touched me: for i perceive that virtue is gone out of me.

8:47 and when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling,
and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the
people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed
immediately.

8:48 and he said unto her, daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace.

8:49 while he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the
synagogue's house, saying to him, thy daughter is dead; trouble not
the master.

8:50 but when jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, fear not:
believe only, and she shall be made whole.

8:51 and when he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in,
save peter, and james, and john, and the father and the mother of the
maiden.

8:52 and all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, weep not; she is not
dead, but sleepeth.

8:53 and they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

8:54 and he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called,
saying, maid, arise.

8:55 and her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he
commanded to give her meat.

8:56 and her parents were astonished: but he charged them that they
should tell no man what was done.

9:1 then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power
and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases.

9:2 and he sent them to preach the kingdom of god, and to heal the
sick.

9:3 and he said unto them, take nothing for your journey, neither
staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two
coats apiece.

9:4 and whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence
depart.

9:5 and whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city,
shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them.

9:6 and they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the
gospel, and healing every where.

9:7 now herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him: and he
was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that john was risen
from the dead; 9:8 and of some, that elias had appeared; and of
others, that one of the old prophets was risen again.

9:9 and herod said, john have i beheaded: but who is this, of whom i
hear such things? and he desired to see him.

9:10 and the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they
had done. and he took them, and went aside privately into a desert
place belonging to the city called bethsaida.

9:11 and the people, when they knew it, followed him: and he received
them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of god, and healed them that
had need of healing.

9:12 and when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and
said unto him, send the multitude away, that they may go into the
towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are
here in a desert place.

9:13 but he said unto them, give ye them to eat. and they said, we
have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and
buy meat for all this people.

9:14 for they were about five thousand men. and he said to his
disciples, make them sit down by fifties in a company.

9:15 and they did so, and made them all sit down.

9:16 then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up
to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to
set before the multitude.

9:17 and they did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them twelve baskets.

9:18 and it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were
with him: and he asked them, saying, whom say the people that i am?
9:19 they answering said, john the baptist; but some say, elias; and
others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again.

9:20 he said unto them, but whom say ye that i am? peter answering
said, the christ of god.

9:21 and he straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell no man
that thing; 9:22 saying, the son of man must suffer many things, and
be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain,
and be raised the third day.

9:23 and he said to them all, if any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

9:24 for whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever
will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it.

9:25 for what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and
lose himself, or be cast away?  9:26 for whosoever shall be ashamed of
me and of my words, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and in his father's, and of the holy
angels.

9:27 but i tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which
shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of god.

9:28 and it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he
took peter and john and james, and went up into a mountain to pray.

9:29 and as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and
his raiment was white and glistering.

9:30 and, behold, there talked with him two men, which were moses and
elias: 9:31 who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he
should accomplish at jerusalem.

9:32 but peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and
when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him.

9:33 and it came to pass, as they departed from him, peter said unto
jesus, master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for moses, and one for elias: not
knowing what he said.

9:34 while he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them:
and they feared as they entered into the cloud.

9:35 and there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, this is my
beloved son: hear him.

9:36 and when the voice was past, jesus was found alone. and they kept
it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they
had seen.

9:37 and it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come
down from the hill, much people met him.

9:38 and, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, master, i
beseech thee, look upon my son: for he is mine only child.

9:39 and, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it
teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly departeth
from him.

9:40 and i besought thy disciples to cast him out; and they could not.

9:41 and jesus answering said, o faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall i be with you, and suffer you? bring thy son hither.

9:42 and as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare
him.

and jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and
delivered him again to his father.

9:43 and they were all amazed at the mighty power of god. but while
they wondered every one at all things which jesus did, he said unto
his disciples, 9:44 let these sayings sink down into your ears: for
the son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men.

9:45 but they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them,
that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying.

9:46 then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be
greatest.

9:47 and jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child,
and set him by him, 9:48 and said unto them, whosoever shall receive
this child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me
receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the
same shall be great.

9:49 and john answered and said, master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name; and we forbad him, because he followeth not with us.

9:50 and jesus said unto him, forbid him not: for he that is not
against us is for us.

9:51 and it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be
received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to jerusalem, 9:52 and
sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a
village of the samaritans, to make ready for him.

9:53 and they did not receive him, because his face was as though he
would go to jerusalem.

9:54 and when his disciples james and john saw this, they said, lord,
wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as elias did?  9:55 but he turned, and rebuked them, and
said, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.

9:56 for the son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to
save them. and they went to another village.

9:57 and it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain man
said unto him, lord, i will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

9:58 and jesus said unto him, foxes have holes, and birds of the air
have nests; but the son of man hath not where to lay his head.

9:59 and he said unto another, follow me. but he said, lord, suffer me
first to go and bury my father.

9:60 jesus said unto him, let the dead bury their dead: but go thou
and preach the kingdom of god.

9:61 and another also said, lord, i will follow thee; but let me first
go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house.

9:62 and jesus said unto him, no man, having put his hand to the
plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of god.

10:1 after these things the lord appointed other seventy also, and
sent them two and two before his face into every city and place,
whither he himself would come.

10:2 therefore said he unto them, the harvest truly is great, but the
labourers are few: pray ye therefore the lord of the harvest, that he
would send forth labourers into his harvest.

10:3 go your ways: behold, i send you forth as lambs among wolves.

10:4 carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by
the way.

10:5 and into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be to this
house.

10:6 and if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it:
if not, it shall turn to you again.

10:7 and in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as
they give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. go not from house
to house.

10:8 and into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such
things as are set before you: 10:9 and heal the sick that are therein,
and say unto them, the kingdom of god is come nigh unto you.

10:10 but into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go
your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, 10:11 even the
very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against
you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of god is
come nigh unto you.

10:12 but i say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day
for sodom, than for that city.

10:13 woe unto thee, chorazin! woe unto thee, bethsaida! for if the
mighty works had been done in tyre and sidon, which have been done in
you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes.

10:14 but it shall be more tolerable for tyre and sidon at the
judgment, than for you.

10:15 and thou, capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be
thrust down to hell.

10:16 he that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you
despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

10:17 and the seventy returned again with joy, saying, lord, even the
devils are subject unto us through thy name.

10:18 and he said unto them, i beheld satan as lightning fall from
heaven.

10:19 behold, i give unto you power to tread on serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by
any means hurt you.

10:20 notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are
subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written
in heaven.

10:21 in that hour jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, i thank thee, o
father, lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so,
father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.

10:22 all things are delivered to me of my father: and no man knoweth
who the son is, but the father; and who the father is, but the son,
and he to whom the son will reveal him.

10:23 and he turned him unto his disciples, and said privately,
blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see: 10:24 for i
tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them.

10:25 and, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying,
master, what shall i do to inherit eternal life?  10:26 he said unto
him, what is written in the law? how readest thou?  10:27 and he
answering said, thou shalt love the lord thy god with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind; and thy neighbour as thyself.

10:28 and he said unto him, thou hast answered right: this do, and
thou shalt live.

10:29 but he, willing to justify himself, said unto jesus, and who is
my neighbour?  10:30 and jesus answering said, a certain man went down
from jerusalem to jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him
of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

10:31 and by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and
when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.

10:32 and likewise a levite, when he was at the place, came and looked
on him, and passed by on the other side.

10:33 but a certain samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and
when he saw him, he had compassion on him, 10:34 and went to him, and
bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own
beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.

10:35 and on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and
gave them to the host, and said unto him, take care of him; and
whatsoever thou spendest more, when i come again, i will repay thee.

10:36 which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him
that fell among the thieves?  10:37 and he said, he that shewed mercy
on him. then said jesus unto him, go, and do thou likewise.

10:38 now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a
certain village: and a certain woman named martha received him into
her house.

10:39 and she had a sister called mary, which also sat at jesus' feet,
and heard his word.

10:40 but martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and
said, lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve
alone?  bid her therefore that she help me.

10:41 and jesus answered and said unto her, martha, martha, thou art
careful and troubled about many things: 10:42 but one thing is
needful: and mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken
away from her.

11:1 and it came to pass, that, as he was praying in a certain place,
when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, lord, teach us to
pray, as john also taught his disciples.

11:2 and he said unto them, when ye pray, say, our father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name. thy kingdom come. thy will be done, as
in heaven, so in earth.

11:3 give us day by day our daily bread.

11:4 and forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us. and lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from
evil.

11:5 and he said unto them, which of you shall have a friend, and
shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, friend, lend me three
loaves; 11:6 for a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and i
have nothing to set before him?  11:7 and he from within shall answer
and say, trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are
with me in bed; i cannot rise and give thee.

11:8 i say unto you, though he will not rise and give him, because he
is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give
him as many as he needeth.

11:9 and i say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

11:10 for every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh
findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

11:11 if a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a
serpent?  11:12 or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a
scorpion?  11:13 if ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly father give the
holy spirit to them that ask him?  11:14 and he was casting out a
devil, and it was dumb. and it came to pass, when the devil was gone
out, the dumb spake; and the people wondered.

11:15 but some of them said, he casteth out devils through beelzebub
the chief of the devils.

11:16 and others, tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven.

11:17 but he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them, every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house divided
against a house falleth.

11:18 if satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom
stand? because ye say that i cast out devils through beelzebub.

11:19 and if i by beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast
them out? therefore shall they be your judges.

11:20 but if i with the finger of god cast out devils, no doubt the
kingdom of god is come upon you.

11:21 when a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in
peace: 11:22 but when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and
overcome him, he taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted,
and divideth his spoils.

11:23 he that is not with me is against me: and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth.

11:24 when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith, i will return
unto my house whence i came out.

11:25 and when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished.

11:26 then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked
than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state
of that man is worse than the first.

11:27 and it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman
of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, blessed is the
womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked.

11:28 but he said, yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of
god, and keep it.

11:29 and when the people were gathered thick together, he began to
say, this is an evil generation: they seek a sign; and there shall no
sign be given it, but the sign of jonas the prophet.

11:30 for as jonas was a sign unto the ninevites, so shall also the
son of man be to this generation.

11:31 the queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the
men of this generation, and condemn them: for she came from the utmost
parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of solomon; and, behold, a
greater than solomon is here.

11:32 the men of nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching
of jonas; and, behold, a greater than jonas is here.

11:33 no man, when he hath lighted a candle, putteth it in a secret
place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which
come in may see the light.

11:34 the light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is
single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when thine eye is
evil, thy body also is full of darkness.

11:35 take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not
darkness.

11:36 if thy whole body therefore be full of light, having no part
dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of
a candle doth give thee light.

11:37 and as he spake, a certain pharisee besought him to dine with
him: and he went in, and sat down to meat.

11:38 and when the pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first
washed before dinner.

11:39 and the lord said unto him, now do ye pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of
ravening and wickedness.

11:40 ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that
which is within also?  11:41 but rather give alms of such things as ye
have; and, behold, all things are clean unto you.

11:42 but woe unto you, pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all
manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of god: these
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

11:43 woe unto you, pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the
synagogues, and greetings in the markets.

11:44 woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as
graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware
of them.

11:45 then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, master,
thus saying thou reproachest us also.

11:46 and he said, woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with
burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens
with one of your fingers.

11:47 woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and
your fathers killed them.

11:48 truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers:
for they indeed killed them, and ye build their sepulchres.

11:49 therefore also said the wisdom of god, i will send them prophets
and apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: 11:50
that the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation
of the world, may be required of this generation; 11:51 from the blood
of abel unto the blood of zacharias which perished between the altar
and the temple: verily i say unto you, it shall be required of this
generation.

11:52 woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of
knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering
in ye hindered.

11:53 and as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the
pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of
many things: 11:54 laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something
out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.

12:1 in the mean time, when there were gathered together an
innumerable multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon
another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all, beware ye of
the leaven of the pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

12:2 for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither
hid, that shall not be known.

12:3 therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in
the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall
be proclaimed upon the housetops.

12:4 and i say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill
the body, and after that have no more that they can do.

12:5 but i will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: fear him, which after
he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, i say unto you, fear
him.

12:6 are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them
is forgotten before god?  12:7 but even the very hairs of your head
are all numbered. fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many
sparrows.

12:8 also i say unto you, whosoever shall confess me before men, him
shall the son of man also confess before the angels of god: 12:9 but
he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of
god.

12:10 and whosoever shall speak a word against the son of man, it
shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the holy
ghost it shall not be forgiven.

12:11 and when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto
magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall
answer, or what ye shall say: 12:12 for the holy ghost shall teach you
in the same hour what ye ought to say.

12:13 and one of the company said unto him, master, speak to my
brother, that he divide the inheritance with me.

12:14 and he said unto him, man, who made me a judge or a divider over
you?  12:15 and he said unto them, take heed, and beware of
covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the
things which he possesseth.

12:16 and he spake a parable unto them, saying, the ground of a
certain rich man brought forth plentifully: 12:17 and he thought
within himself, saying, what shall i do, because i have no room where
to bestow my fruits?  12:18 and he said, this will i do: i will pull
down my barns, and build greater; and there will i bestow all my
fruits and my goods.

12:19 and i will say to my soul, soul, thou hast much goods laid up
for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

12:20 but god said unto him, thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast
provided?  12:21 so is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is
not rich toward god.

12:22 and he said unto his disciples, therefore i say unto you, take
no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for the body,
what ye shall put on.

12:23 the life is more than meat, and the body is more than raiment.

12:24 consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which
neither have storehouse nor barn; and god feedeth them: how much more
are ye better than the fowls?  12:25 and which of you with taking
thought can add to his stature one cubit?  12:26 if ye then be not
able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the
rest?  12:27 consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they
spin not; and yet i say unto you, that solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these.

12:28 if then god so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field,
and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more will he clothe you,
o ye of little faith?  12:29 and seek not ye what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind.

12:30 for all these things do the nations of the world seek after: and
your father knoweth that ye have need of these things.

12:31 but rather seek ye the kingdom of god; and all these things
shall be added unto you.

12:32 fear not, little flock; for it is your father's good pleasure to
give you the kingdom.

12:33 sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which
wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no
thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.

12:34 for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

12:35 let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; 12:36
and ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will
return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may
open unto him immediately.

12:37 blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall
find watching: verily i say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and
make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

12:38 and if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third
watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.

12:39 and this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what
hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his house to be broken through.

12:40 be ye therefore ready also: for the son of man cometh at an hour
when ye think not.

12:41 then peter said unto him, lord, speakest thou this parable unto
us, or even to all?  12:42 and the lord said, who then is that
faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall make ruler over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?  12:43
blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.

12:44 of a truth i say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all
that he hath.

12:45 but and if that servant say in his heart, my lord delayeth his
coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to
eat and drink, and to be drunken; 12:46 the lord of that servant will
come in a day when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is
not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
portion with the unbelievers.

12:47 and that servant, which knew his lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes.

12:48 but he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes. for unto whomsoever much is given,
of him shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of
him they will ask the more.

12:49 i am come to send fire on the earth; and what will i, if it be
already kindled?  12:50 but i have a baptism to be baptized with; and
how am i straitened till it be accomplished!  12:51 suppose ye that i
am come to give peace on earth? i tell you, nay; but rather division:
12:52 for from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided,
three against two, and two against three.

12:53 the father shall be divided against the son, and the son against
the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against
the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law.

12:54 and he said also to the people, when ye see a cloud rise out of
the west, straightway ye say, there cometh a shower; and so it is.

12:55 and when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, there will be heat;
and it cometh to pass.

12:56 ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the
earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time?  12:57 yea, and
why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?  12:58 when thou
goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way,
give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him; lest he hale
thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the
officer cast thee into prison.

12:59 i tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid
the very last mite.

13:1 there were present at that season some that told him of the
galilaeans, whose blood pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.

13:2 and jesus answering said unto them, suppose ye that these
galilaeans were sinners above all the galilaeans, because they
suffered such things?  13:3 i tell you, nay: but, except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish.

13:4 or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in siloam fell, and slew
them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in
jerusalem?  13:5 i tell you, nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

13:6 he spake also this parable; a certain man had a fig tree planted
in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.

13:7 then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, behold, these
three years i come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut
it down; why cumbereth it the ground?  13:8 and he answering said unto
him, lord, let it alone this year also, till i shall dig about it, and
dung it: 13:9 and if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that
thou shalt cut it down.

13:10 and he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath.

13:11 and, behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up
herself.

13:12 and when jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her,
woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity.

13:13 and he laid his hands on her: and immediately she was made
straight, and glorified god.

13:14 and the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation,
because that jesus had healed on the sabbath day, and said unto the
people, there are six days in which men ought to work: in them
therefore come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day.

13:15 the lord then answered him, and said, thou hypocrite, doth not
each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall,
and lead him away to watering?  13:16 and ought not this woman, being
a daughter of abraham, whom satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen
years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?  13:17 and when he
had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and all the
people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.

13:18 then said he, unto what is the kingdom of god like? and
whereunto shall i resemble it?  13:19 it is like a grain of mustard
seed, which a man took, and cast into his garden; and it grew, and
waxed a great tree; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of
it.

13:20 and again he said, whereunto shall i liken the kingdom of god?
13:21 it is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures
of meal, till the whole was leavened.

13:22 and he went through the cities and villages, teaching, and
journeying toward jerusalem.

13:23 then said one unto him, lord, are there few that be saved? and
he said unto them, 13:24 strive to enter in at the strait gate: for
many, i say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

13:25 when once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to
the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, lord, lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto
you, i know you not whence ye are: 13:26 then shall ye begin to say,
we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our
streets.

13:27 but he shall say, i tell you, i know you not whence ye are;
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

13:28 there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
abraham, and isaac, and jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of
god, and you yourselves thrust out.

13:29 and they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from
the north, and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of
god.

13:30 and, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are
first which shall be last.

13:31 the same day there came certain of the pharisees, saying unto
him, get thee out, and depart hence: for herod will kill thee.

13:32 and he said unto them, go ye, and tell that fox, behold, i cast
out devils, and i do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day i
shall be perfected.

13:33 nevertheless i must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day
following: for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of jerusalem.

13:34 o jerusalem, jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest
them that are sent unto thee; how often would i have gathered thy
children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and
ye would not!  13:35 behold, your house is left unto you desolate: and
verily i say unto you, ye shall not see me, until the time come when
ye shall say, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.

14:1 and it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the
chief pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched
him.

14:2 and, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the
dropsy.

14:3 and jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and pharisees, saying,
is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?  14:4 and they held their
peace. and he took him, and healed him, and let him go; 14:5 and
answered them, saying, which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen
into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?
14:6 and they could not answer him again to these things.

14:7 and he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he
marked how they chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them.

14:8 when thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the
highest room; lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him;
14:9 and he that bade thee and him come and say to thee, give this man
place; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room.

14:10 but when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room;
that when he that bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee, friend, go
up higher: then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that
sit at meat with thee.

14:11 for whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted.

14:12 then said he also to him that bade him, when thou makest a
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither
thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they also bid thee again,
and a recompence be made thee.

14:13 but when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, the blind: 14:14 and thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot
recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of
the just.

14:15 and when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these
things, he said unto him, blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of god.

14:16 then said he unto him, a certain man made a great supper, and
bade many: 14:17 and sent his servant at supper time to say to them
that were bidden, come; for all things are now ready.

14:18 and they all with one consent began to make excuse. the first
said unto him, i have bought a piece of ground, and i must needs go
and see it: i pray thee have me excused.

14:19 and another said, i have bought five yoke of oxen, and i go to
prove them: i pray thee have me excused.

14:20 and another said, i have married a wife, and therefore i cannot
come.

14:21 so that servant came, and shewed his lord these things. then the
master of the house being angry said to his servant, go out quickly
into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor,
and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.

14:22 and the servant said, lord, it is done as thou hast commanded,
and yet there is room.

14:23 and the lord said unto the servant, go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.

14:24 for i say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden
shall taste of my supper.

14:25 and there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and
said unto them, 14:26 if any man come to me, and hate not his father,
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea,
and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.

14:27 and whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot
be my disciple.

14:28 for which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down
first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?
14:29 lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able
to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, 14:30 saying, this
man began to build, and was not able to finish.

14:31 or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth
not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to
meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?  14:32 or else,
while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and
desireth conditions of peace.

14:33 so likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that
he hath, he cannot be my disciple.

14:34 salt is good: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith
shall it be seasoned?  14:35 it is neither fit for the land, nor yet
for the dunghill; but men cast it out. he that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.

15:1 then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear
him.

15:2 and the pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, this man
receiveth sinners, and eateth with them.

15:3 and he spake this parable unto them, saying, 15:4 what man of
you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave
the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is
lost, until he find it?  15:5 and when he hath found it, he layeth it
on his shoulders, rejoicing.

15:6 and when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and
neighbours, saying unto them, rejoice with me; for i have found my
sheep which was lost.

15:7 i say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons,
which need no repentance.

15:8 either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one
piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek
diligently till she find it?  15:9 and when she hath found it, she
calleth her friends and her neighbours together, saying, rejoice with
me; for i have found the piece which i had lost.

15:10 likewise, i say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the
angels of god over one sinner that repenteth.

15:11 and he said, a certain man had two sons: 15:12 and the younger
of them said to his father, father, give me the portion of goods that
falleth to me. and he divided unto them his living.

15:13 and not many days after the younger son gathered all together,
and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his
substance with riotous living.

15:14 and when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that
land; and he began to be in want.

15:15 and he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and
he sent him into his fields to feed swine.

15:16 and he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the
swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.

15:17 and when he came to himself, he said, how many hired servants of
my father's have bread enough and to spare, and i perish with hunger!
15:18 i will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, father,
i have sinned against heaven, and before thee, 15:19 and am no more
worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

15:20 and he arose, and came to his father. but when he was yet a
great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and
fell on his neck, and kissed him.

15:21 and the son said unto him, father, i have sinned against heaven,
and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

15:22 but the father said to his servants, bring forth the best robe,
and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet:
15:23 and bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat,
and be merry: 15:24 for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he
was lost, and is found. and they began to be merry.

15:25 now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh
to the house, he heard musick and dancing.

15:26 and he called one of the servants, and asked what these things
meant.

15:27 and he said unto him, thy brother is come; and thy father hath
killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.

15:28 and he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father
out, and intreated him.

15:29 and he answering said to his father, lo, these many years do i
serve thee, neither transgressed i at any time thy commandment: and
yet thou never gavest me a kid, that i might make merry with my
friends: 15:30 but as soon as this thy son was come, which hath
devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted
calf.

15:31 and he said unto him, son, thou art ever with me, and all that i
have is thine.

15:32 it was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.

16:1 and he said also unto his disciples, there was a certain rich
man, which had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he
had wasted his goods.

16:2 and he called him, and said unto him, how is it that i hear this
of thee? give an account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no
longer steward.

16:3 then the steward said within himself, what shall i do? for my
lord taketh away from me the stewardship: i cannot dig; to beg i am
ashamed.

16:4 i am resolved what to do, that, when i am put out of the
stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.

16:5 so he called every one of his lord's debtors unto him, and said
unto the first, how much owest thou unto my lord?  16:6 and he said,
an hundred measures of oil. and he said unto him, take thy bill, and
sit down quickly, and write fifty.

16:7 then said he to another, and how much owest thou? and he said, an
hundred measures of wheat. and he said unto him, take thy bill, and
write fourscore.

16:8 and the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done
wisely: for the children of this world are in their generation wiser
than the children of light.

16:9 and i say unto you, make to yourselves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations.

16:10 he that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in
much: and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much.

16:11 if therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?  16:12 and if
ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall
give you that which is your own?  16:13 no servant can serve two
masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else
he will hold to the one, and despise the other. ye cannot serve god
and mammon.

16:14 and the pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these
things: and they derided him.

16:15 and he said unto them, ye are they which justify yourselves
before men; but god knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly
esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of god.

16:16 the law and the prophets were until john: since that time the
kingdom of god is preached, and every man presseth into it.

16:17 and it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle
of the law to fail.

16:18 whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another,
committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from
her husband committeth adultery.

16:19 there was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and
fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day: 16:20 and there was a
certain beggar named lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of
sores, 16:21 and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from
the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

16:22 and it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by
the angels into abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was
buried; 16:23 and in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and
seeth abraham afar off, and lazarus in his bosom.

16:24 and he cried and said, father abraham, have mercy on me, and
send lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool
my tongue; for i am tormented in this flame.

16:25 but abraham said, son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
receivedst thy good things, and likewise lazarus evil things: but now
he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

16:26 and beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf
fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither
can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

16:27 then he said, i pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest
send him to my father's house: 16:28 for i have five brethren; that he
may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.

16:29 abraham saith unto him, they have moses and the prophets; let
them hear them.

16:30 and he said, nay, father abraham: but if one went unto them from
the dead, they will repent.

16:31 and he said unto him, if they hear not moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

17:1 then said he unto the disciples, it is impossible but that
offences will come: but woe unto him, through whom they come!  17:2 it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little
ones.

17:3 take heed to yourselves: if thy brother trespass against thee,
rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him.

17:4 and if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven
times in a day turn again to thee, saying, i repent; thou shalt
forgive him.

17:5 and the apostles said unto the lord, increase our faith.

17:6 and the lord said, if ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
might say unto this sycamine tree, be thou plucked up by the root, and
be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you.

17:7 but which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle,
will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, go and
sit down to meat?  17:8 and will not rather say unto him, make ready
wherewith i may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till i have eaten
and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?  17:9 doth he
thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him?
i trow not.

17:10 so likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which
are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants: we have done
that which was our duty to do.

17:11 and it came to pass, as he went to jerusalem, that he passed
through the midst of samaria and galilee.

17:12 and as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men
that were lepers, which stood afar off: 17:13 and they lifted up their
voices, and said, jesus, master, have mercy on us.

17:14 and when he saw them, he said unto them, go shew yourselves unto
the priests. and it came to pass, that, as they went, they were
cleansed.

17:15 and one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back,
and with a loud voice glorified god, 17:16 and fell down on his face
at his feet, giving him thanks: and he was a samaritan.

17:17 and jesus answering said, were there not ten cleansed? but where
are the nine?  17:18 there are not found that returned to give glory
to god, save this stranger.

17:19 and he said unto him, arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made
thee whole.

17:20 and when he was demanded of the pharisees, when the kingdom of
god should come, he answered them and said, the kingdom of god cometh
not with observation: 17:21 neither shall they say, lo here! or, lo
there! for, behold, the kingdom of god is within you.

17:22 and he said unto the disciples, the days will come, when ye
shall desire to see one of the days of the son of man, and ye shall
not see it.

17:23 and they shall say to you, see here; or, see there: go not after
them, nor follow them.

17:24 for as the lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under
heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shall also the
son of man be in his day.

17:25 but first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this
generation.

17:26 and as it was in the days of noe, so shall it be also in the
days of the son of man.

17:27 they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in
marriage, until the day that noe entered into the ark, and the flood
came, and destroyed them all.

17:28 likewise also as it was in the days of lot; they did eat, they
drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; 17:29 but
the same day that lot went out of sodom it rained fire and brimstone
from heaven, and destroyed them all.

17:30 even thus shall it be in the day when the son of man is
revealed.

17:31 in that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff
in the house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in
the field, let him likewise not return back.

17:32 remember lot's wife.

17:33 whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it; and
whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it.

17:34 i tell you, in that night there shall be two men in one bed; the
one shall be taken, and the other shall be left.

17:35 two women shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken,
and the other left.

17:36 two men shall be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the
other left.

17:37 and they answered and said unto him, where, lord? and he said
unto them, wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be
gathered together.

18:1 and he spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought
always to pray, and not to faint; 18:2 saying, there was in a city a
judge, which feared not god, neither regarded man: 18:3 and there was
a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, avenge me of mine
adversary.

18:4 and he would not for a while: but afterward he said within
himself, though i fear not god, nor regard man; 18:5 yet because this
widow troubleth me, i will avenge her, lest by her continual coming
she weary me.

18:6 and the lord said, hear what the unjust judge saith.

18:7 and shall not god avenge his own elect, which cry day and night
unto him, though he bear long with them?  18:8 i tell you that he will
avenge them speedily. nevertheless when the son of man cometh, shall
he find faith on the earth?  18:9 and he spake this parable unto
certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and
despised others: 18:10 two men went up into the temple to pray; the
one a pharisee, and the other a publican.

18:11 the pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, god, i thank
thee, that i am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this publican.

18:12 i fast twice in the week, i give tithes of all that i possess.

18:13 and the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much
as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, god be
merciful to me a sinner.

18:14 i tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather
than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased;
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

18:15 and they brought unto him also infants, that he would touch
them: but when his disciples saw it, they rebuked them.

18:16 but jesus called them unto him, and said, suffer little children
to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of
god.

18:17 verily i say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom
of god as a little child shall in no wise enter therein.

18:18 and a certain ruler asked him, saying, good master, what shall i
do to inherit eternal life?  18:19 and jesus said unto him, why
callest thou me good? none is good, save one, that is, god.

18:20 thou knowest the commandments, do not commit adultery, do not
kill, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honour thy father and
thy mother.

18:21 and he said, all these have i kept from my youth up.

18:22 now when jesus heard these things, he said unto him, yet lackest
thou one thing: sell all that thou hast, and distribute unto the poor,
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me.

18:23 and when he heard this, he was very sorrowful: for he was very
rich.

18:24 and when jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, how
hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of god!
18:25 for it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.

18:26 and they that heard it said, who then can be saved?  18:27 and
he said, the things which are impossible with men are possible with
god.

18:28 then peter said, lo, we have left all, and followed thee.

18:29 and he said unto them, verily i say unto you, there is no man
that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children,
for the kingdom of god's sake, 18:30 who shall not receive manifold
more in this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting.

18:31 then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, behold, we
go up to jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets
concerning the son of man shall be accomplished.

18:32 for he shall be delivered unto the gentiles, and shall be
mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on: 18:33 and they shall
scourge him, and put him to death: and the third day he shall rise
again.

18:34 and they understood none of these things: and this saying was
hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken.

18:35 and it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto jericho, a
certain blind man sat by the way side begging: 18:36 and hearing the
multitude pass by, he asked what it meant.

18:37 and they told him, that jesus of nazareth passeth by.

18:38 and he cried, saying, jesus, thou son of david, have mercy on
me.

18:39 and they which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his
peace: but he cried so much the more, thou son of david, have mercy on
me.

18:40 and jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and
when he was come near, he asked him, 18:41 saying, what wilt thou that
i shall do unto thee? and he said, lord, that i may receive my sight.

18:42 and jesus said unto him, receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved
thee.

18:43 and immediately he received his sight, and followed him,
glorifying god: and all the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto
god.

19:1 and jesus entered and passed through jericho.

19:2 and, behold, there was a man named zacchaeus, which was the chief
among the publicans, and he was rich.

19:3 and he sought to see jesus who he was; and could not for the
press, because he was little of stature.

19:4 and he ran before, and climbed up into a sycomore tree to see
him: for he was to pass that way.

19:5 and when jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and
said unto him, zacchaeus, make haste, and come down; for to day i must
abide at thy house.

19:6 and he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.

19:7 and when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, that he was gone
to be guest with a man that is a sinner.

19:8 and zacchaeus stood, and said unto the lord: behold, lord, the
half of my goods i give to the poor; and if i have taken any thing
from any man by false accusation, i restore him fourfold.

19:9 and jesus said unto him, this day is salvation come to this
house, forsomuch as he also is a son of abraham.

19:10 for the son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost.

19:11 and as they heard these things, he added and spake a parable,
because he was nigh to jerusalem, and because they thought that the
kingdom of god should immediately appear.

19:12 he said therefore, a certain nobleman went into a far country to
receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.

19:13 and he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds,
and said unto them, occupy till i come.

19:14 but his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him,
saying, we will not have this man to reign over us.

19:15 and it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received
the kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him,
to whom he had given the money, that he might know how much every man
had gained by trading.

19:16 then came the first, saying, lord, thy pound hath gained ten
pounds.

19:17 and he said unto him, well, thou good servant: because thou hast
been faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.

19:18 and the second came, saying, lord, thy pound hath gained five
pounds.

19:19 and he said likewise to him, be thou also over five cities.

19:20 and another came, saying, lord, behold, here is thy pound, which
i have kept laid up in a napkin: 19:21 for i feared thee, because thou
art an austere man: thou takest up that thou layedst not down, and
reapest that thou didst not sow.

19:22 and he saith unto him, out of thine own mouth will i judge thee,
thou wicked servant. thou knewest that i was an austere man, taking up
that i laid not down, and reaping that i did not sow: 19:23 wherefore
then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming i might
have required mine own with usury?  19:24 and he said unto them that
stood by, take from him the pound, and give it to him that hath ten
pounds.

19:25 (and they said unto him, lord, he hath ten pounds.)  19:26 for i
say unto you, that unto every one which hath shall be given; and from
him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him.

19:27 but those mine enemies, which would not that i should reign over
them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

19:28 and when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to
jerusalem.

19:29 and it came to pass, when he was come nigh to bethphage and
bethany, at the mount called the mount of olives, he sent two of his
disciples, 19:30 saying, go ye into the village over against you; in
the which at your entering ye shall find a colt tied, whereon yet
never man sat: loose him, and bring him hither.

19:31 and if any man ask you, why do ye loose him? thus shall ye say
unto him, because the lord hath need of him.

19:32 and they that were sent went their way, and found even as he had
said unto them.

19:33 and as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said unto
them, why loose ye the colt?  19:34 and they said, the lord hath need
of him.

19:35 and they brought him to jesus: and they cast their garments upon
the colt, and they set jesus thereon.

19:36 and as he went, they spread their clothes in the way.

19:37 and when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount
of olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and
praise god with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had
seen; 19:38 saying, blessed be the king that cometh in the name of the
lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.

19:39 and some of the pharisees from among the multitude said unto
him, master, rebuke thy disciples.

19:40 and he answered and said unto them, i tell you that, if these
should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

19:41 and when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it,
19:42 saying, if thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy
day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes.

19:43 for the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast
a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side, 19:44 and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children
within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another;
because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.

19:45 and he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that
sold therein, and them that bought; 19:46 saying unto them, it is
written, my house is the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of
thieves.

19:47 and he taught daily in the temple. but the chief priests and the
scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him, 19:48 and
could not find what they might do: for all the people were very
attentive to hear him.

20:1 and it came to pass, that on one of those days, as he taught the
people in the temple, and preached the gospel, the chief priests and
the scribes came upon him with the elders, 20:2 and spake unto him,
saying, tell us, by what authority doest thou these things? or who is
he that gave thee this authority?  20:3 and he answered and said unto
them, i will also ask you one thing; and answer me: 20:4 the baptism
of john, was it from heaven, or of men?  20:5 and they reasoned with
themselves, saying, if we shall say, from heaven; he will say, why
then believed ye him not?  20:6 but and if we say, of men; all the
people will stone us: for they be persuaded that john was a prophet.

20:7 and they answered, that they could not tell whence it was.

20:8 and jesus said unto them, neither tell i you by what authority i
do these things.

20:9 then began he to speak to the people this parable; a certain man
planted a vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen, and went into a
far country for a long time.

20:10 and at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they
should give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat
him, and sent him away empty.

20:11 and again he sent another servant: and they beat him also, and
entreated him shamefully, and sent him away empty.

20:12 and again he sent a third: and they wounded him also, and cast
him out.

20:13 then said the lord of the vineyard, what shall i do? i will send
my beloved son: it may be they will reverence him when they see him.

20:14 but when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves,
saying, this is the heir: come, let us kill him, that the inheritance
may be ours.

20:15 so they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him. what
therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them?  20:16 he shall
come and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to
others. and when they heard it, they said, god forbid.

20:17 and he beheld them, and said, what is this then that is written,
the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of
the corner?  20:18 whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be
broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

20:19 and the chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to
lay hands on him; and they feared the people: for they perceived that
he had spoken this parable against them.

20:20 and they watched him, and sent forth spies, which should feign
themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so
they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor.

20:21 and they asked him, saying, master, we know that thou sayest and
teachest rightly, neither acceptest thou the person of any, but
teachest the way of god truly: 20:22 is it lawful for us to give
tribute unto caesar, or no?  20:23 but he perceived their craftiness,
and said unto them, why tempt ye me?  20:24 shew me a penny. whose
image and superscription hath it? they answered and said, caesar's.

20:25 and he said unto them, render therefore unto caesar the things
which be caesar's, and unto god the things which be god's.

20:26 and they could not take hold of his words before the people: and
they marvelled at his answer, and held their peace.

20:27 then came to him certain of the sadducees, which deny that there
is any resurrection; and they asked him, 20:28 saying, master, moses
wrote unto us, if any man's brother die, having a wife, and he die
without children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up
seed unto his brother.

20:29 there were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a wife,
and died without children.

20:30 and the second took her to wife, and he died childless.

20:31 and the third took her; and in like manner the seven also: and
they left no children, and died.

20:32 last of all the woman died also.

20:33 therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she? for
seven had her to wife.

20:34 and jesus answering said unto them, the children of this world
marry, and are given in marriage: 20:35 but they which shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the
dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: 20:36 neither can they
die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children
of god, being the children of the resurrection.

20:37 now that the dead are raised, even moses shewed at the bush,
when he calleth the lord the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and
the god of jacob.

20:38 for he is not a god of the dead, but of the living: for all live
unto him.

20:39 then certain of the scribes answering said, master, thou hast
well said.

20:40 and after that they durst not ask him any question at all.

20:41 and he said unto them, how say they that christ is david's son?
20:42 and david himself saith in the book of psalms, the lord said
unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand, 20:43 till i make thine
enemies thy footstool.

20:44 david therefore calleth him lord, how is he then his son?  20:45
then in the audience of all the people he said unto his disciples,
20:46 beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes, and
love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in the
synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts; 20:47 which devour widows'
houses, and for a shew make long prayers: the same shall receive
greater damnation.

21:1 and he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into
the treasury.

21:2 and he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two
mites.

21:3 and he said, of a truth i say unto you, that this poor widow hath
cast in more than they all: 21:4 for all these have of their abundance
cast in unto the offerings of god: but she of her penury hath cast in
all the living that she had.

21:5 and as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly
stones and gifts, he said, 21:6 as for these things which ye behold,
the days will come, in the which there shall not be left one stone
upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

21:7 and they asked him, saying, master, but when shall these things
be?  and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass?
21:8 and he said, take heed that ye be not deceived: for many shall
come in my name, saying, i am christ; and the time draweth near: go ye
not therefore after them.

21:9 but when ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified:
for these things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and
by.

21:10 then said he unto them, nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom: 21:11 and great earthquakes shall be in
divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights and
great signs shall there be from heaven.

21:12 but before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and
persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons,
being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake.

21:13 and it shall turn to you for a testimony.

21:14 settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what
ye shall answer: 21:15 for i will give you a mouth and wisdom, which
all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist.

21:16 and ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and
kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to
death.

21:17 and ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake.

21:18 but there shall not an hair of your head perish.

21:19 in your patience possess ye your souls.

21:20 and when ye shall see jerusalem compassed with armies, then know
that the desolation thereof is nigh.

21:21 then let them which are in judaea flee to the mountains; and let
them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let not them that
are in the countries enter thereinto.

21:22 for these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are
written may be fulfilled.

21:23 but woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give
suck, in those days! for there shall be great distress in the land,
and wrath upon this people.

21:24 and they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led
away captive into all nations: and jerusalem shall be trodden down of
the gentiles, until the times of the gentiles be fulfilled.

21:25 and there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the
stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the
sea and the waves roaring; 21:26 men's hearts failing them for fear,
and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for
the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

21:27 and then shall they see the son of man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory.

21:28 and when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.

21:29 and he spake to them a parable; behold the fig tree, and all the
trees; 21:30 when they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own
selves that summer is now nigh at hand.

21:31 so likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye
that the kingdom of god is nigh at hand.

21:32 verily i say unto you, this generation shall not pass away, till
all be fulfilled.

21:33 heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass
away.

21:34 and take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
and so that day come upon you unawares.

21:35 for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face
of the whole earth.

21:36 watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the son of man.

21:37 and in the day time he was teaching in the temple; and at night
he went out, and abode in the mount that is called the mount of
olives.

21:38 and all the people came early in the morning to him in the
temple, for to hear him.

22:1 now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the
passover.

22:2 and the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill him;
for they feared the people.

22:3 then entered satan into judas surnamed iscariot, being of the
number of the twelve.

22:4 and he went his way, and communed with the chief priests and
captains, how he might betray him unto them.

22:5 and they were glad, and covenanted to give him money.

22:6 and he promised, and sought opportunity to betray him unto them
in the absence of the multitude.

22:7 then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be
killed.

22:8 and he sent peter and john, saying, go and prepare us the
passover, that we may eat.

22:9 and they said unto him, where wilt thou that we prepare?  22:10
and he said unto them, behold, when ye are entered into the city,
there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him
into the house where he entereth in.

22:11 and ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, the master saith
unto thee, where is the guestchamber, where i shall eat the passover
with my disciples?  22:12 and he shall shew you a large upper room
furnished: there make ready.

22:13 and they went, and found as he had said unto them: and they made
ready the passover.

22:14 and when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles
with him.

22:15 and he said unto them, with desire i have desired to eat this
passover with you before i suffer: 22:16 for i say unto you, i will
not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of god.

22:17 and he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, take this, and
divide it among yourselves: 22:18 for i say unto you, i will not drink
of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of god shall come.

22:19 and he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
them, saying, this is my body which is given for you: this do in
remembrance of me.

22:20 likewise also the cup after supper, saying, this cup is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

22:21 but, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the
table.

22:22 and truly the son of man goeth, as it was determined: but woe
unto that man by whom he is betrayed!  22:23 and they began to enquire
among themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing.

22:24 and there was also a strife among them, which of them should be
accounted the greatest.

22:25 and he said unto them, the kings of the gentiles exercise
lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon them are
called benefactors.

22:26 but ye shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you, let
him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve.

22:27 for whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that
serveth?  is not he that sitteth at meat? but i am among you as he
that serveth.

22:28 ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations.

22:29 and i appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father hath appointed
unto me; 22:30 that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom,
and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of israel.

22:31 and the lord said, simon, simon, behold, satan hath desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat: 22:32 but i have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen
thy brethren.

22:33 and he said unto him, lord, i am ready to go with thee, both
into prison, and to death.

22:34 and he said, i tell thee, peter, the cock shall not crow this
day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.

22:35 and he said unto them, when i sent you without purse, and scrip,
and shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said, nothing.

22:36 then said he unto them, but now, he that hath a purse, let him
take it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him
sell his garment, and buy one.

22:37 for i say unto you, that this that is written must yet be
accomplished in me, and he was reckoned among the transgressors: for
the things concerning me have an end.

22:38 and they said, lord, behold, here are two swords. and he said
unto them, it is enough.

22:39 and he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of
olives; and his disciples also followed him.

22:40 and when he was at the place, he said unto them, pray that ye
enter not into temptation.

22:41 and he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and kneeled
down, and prayed, 22:42 saying, father, if thou be willing, remove
this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

22:43 and there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening
him.

22:44 and being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat
was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

22:45 and when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples,
he found them sleeping for sorrow, 22:46 and said unto them, why sleep
ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.

22:47 and while he yet spake, behold a multitude, and he that was
called judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto
jesus to kiss him.

22:48 but jesus said unto him, judas, betrayest thou the son of man
with a kiss?  22:49 when they which were about him saw what would
follow, they said unto him, lord, shall we smite with the sword?
22:50 and one of them smote the servant of the high priest, and cut
off his right ear.

22:51 and jesus answered and said, suffer ye thus far. and he touched
his ear, and healed him.

22:52 then jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains of the
temple, and the elders, which were come to him, be ye come out, as
against a thief, with swords and staves?  22:53 when i was daily with
you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me: but this is
your hour, and the power of darkness.

22:54 then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high
priest's house. and peter followed afar off.

22:55 and when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and
were set down together, peter sat down among them.

22:56 but a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and
earnestly looked upon him, and said, this man was also with him.

22:57 and he denied him, saying, woman, i know him not.

22:58 and after a little while another saw him, and said, thou art
also of them. and peter said, man, i am not.

22:59 and about the space of one hour after another confidently
affirmed, saying, of a truth this fellow also was with him: for he is
a galilaean.

22:60 and peter said, man, i know not what thou sayest. and
immediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew.

22:61 and the lord turned, and looked upon peter. and peter remembered
the word of the lord, how he had said unto him, before the cock crow,
thou shalt deny me thrice.

22:62 and peter went out, and wept bitterly.

22:63 and the men that held jesus mocked him, and smote him.

22:64 and when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face,
and asked him, saying, prophesy, who is it that smote thee?  22:65 and
many other things blasphemously spake they against him.

22:66 and as soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the
chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their
council, saying, 22:67 art thou the christ? tell us. and he said unto
them, if i tell you, ye will not believe: 22:68 and if i also ask you,
ye will not answer me, nor let me go.

22:69 hereafter shall the son of man sit on the right hand of the
power of god.

22:70 then said they all, art thou then the son of god? and he said
unto them, ye say that i am.

22:71 and they said, what need we any further witness? for we
ourselves have heard of his own mouth.

23:1 and the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto pilate.

23:2 and they began to accuse him, saying, we found this fellow
perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to caesar,
saying that he himself is christ a king.

23:3 and pilate asked him, saying, art thou the king of the jews? and
he answered him and said, thou sayest it.

23:4 then said pilate to the chief priests and to the people, i find
no fault in this man.

23:5 and they were the more fierce, saying, he stirreth up the people,
teaching throughout all jewry, beginning from galilee to this place.

23:6 when pilate heard of galilee, he asked whether the man were a
galilaean.

23:7 and as soon as he knew that he belonged unto herod's
jurisdiction, he sent him to herod, who himself also was at jerusalem
at that time.

23:8 and when herod saw jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was
desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many things
of him; and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him.

23:9 then he questioned with him in many words; but he answered him
nothing.

23:10 and the chief priests and scribes stood and vehemently accused
him.

23:11 and herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him,
and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to pilate.

23:12 and the same day pilate and herod were made friends together:
for before they were at enmity between themselves.

23:13 and pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and
the rulers and the people, 23:14 said unto them, ye have brought this
man unto me, as one that perverteth the people: and, behold, i, having
examined him before you, have found no fault in this man touching
those things whereof ye accuse him: 23:15 no, nor yet herod: for i
sent you to him; and, lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him.

23:16 i will therefore chastise him, and release him.

23:17 (for of necessity he must release one unto them at the feast.)
23:18 and they cried out all at once, saying, away with this man, and
release unto us barabbas: 23:19 (who for a certain sedition made in
the city, and for murder, was cast into prison.)  23:20 pilate
therefore, willing to release jesus, spake again to them.

23:21 but they cried, saying, crucify him, crucify him.

23:22 and he said unto them the third time, why, what evil hath he
done? i have found no cause of death in him: i will therefore chastise
him, and let him go.

23:23 and they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might
be crucified. and the voices of them and of the chief priests
prevailed.

23:24 and pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.

23:25 and he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was
cast into prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered jesus to
their will.

23:26 and as they led him away, they laid hold upon one simon, a
cyrenian, coming out of the country, and on him they laid the cross,
that he might bear it after jesus.

23:27 and there followed him a great company of people, and of women,
which also bewailed and lamented him.

23:28 but jesus turning unto them said, daughters of jerusalem, weep
not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.

23:29 for, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say,
blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps
which never gave suck.

23:30 then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall on us; and
to the hills, cover us.

23:31 for if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done
in the dry?  23:32 and there were also two other, malefactors, led
with him to be put to death.

23:33 and when they were come to the place, which is called calvary,
there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand,
and the other on the left.

23:34 then said jesus, father, forgive them; for they know not what
they do. and they parted his raiment, and cast lots.

23:35 and the people stood beholding. and the rulers also with them
derided him, saying, he saved others; let him save himself, if he be
christ, the chosen of god.

23:36 and the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering
him vinegar, 23:37 and saying, if thou be the king of the jews, save
thyself.

23:38 and a superscription also was written over him in letters of
greek, and latin, and hebrew, this is the king of the jews.

23:39 and one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him,
saying, if thou be christ, save thyself and us.

23:40 but the other answering rebuked him, saying, dost not thou fear
god, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?  23:41 and we indeed
justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath
done nothing amiss.

23:42 and he said unto jesus, lord, remember me when thou comest into
thy kingdom.

23:43 and jesus said unto him, verily i say unto thee, to day shalt
thou be with me in paradise.

23:44 and it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over
all the earth until the ninth hour.

23:45 and the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in
the midst.

23:46 and when jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, father,
into thy hands i commend my spirit: and having said thus, he gave up
the ghost.

23:47 now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified god,
saying, certainly this was a righteous man.

23:48 and all the people that came together to that sight, beholding
the things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned.

23:49 and all his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from
galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things.

23:50 and, behold, there was a man named joseph, a counsellor; and he
was a good man, and a just: 23:51 (the same had not consented to the
counsel and deed of them;) he was of arimathaea, a city of the jews:
who also himself waited for the kingdom of god.

23:52 this man went unto pilate, and begged the body of jesus.

23:53 and he took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a
sepulchre that was hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid.

23:54 and that day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on.

23:55 and the women also, which came with him from galilee, followed
after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid.

23:56 and they returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and rested
the sabbath day according to the commandment.

24:1 now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning,
they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had
prepared, and certain others with them.

24:2 and they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre.

24:3 and they entered in, and found not the body of the lord jesus.

24:4 and it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout,
behold, two men stood by them in shining garments: 24:5 and as they
were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto
them, why seek ye the living among the dead?  24:6 he is not here, but
is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in galilee,
24:7 saying, the son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

24:8 and they remembered his words, 24:9 and returned from the
sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to all the
rest.

24:10 it was mary magdalene and joanna, and mary the mother of james,
and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the
apostles.

24:11 and their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed
them not.

24:12 then arose peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stooping down,
he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed,
wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.

24:13 and, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called
emmaus, which was from jerusalem about threescore furlongs.

24:14 and they talked together of all these things which had happened.

24:15 and it came to pass, that, while they communed together and
reasoned, jesus himself drew near, and went with them.

24:16 but their eyes were holden that they should not know him.

24:17 and he said unto them, what manner of communications are these
that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?  24:18 and the
one of them, whose name was cleopas, answering said unto him, art thou
only a stranger in jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are
come to pass there in these days?  24:19 and he said unto them, what
things? and they said unto him, concerning jesus of nazareth, which
was a prophet mighty in deed and word before god and all the people:
24:20 and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be
condemned to death, and have crucified him.

24:21 but we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed
israel: and beside all this, to day is the third day since these
things were done.

24:22 yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished,
which were early at the sepulchre; 24:23 and when they found not his
body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels,
which said that he was alive.

24:24 and certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre,
and found it even so as the women had said: but him they saw not.

24:25 then he said unto them, o fools, and slow of heart to believe
all that the prophets have spoken: 24:26 ought not christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?  24:27 and
beginning at moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all
the scriptures the things concerning himself.

24:28 and they drew nigh unto the village, whither they went: and he
made as though he would have gone further.

24:29 but they constrained him, saying, abide with us: for it is
toward evening, and the day is far spent. and he went in to tarry with
them.

24:30 and it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread,
and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them.

24:31 and their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished
out of their sight.

24:32 and they said one to another, did not our heart burn within us,
while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the
scriptures?  24:33 and they rose up the same hour, and returned to
jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were
with them, 24:34 saying, the lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared
to simon.

24:35 and they told what things were done in the way, and how he was
known of them in breaking of bread.

24:36 and as they thus spake, jesus himself stood in the midst of
them, and saith unto them, peace be unto you.

24:37 but they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they
had seen a spirit.

24:38 and he said unto them, why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts?  24:39 behold my hands and my feet, that it is i
myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have.

24:40 and when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his
feet.

24:41 and while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said
unto them, have ye here any meat?  24:42 and they gave him a piece of
a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.

24:43 and he took it, and did eat before them.

24:44 and he said unto them, these are the words which i spake unto
you, while i was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled,
which were written in the law of moses, and in the prophets, and in
the psalms, concerning me.

24:45 then opened he their understanding, that they might understand
the scriptures, 24:46 and said unto them, thus it is written, and thus
it behoved christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:
24:47 and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
his name among all nations, beginning at jerusalem.

24:48 and ye are witnesses of these things.

24:49 and, behold, i send the promise of my father upon you: but tarry
ye in the city of jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on
high.

24:50 and he led them out as far as to bethany, and he lifted up his
hands, and blessed them.

24:51 and it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from
them, and carried up into heaven.

24:52 and they worshipped him, and returned to jerusalem with great
joy: 24:53 and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing
god. amen.




the gospel according to saint john


1:1 in the beginning was the word, and the word was with god, and the
word was god.

1:2 the same was in the beginning with god.

1:3 all things were made by him; and without him was not any thing
made that was made.

1:4 in him was life; and the life was the light of men.

1:5 and the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended
it not.

1:6 there was a man sent from god, whose name was john.

1:7 the same came for a witness, to bear witness of the light, that
all men through him might believe.

1:8 he was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that light.

1:9 that was the true light, which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world.

1:10 he was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not.

1:11 he came unto his own, and his own received him not.

1:12 but as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
sons of god, even to them that believe on his name: 1:13 which were
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of god.

1:14 and the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the father,) full of
grace and truth.

1:15 john bare witness of him, and cried, saying, this was he of whom
i spake, he that cometh after me is preferred before me: for he was
before me.

1:16 and of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace.

1:17 for the law was given by moses, but grace and truth came by jesus
christ.

1:18 no man hath seen god at any time, the only begotten son, which is
in the bosom of the father, he hath declared him.

1:19 and this is the record of john, when the jews sent priests and
levites from jerusalem to ask him, who art thou?  1:20 and he
confessed, and denied not; but confessed, i am not the christ.

1:21 and they asked him, what then? art thou elias? and he saith, i am
not. art thou that prophet? and he answered, no.

1:22 then said they unto him, who art thou? that we may give an answer
to them that sent us. what sayest thou of thyself?  1:23 he said, i am
the voice of one crying in the wilderness, make straight the way of
the lord, as said the prophet esaias.

1:24 and they which were sent were of the pharisees.

1:25 and they asked him, and said unto him, why baptizest thou then,
if thou be not that christ, nor elias, neither that prophet?  1:26
john answered them, saying, i baptize with water: but there standeth
one among you, whom ye know not; 1:27 he it is, who coming after me is
preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet i am not worthy to unloose.

1:28 these things were done in bethabara beyond jordan, where john was
baptizing.

1:29 the next day john seeth jesus coming unto him, and saith, behold
the lamb of god, which taketh away the sin of the world.

1:30 this is he of whom i said, after me cometh a man which is
preferred before me: for he was before me.

1:31 and i knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to
israel, therefore am i come baptizing with water.

1:32 and john bare record, saying, i saw the spirit descending from
heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him.

1:33 and i knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water,
the same said unto me, upon whom thou shalt see the spirit descending,
and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the holy
ghost.

1:34 and i saw, and bare record that this is the son of god.

1:35 again the next day after john stood, and two of his disciples;
1:36 and looking upon jesus as he walked, he saith, behold the lamb of
god!  1:37 and the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed
jesus.

1:38 then jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them,
what seek ye? they said unto him, rabbi, (which is to say, being
interpreted, master,) where dwellest thou?  1:39 he saith unto them,
come and see. they came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him
that day: for it was about the tenth hour.

1:40 one of the two which heard john speak, and followed him, was
andrew, simon peter's brother.

1:41 he first findeth his own brother simon, and saith unto him, we
have found the messias, which is, being interpreted, the christ.

1:42 and he brought him to jesus. and when jesus beheld him, he said,
thou art simon the son of jona: thou shalt be called cephas, which is
by interpretation, a stone.

1:43 the day following jesus would go forth into galilee, and findeth
philip, and saith unto him, follow me.

1:44 now philip was of bethsaida, the city of andrew and peter.

1:45 philip findeth nathanael, and saith unto him, we have found him,
of whom moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, jesus of
nazareth, the son of joseph.

1:46 and nathanael said unto him, can there any good thing come out of
nazareth? philip saith unto him, come and see.

1:47 jesus saw nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, behold an
israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!  1:48 nathanael saith unto him,
whence knowest thou me? jesus answered and said unto him, before that
philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, i saw thee.

1:49 nathanael answered and saith unto him, rabbi, thou art the son of
god; thou art the king of israel.

1:50 jesus answered and said unto him, because i said unto thee, i saw
thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things
than these.

1:51 and he saith unto him, verily, verily, i say unto you, hereafter
ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of god ascending and
descending upon the son of man.

2:1 and the third day there was a marriage in cana of galilee; and the
mother of jesus was there: 2:2 and both jesus was called, and his
disciples, to the marriage.

2:3 and when they wanted wine, the mother of jesus saith unto him,
they have no wine.

2:4 jesus saith unto her, woman, what have i to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come.

2:5 his mother saith unto the servants, whatsoever he saith unto you,
do it.

2:6 and there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner
of the purifying of the jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.

2:7 jesus saith unto them, fill the waterpots with water. and they
filled them up to the brim.

2:8 and he saith unto them, draw out now, and bear unto the governor
of the feast. and they bare it.

2:9 when the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made
wine, and knew not whence it was: (but the servants which drew the
water knew;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom, 2:10 and
saith unto him, every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine;
and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou hast
kept the good wine until now.

2:11 this beginning of miracles did jesus in cana of galilee, and
manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him.

2:12 after this he went down to capernaum, he, and his mother, and his
brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there not many days.

2:13 and the jews' passover was at hand, and jesus went up to
jerusalem.

2:14 and found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves,
and the changers of money sitting: 2:15 and when he had made a scourge
of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep,
and the oxen; and poured out the changers' money, and overthrew the
tables; 2:16 and said unto them that sold doves, take these things
hence; make not my father's house an house of merchandise.

2:17 and his disciples remembered that it was written, the zeal of
thine house hath eaten me up.

2:18 then answered the jews and said unto him, what sign shewest thou
unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?  2:19 jesus answered and
said unto them, destroy this temple, and in three days i will raise it
up.

2:20 then said the jews, forty and six years was this temple in
building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?  2:21 but he spake
of the temple of his body.

2:22 when therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the
scripture, and the word which jesus had said.

2:23 now when he was in jerusalem at the passover, in the feast day,
many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did.

2:24 but jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all
men, 2:25 and needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew
what was in man.

3:1 there was a man of the pharisees, named nicodemus, a ruler of the
jews: 3:2 the same came to jesus by night, and said unto him, rabbi,
we know that thou art a teacher come from god: for no man can do these
miracles that thou doest, except god be with him.

3:3 jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily, i say unto thee,
except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of god.

3:4 nicodemus saith unto him, how can a man be born when he is old?
can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born?  3:5
jesus answered, verily, verily, i say unto thee, except a man be born
of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of god.

3:6 that which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born
of the spirit is spirit.

3:7 marvel not that i said unto thee, ye must be born again.

3:8 the wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so
is every one that is born of the spirit.

3:9 nicodemus answered and said unto him, how can these things be?
3:10 jesus answered and said unto him, art thou a master of israel,
and knowest not these things?  3:11 verily, verily, i say unto thee,
we speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen; and ye
receive not our witness.

3:12 if i have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall
ye believe, if i tell you of heavenly things?  3:13 and no man hath
ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the son
of man which is in heaven.

3:14 and as moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so
must the son of man be lifted up: 3:15 that whosoever believeth in him
should not perish, but have eternal life.

3:16 for god so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

3:17 for god sent not his son into the world to condemn the world; but
that the world through him might be saved.

3:18 he that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth
not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of
the only begotten son of god.

3:19 and this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
evil.

3:20 for every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

3:21 but he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may
be made manifest, that they are wrought in god.

3:22 after these things came jesus and his disciples into the land of
judaea; and there he tarried with them, and baptized.

3:23 and john also was baptizing in aenon near to salim, because there
was much water there: and they came, and were baptized.

3:24 for john was not yet cast into prison.

3:25 then there arose a question between some of john's disciples and
the jews about purifying.

3:26 and they came unto john, and said unto him, rabbi, he that was
with thee beyond jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same
baptizeth, and all men come to him.

3:27 john answered and said, a man can receive nothing, except it be
given him from heaven.

3:28 ye yourselves bear me witness, that i said, i am not the christ,
but that i am sent before him.

3:29 he that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because
of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled.

3:30 he must increase, but i must decrease.

3:31 he that cometh from above is above all: he that is of the earth
is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that cometh from heaven is
above all.

3:32 and what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no man
receiveth his testimony.

3:33 he that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that god
is true.

3:34 for he whom god hath sent speaketh the words of god: for god
giveth not the spirit by measure unto him.

3:35 the father loveth the son, and hath given all things into his
hand.

3:36 he that believeth on the son hath everlasting life: and he that
believeth not the son shall not see life; but the wrath of god abideth
on him.

4:1 when therefore the lord knew how the pharisees had heard that
jesus made and baptized more disciples than john, 4:2 (though jesus
himself baptized not, but his disciples,) 4:3 he left judaea, and
departed again into galilee.

4:4 and he must needs go through samaria.

4:5 then cometh he to a city of samaria, which is called sychar, near
to the parcel of ground that jacob gave to his son joseph.

4:6 now jacob's well was there. jesus therefore, being wearied with
his journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about the sixth hour.

4:7 there cometh a woman of samaria to draw water: jesus saith unto
her, give me to drink.

4:8 (for his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.)  4:9
then saith the woman of samaria unto him, how is it that thou, being a
jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of samaria? for the jews
have no dealings with the samaritans.

4:10 jesus answered and said unto her, if thou knewest the gift of
god, and who it is that saith to thee, give me to drink; thou wouldest
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.

4:11 the woman saith unto him, sir, thou hast nothing to draw with,
and the well is deep: from whence then hast thou that living water?
4:12 art thou greater than our father jacob, which gave us the well,
and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle?  4:13
jesus answered and said unto her, whosoever drinketh of this water
shall thirst again: 4:14 but whosoever drinketh of the water that i
shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that i shall give him
shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.

4:15 the woman saith unto him, sir, give me this water, that i thirst
not, neither come hither to draw.

4:16 jesus saith unto her, go, call thy husband, and come hither.

4:17 the woman answered and said, i have no husband. jesus said unto
her, thou hast well said, i have no husband: 4:18 for thou hast had
five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in that
saidst thou truly.

4:19 the woman saith unto him, sir, i perceive that thou art a
prophet.

4:20 our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in
jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.

4:21 jesus saith unto her, woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at jerusalem, worship the
father.

4:22 ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for
salvation is of the jews.

4:23 but the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the father in spirit and in truth: for the father seeketh such
to worship him.

4:24 god is a spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth.

4:25 the woman saith unto him, i know that messias cometh, which is
called christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.

4:26 jesus saith unto her, i that speak unto thee am he.

4:27 and upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked
with the woman: yet no man said, what seekest thou? or, why talkest
thou with her?  4:28 the woman then left her waterpot, and went her
way into the city, and saith to the men, 4:29 come, see a man, which
told me all things that ever i did: is not this the christ?  4:30 then
they went out of the city, and came unto him.

4:31 in the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, master, eat.

4:32 but he said unto them, i have meat to eat that ye know not of.

4:33 therefore said the disciples one to another, hath any man brought
him ought to eat?  4:34 jesus saith unto them, my meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.

4:35 say not ye, there are yet four months, and then cometh harvest?
behold, i say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for
they are white already to harvest.

4:36 and he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto
life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice
together.

4:37 and herein is that saying true, one soweth, and another reapeth.

4:38 i sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour: other men
laboured, and ye are entered into their labours.

4:39 and many of the samaritans of that city believed on him for the
saying of the woman, which testified, he told me all that ever i did.

4:40 so when the samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that
he would tarry with them: and he abode there two days.

4:41 and many more believed because of his own word; 4:42 and said
unto the woman, now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have
heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the christ, the
saviour of the world.

4:43 now after two days he departed thence, and went into galilee.

4:44 for jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his
own country.

4:45 then when he was come into galilee, the galilaeans received him,
having seen all the things that he did at jerusalem at the feast: for
they also went unto the feast.

4:46 so jesus came again into cana of galilee, where he made the water
wine. and there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at
capernaum.

4:47 when he heard that jesus was come out of judaea into galilee, he
went unto him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his
son: for he was at the point of death.

4:48 then said jesus unto him, except ye see signs and wonders, ye
will not believe.

4:49 the nobleman saith unto him, sir, come down ere my child die.

4:50 jesus saith unto him, go thy way; thy son liveth. and the man
believed the word that jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way.

4:51 and as he was now going down, his servants met him, and told him,
saying, thy son liveth.

4:52 then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. and
they said unto him, yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.

4:53 so the father knew that it was at the same hour, in the which
jesus said unto him, thy son liveth: and himself believed, and his
whole house.

4:54 this is again the second miracle that jesus did, when he was come
out of judaea into galilee.

5:1 after this there was a feast of the jews; and jesus went up to
jerusalem.

5:2 now there is at jerusalem by the sheep market a pool, which is
called in the hebrew tongue bethesda, having five porches.

5:3 in these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt,
withered, waiting for the moving of the water.

5:4 for an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and
troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the
water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.

5:5 and a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and
eight years.

5:6 when jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time
in that case, he saith unto him, wilt thou be made whole?  5:7 the
impotent man answered him, sir, i have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pool: but while i am coming, another
steppeth down before me.

5:8 jesus saith unto him, rise, take up thy bed, and walk.

5:9 and immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and
walked: and on the same day was the sabbath.

5:10 the jews therefore said unto him that was cured, it is the
sabbath day: it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.

5:11 he answered them, he that made me whole, the same said unto me,
take up thy bed, and walk.

5:12 then asked they him, what man is that which said unto thee, take
up thy bed, and walk?  5:13 and he that was healed wist not who it
was: for jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that
place.

5:14 afterward jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him,
behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee.

5:15 the man departed, and told the jews that it was jesus, which had
made him whole.

5:16 and therefore did the jews persecute jesus, and sought to slay
him, because he had done these things on the sabbath day.

5:17 but jesus answered them, my father worketh hitherto, and i work.

5:18 therefore the jews sought the more to kill him, because he not
only had broken the sabbath, but said also that god was his father,
making himself equal with god.

5:19 then answered jesus and said unto them, verily, verily, i say
unto you, the son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the
father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the son
likewise.

5:20 for the father loveth the son, and sheweth him all things that
himself doeth: and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye
may marvel.

5:21 for as the father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even
so the son quickeneth whom he will.

5:22 for the father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment
unto the son: 5:23 that all men should honour the son, even as they
honour the father.

he that honoureth not the son honoureth not the father which hath sent
him.

5:24 verily, verily, i say unto you, he that heareth my word, and
believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.

5:25 verily, verily, i say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of god: and they that
hear shall live.

5:26 for as the father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the
son to have life in himself; 5:27 and hath given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the son of man.

5:28 marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear his voice, 5:29 and shall come forth;
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.

5:30 i can of mine own self do nothing: as i hear, i judge: and my
judgment is just; because i seek not mine own will, but the will of
the father which hath sent me.

5:31 if i bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.

5:32 there is another that beareth witness of me; and i know that the
witness which he witnesseth of me is true.

5:33 ye sent unto john, and he bare witness unto the truth.

5:34 but i receive not testimony from man: but these things i say,
that ye might be saved.

5:35 he was a burning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a
season to rejoice in his light.

5:36 but i have greater witness than that of john: for the works which
the father hath given me to finish, the same works that i do, bear
witness of me, that the father hath sent me.

5:37 and the father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of
me.

ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

5:38 and ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent,
him ye believe not.

5:39 search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life:
and they are they which testify of me.

5:40 and ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.

5:41 i receive not honour from men.

5:42 but i know you, that ye have not the love of god in you.

5:43 i am come in my father's name, and ye receive me not: if another
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.

5:44 how can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek
not the honour that cometh from god only?  5:45 do not think that i
will accuse you to the father: there is one that accuseth you, even
moses, in whom ye trust.

5:46 for had ye believed moses, ye would have believed me; for he
wrote of me.

5:47 but if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my
words?  6:1 after these things jesus went over the sea of galilee,
which is the sea of tiberias.

6:2 and a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles
which he did on them that were diseased.

6:3 and jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his
disciples.

6:4 and the passover, a feast of the jews, was nigh.

6:5 when jesus then lifted up his eyes, and saw a great company come
unto him, he saith unto philip, whence shall we buy bread, that these
may eat?  6:6 and this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what
he would do.

6:7 philip answered him, two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little.

6:8 one of his disciples, andrew, simon peter's brother, saith unto
him, 6:9 there is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two
small fishes: but what are they among so many?  6:10 and jesus said,
make the men sit down. now there was much grass in the place. so the
men sat down, in number about five thousand.

6:11 and jesus took the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set
down; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would.

6:12 when they were filled, he said unto his disciples, gather up the
fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

6:13 therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets
with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and
above unto them that had eaten.

6:14 then those men, when they had seen the miracle that jesus did,
said, this is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world.

6:15 when jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him
by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain
himself alone.

6:16 and when even was now come, his disciples went down unto the sea,
6:17 and entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward capernaum.
and it was now dark, and jesus was not come to them.

6:18 and the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.

6:19 so when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs,
they see jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship: and
they were afraid.

6:20 but he saith unto them, it is i; be not afraid.

6:21 then they willingly received him into the ship: and immediately
the ship was at the land whither they went.

6:22 the day following, when the people which stood on the other side
of the sea saw that there was none other boat there, save that one
whereinto his disciples were entered, and that jesus went not with his
disciples into the boat, but that his disciples were gone away alone;
6:23 (howbeit there came other boats from tiberias nigh unto the place
where they did eat bread, after that the lord had given thanks:) 6:24
when the people therefore saw that jesus was not there, neither his
disciples, they also took shipping, and came to capernaum, seeking for
jesus.

6:25 and when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they
said unto him, rabbi, when camest thou hither?  6:26 jesus answered
them and said, verily, verily, i say unto you, ye seek me, not because
ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were
filled.

6:27 labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which
endureth unto everlasting life, which the son of man shall give unto
you: for him hath god the father sealed.

6:28 then said they unto him, what shall we do, that we might work the
works of god?  6:29 jesus answered and said unto them, this is the
work of god, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent.

6:30 they said therefore unto him, what sign shewest thou then, that
we may see, and believe thee? what dost thou work?  6:31 our fathers
did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, he gave them bread from
heaven to eat.

6:32 then jesus said unto them, verily, verily, i say unto you, moses
gave you not that bread from heaven; but my father giveth you the true
bread from heaven.

6:33 for the bread of god is he which cometh down from heaven, and
giveth life unto the world.

6:34 then said they unto him, lord, evermore give us this bread.

6:35 and jesus said unto them, i am the bread of life: he that cometh
to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never
thirst.

6:36 but i said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not.

6:37 all that the father giveth me shall come to me; and him that
cometh to me i will in no wise cast out.

6:38 for i came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me.

6:39 and this is the father's will which hath sent me, that of all
which he hath given me i should lose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day.

6:40 and this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which
seeth the son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and i
will raise him up at the last day.

6:41 the jews then murmured at him, because he said, i am the bread
which came down from heaven.

6:42 and they said, is not this jesus, the son of joseph, whose father
and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, i came down from
heaven?  6:43 jesus therefore answered and said unto them, murmur not
among yourselves.

6:44 no man can come to me, except the father which hath sent me draw
him: and i will raise him up at the last day.

6:45 it is written in the prophets, and they shall be all taught of
god.

every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the father,
cometh unto me.

6:46 not that any man hath seen the father, save he which is of god,
he hath seen the father.

6:47 verily, verily, i say unto you, he that believeth on me hath
everlasting life.

6:48 i am that bread of life.

6:49 your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

6:50 this is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may
eat thereof, and not die.

6:51 i am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that i will give
is my flesh, which i will give for the life of the world.

6:52 the jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, how can this
man give us his flesh to eat?  6:53 then jesus said unto them, verily,
verily, i say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you.

6:54 whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life;
and i will raise him up at the last day.

6:55 for my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.

6:56 he that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me,
and i in him.

6:57 as the living father hath sent me, and i live by the father: so
he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.

6:58 this is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your
fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread
shall live for ever.

6:59 these things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in capernaum.

6:60 many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said,
this is an hard saying; who can hear it?  6:61 when jesus knew in
himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, doth
this offend you?  6:62 what and if ye shall see the son of man ascend
up where he was before?  6:63 it is the spirit that quickeneth; the
flesh profiteth nothing: the words that i speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life.

6:64 but there are some of you that believe not. for jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray
him.

6:65 and he said, therefore said i unto you, that no man can come unto
me, except it were given unto him of my father.

6:66 from that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no
more with him.

6:67 then said jesus unto the twelve, will ye also go away?  6:68 then
simon peter answered him, lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the
words of eternal life.

6:69 and we believe and are sure that thou art that christ, the son of
the living god.

6:70 jesus answered them, have not i chosen you twelve, and one of you
is a devil?  6:71 he spake of judas iscariot the son of simon: for he
it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.

7:1 after these things jesus walked in galilee: for he would not walk
in jewry, because the jews sought to kill him.

7:2 now the jew's feast of tabernacles was at hand.

7:3 his brethren therefore said unto him, depart hence, and go into
judaea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest.

7:4 for there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself
seeketh to be known openly. if thou do these things, shew thyself to
the world.

7:5 for neither did his brethren believe in him.

7:6 then jesus said unto them, my time is not yet come: but your time
is alway ready.

7:7 the world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because i testify of
it, that the works thereof are evil.

7:8 go ye up unto this feast: i go not up yet unto this feast: for my
time is not yet full come.

7:9 when he had said these words unto them, he abode still in galilee.

7:10 but when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the
feast, not openly, but as it were in secret.

7:11 then the jews sought him at the feast, and said, where is he?
7:12 and there was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for
some said, he is a good man: others said, nay; but he deceiveth the
people.

7:13 howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the jews.

7:14 now about the midst of the feast jesus went up into the temple,
and taught.

7:15 and the jews marvelled, saying, how knoweth this man letters,
having never learned?  7:16 jesus answered them, and said, my doctrine
is not mine, but his that sent me.

7:17 if any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of god, or whether i speak of myself.

7:18 he that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that
seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him.

7:19 did not moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the
law?  why go ye about to kill me?  7:20 the people answered and said,
thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kill thee?  7:21 jesus answered
and said unto them, i have done one work, and ye all marvel.

7:22 moses therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of
moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a
man.

7:23 if a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of
moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because i have made a
man every whit whole on the sabbath day?  7:24 judge not according to
the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

7:25 then said some of them of jerusalem, is not this he, whom they
seek to kill?  7:26 but, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing
unto him. do the rulers know indeed that this is the very christ?
7:27 howbeit we know this man whence he is: but when christ cometh, no
man knoweth whence he is.

7:28 then cried jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, ye both know
me, and ye know whence i am: and i am not come of myself, but he that
sent me is true, whom ye know not.

7:29 but i know him: for i am from him, and he hath sent me.

7:30 then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him,
because his hour was not yet come.

7:31 and many of the people believed on him, and said, when christ
cometh, will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done?
7:32 the pharisees heard that the people murmured such things
concerning him; and the pharisees and the chief priests sent officers
to take him.

7:33 then said jesus unto them, yet a little while am i with you, and
then i go unto him that sent me.

7:34 ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where i am, thither
ye cannot come.

7:35 then said the jews among themselves, whither will he go, that we
shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the gentiles,
and teach the gentiles?  7:36 what manner of saying is this that he
said, ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where i am, thither
ye cannot come?  7:37 in the last day, that great day of the feast,
jesus stood and cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto
me, and drink.

7:38 he that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water.

7:39 (but this spake he of the spirit, which they that believe on him
should receive: for the holy ghost was not yet given; because that
jesus was not yet glorified.)  7:40 many of the people therefore, when
they heard this saying, said, of a truth this is the prophet.

7:41 others said, this is the christ. but some said, shall christ come
out of galilee?  7:42 hath not the scripture said, that christ cometh
of the seed of david, and out of the town of bethlehem, where david
was?  7:43 so there was a division among the people because of him.

7:44 and some of them would have taken him; but no man laid hands on
him.

7:45 then came the officers to the chief priests and pharisees; and
they said unto them, why have ye not brought him?  7:46 the officers
answered, never man spake like this man.

7:47 then answered them the pharisees, are ye also deceived?  7:48
have any of the rulers or of the pharisees believed on him?  7:49 but
this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.

7:50 nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to jesus by night, being
one of them,) 7:51 doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and
know what he doeth?  7:52 they answered and said unto him, art thou
also of galilee?  search, and look: for out of galilee ariseth no
prophet.

7:53 and every man went unto his own house.

8:1 jesus went unto the mount of olives.

8:2 and early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all
the people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them.

8:3 and the scribes and pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in
adultery; and when they had set her in the midst, 8:4 they say unto
him, master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act.

8:5 now moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but
what sayest thou?  8:6 this they said, tempting him, that they might
have to accuse him. but jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote
on the ground, as though he heard them not.

8:7 so when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said
unto them, he that is without sin among you, let him first cast a
stone at her.

8:8 and again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.

8:9 and they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience,
went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last: and
jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.

8:10 when jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he
said unto her, woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man
condemned thee?  8:11 she said, no man, lord. and jesus said unto her,
neither do i condemn thee: go, and sin no more.

8:12 then spake jesus again unto them, saying, i am the light of the
world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life.

8:13 the pharisees therefore said unto him, thou bearest record of
thyself; thy record is not true.

8:14 jesus answered and said unto them, though i bear record of
myself, yet my record is true: for i know whence i came, and whither i
go; but ye cannot tell whence i come, and whither i go.

8:15 ye judge after the flesh; i judge no man.

8:16 and yet if i judge, my judgment is true: for i am not alone, but
i and the father that sent me.

8:17 it is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is
true.

8:18 i am one that bear witness of myself, and the father that sent me
beareth witness of me.

8:19 then said they unto him, where is thy father? jesus answered, ye
neither know me, nor my father: if ye had known me, ye should have
known my father also.

8:20 these words spake jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the
temple: and no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come.

8:21 then said jesus again unto them, i go my way, and ye shall seek
me, and shall die in your sins: whither i go, ye cannot come.

8:22 then said the jews, will he kill himself? because he saith,
whither i go, ye cannot come.

8:23 and he said unto them, ye are from beneath; i am from above: ye
are of this world; i am not of this world.

8:24 i said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if
ye believe not that i am he, ye shall die in your sins.

8:25 then said they unto him, who art thou? and jesus saith unto them,
even the same that i said unto you from the beginning.

8:26 i have many things to say and to judge of you: but he that sent
me is true; and i speak to the world those things which i have heard
of him.

8:27 they understood not that he spake to them of the father.

8:28 then said jesus unto them, when ye have lifted up the son of man,
then shall ye know that i am he, and that i do nothing of myself; but
as my father hath taught me, i speak these things.

8:29 and he that sent me is with me: the father hath not left me
alone; for i do always those things that please him.

8:30 as he spake these words, many believed on him.

8:31 then said jesus to those jews which believed on him, if ye
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; 8:32 and ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

8:33 they answered him, we be abraham's seed, and were never in
bondage to any man: how sayest thou, ye shall be made free?  8:34
jesus answered them, verily, verily, i say unto you, whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin.

8:35 and the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the son
abideth ever.

8:36 if the son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed.

8:37 i know that ye are abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me,
because my word hath no place in you.

8:38 i speak that which i have seen with my father: and ye do that
which ye have seen with your father.

8:39 they answered and said unto him, abraham is our father. jesus
saith unto them, if ye were abraham's children, ye would do the works
of abraham.

8:40 but now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth,
which i have heard of god: this did not abraham.

8:41 ye do the deeds of your father. then said they to him, we be not
born of fornication; we have one father, even god.

8:42 jesus said unto them, if god were your father, ye would love me:
for i proceeded forth and came from god; neither came i of myself, but
he sent me.

8:43 why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear
my word.

8:44 ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do. he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. when he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.

8:45 and because i tell you the truth, ye believe me not.

8:46 which of you convinceth me of sin? and if i say the truth, why do
ye not believe me?  8:47 he that is of god heareth god's words: ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of god.

8:48 then answered the jews, and said unto him, say we not well that
thou art a samaritan, and hast a devil?  8:49 jesus answered, i have
not a devil; but i honour my father, and ye do dishonour me.

8:50 and i seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and
judgeth.

8:51 verily, verily, i say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall
never see death.

8:52 then said the jews unto him, now we know that thou hast a devil.

abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, if a man keep my
saying, he shall never taste of death.

8:53 art thou greater than our father abraham, which is dead? and the
prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?  8:54 jesus answered, if
i honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is my father that honoureth
me; of whom ye say, that he is your god: 8:55 yet ye have not known
him; but i know him: and if i should say, i know him not, i shall be a
liar like unto you: but i know him, and keep his saying.

8:56 your father abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and
was glad.

8:57 then said the jews unto him, thou art not yet fifty years old,
and hast thou seen abraham?  8:58 jesus said unto them, verily,
verily, i say unto you, before abraham was, i am.

8:59 then took they up stones to cast at him: but jesus hid himself,
and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so
passed by.

9:1 and as jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his
birth.

9:2 and his disciples asked him, saying, master, who did sin, this
man, or his parents, that he was born blind?  9:3 jesus answered,
neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of
god should be made manifest in him.

9:4 i must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the
night cometh, when no man can work.

9:5 as long as i am in the world, i am the light of the world.

9:6 when he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of
the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,
9:7 and said unto him, go, wash in the pool of siloam, (which is by
interpretation, sent.) he went his way therefore, and washed, and came
seeing.

9:8 the neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him that
he was blind, said, is not this he that sat and begged?  9:9 some
said, this is he: others said, he is like him: but he said, i am he.

9:10 therefore said they unto him, how were thine eyes opened?  9:11
he answered and said, a man that is called jesus made clay, and
anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, go to the pool of siloam, and
wash: and i went and washed, and i received sight.

9:12 then said they unto him, where is he? he said, i know not.

9:13 they brought to the pharisees him that aforetime was blind.

9:14 and it was the sabbath day when jesus made the clay, and opened
his eyes.

9:15 then again the pharisees also asked him how he had received his
sight. he said unto them, he put clay upon mine eyes, and i washed,
and do see.

9:16 therefore said some of the pharisees, this man is not of god,
because he keepeth not the sabbath day. others said, how can a man
that is a sinner do such miracles? and there was a division among
them.

9:17 they say unto the blind man again, what sayest thou of him, that
he hath opened thine eyes? he said, he is a prophet.

9:18 but the jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been
blind, and received his sight, until they called the parents of him
that had received his sight.

9:19 and they asked them, saying, is this your son, who ye say was
born blind? how then doth he now see?  9:20 his parents answered them
and said, we know that this is our son, and that he was born blind:
9:21 but by what means he now seeth, we know not; or who hath opened
his eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask him: he shall speak for
himself.

9:22 these words spake his parents, because they feared the jews: for
the jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was
christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.

9:23 therefore said his parents, he is of age; ask him.

9:24 then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him,
give god the praise: we know that this man is a sinner.

9:25 he answered and said, whether he be a sinner or no, i know not:
one thing i know, that, whereas i was blind, now i see.

9:26 then said they to him again, what did he to thee? how opened he
thine eyes?  9:27 he answered them, i have told you already, and ye
did not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye also be his
disciples?  9:28 then they reviled him, and said, thou art his
disciple; but we are moses' disciples.

9:29 we know that god spake unto moses: as for this fellow, we know
not from whence he is.

9:30 the man answered and said unto them, why herein is a marvellous
thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine
eyes.

9:31 now we know that god heareth not sinners: but if any man be a
worshipper of god, and doeth his will, him he heareth.

9:32 since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the
eyes of one that was born blind.

9:33 if this man were not of god, he could do nothing.

9:34 they answered and said unto him, thou wast altogether born in
sins, and dost thou teach us? and they cast him out.

9:35 jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found
him, he said unto him, dost thou believe on the son of god?  9:36 he
answered and said, who is he, lord, that i might believe on him?  9:37
and jesus said unto him, thou hast both seen him, and it is he that
talketh with thee.

9:38 and he said, lord, i believe. and he worshipped him.

9:39 and jesus said, for judgment i am come into this world, that they
which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind.

9:40 and some of the pharisees which were with him heard these words,
and said unto him, are we blind also?  9:41 jesus said unto them, if
ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, we see;
therefore your sin remaineth.

10:1 verily, verily, i say unto you, he that entereth not by the door
into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a
thief and a robber.

10:2 but he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.

10:3 to him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he
calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.

10:4 and when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them,
and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice.

10:5 and a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for
they know not the voice of strangers.

10:6 this parable spake jesus unto them: but they understood not what
things they were which he spake unto them.

10:7 then said jesus unto them again, verily, verily, i say unto you,
i am the door of the sheep.

10:8 all that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the
sheep did not hear them.

10:9 i am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and
shall go in and out, and find pasture.

10:10 the thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy: i am come that they might have life, and that they might have
it more abundantly.

10:11 i am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for
the sheep.

10:12 but he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep.

10:13 the hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not
for the sheep.

10:14 i am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.

10:15 as the father knoweth me, even so know i the father: and i lay
down my life for the sheep.

10:16 and other sheep i have, which are not of this fold: them also i
must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold,
and one shepherd.

10:17 therefore doth my father love me, because i lay down my life,
that i might take it again.

10:18 no man taketh it from me, but i lay it down of myself. i have
power to lay it down, and i have power to take it again. this
commandment have i received of my father.

10:19 there was a division therefore again among the jews for these
sayings.

10:20 and many of them said, he hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye
him?  10:21 others said, these are not the words of him that hath a
devil. can a devil open the eyes of the blind?  10:22 and it was at
jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.

10:23 and jesus walked in the temple in solomon's porch.

10:24 then came the jews round about him, and said unto him, how long
dost thou make us to doubt? if thou be the christ, tell us plainly.

10:25 jesus answered them, i told you, and ye believed not: the works
that i do in my father's name, they bear witness of me.

10:26 but ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as i said
unto you.

10:27 my sheep hear my voice, and i know them, and they follow me:
10:28 and i give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

10:29 my father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man
is able to pluck them out of my father's hand.

10:30 i and my father are one.

10:31 then the jews took up stones again to stone him.

10:32 jesus answered them, many good works have i shewed you from my
father; for which of those works do ye stone me?  10:33 the jews
answered him, saying, for a good work we stone thee not; but for
blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself god.

10:34 jesus answered them, is it not written in your law, i said, ye
are gods?  10:35 if he called them gods, unto whom the word of god
came, and the scripture cannot be broken; 10:36 say ye of him, whom
the father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest;
because i said, i am the son of god?  10:37 if i do not the works of
my father, believe me not.

10:38 but if i do, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that
ye may know, and believe, that the father is in me, and i in him.

10:39 therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of
their hand, 10:40 and went away again beyond jordan into the place
where john at first baptized; and there he abode.

10:41 and many resorted unto him, and said, john did no miracle: but
all things that john spake of this man were true.

10:42 and many believed on him there.

11:1 now a certain man was sick, named lazarus, of bethany, the town
of mary and her sister martha.

11:2 (it was that mary which anointed the lord with ointment, and
wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother lazarus was sick.)  11:3
therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick.

11:4 when jesus heard that, he said, this sickness is not unto death,
but for the glory of god, that the son of god might be glorified
thereby.

11:5 now jesus loved martha, and her sister, and lazarus.

11:6 when he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days
still in the same place where he was.

11:7 then after that saith he to his disciples, let us go into judaea
again.

11:8 his disciples say unto him, master, the jews of late sought to
stone thee; and goest thou thither again?  11:9 jesus answered, are
there not twelve hours in the day? if any man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world.

11:10 but if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is
no light in him.

11:11 these things said he: and after that he saith unto them, our
friend lazarus sleepeth; but i go, that i may awake him out of sleep.

11:12 then said his disciples, lord, if he sleep, he shall do well.

11:13 howbeit jesus spake of his death: but they thought that he had
spoken of taking of rest in sleep.

11:14 then said jesus unto them plainly, lazarus is dead.

11:15 and i am glad for your sakes that i was not there, to the intent
ye may believe; nevertheless let us go unto him.

11:16 then said thomas, which is called didymus, unto his
fellowdisciples, let us also go, that we may die with him.

11:17 then when jesus came, he found that he had lain in the grave
four days already.

11:18 now bethany was nigh unto jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off:
11:19 and many of the jews came to martha and mary, to comfort them
concerning their brother.

11:20 then martha, as soon as she heard that jesus was coming, went
and met him: but mary sat still in the house.

11:21 then said martha unto jesus, lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died.

11:22 but i know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of god, god
will give it thee.

11:23 jesus saith unto her, thy brother shall rise again.

11:24 martha saith unto him, i know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day.

11:25 jesus said unto her, i am the resurrection, and the life: he
that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: 11:26
and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. believest
thou this?  11:27 she saith unto him, yea, lord: i believe that thou
art the christ, the son of god, which should come into the world.

11:28 and when she had so said, she went her way, and called mary her
sister secretly, saying, the master is come, and calleth for thee.

11:29 as soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him.

11:30 now jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place
where martha met him.

11:31 the jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted
her, when they saw mary, that she rose up hastily and went out,
followed her, saying, she goeth unto the grave to weep there.

11:32 then when mary was come where jesus was, and saw him, she fell
down at his feet, saying unto him, lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died.

11:33 when jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the jews also weeping
which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled.

11:34 and said, where have ye laid him? they said unto him, lord, come
and see.

11:35 jesus wept.

11:36 then said the jews, behold how he loved him!  11:37 and some of
them said, could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind,
have caused that even this man should not have died?  11:38 jesus
therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave. it was a
cave, and a stone lay upon it.

11:39 jesus said, take ye away the stone. martha, the sister of him
that was dead, saith unto him, lord, by this time he stinketh: for he
hath been dead four days.

11:40 jesus saith unto her, said i not unto thee, that, if thou
wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of god?  11:41 then
they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid. and
jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, father, i thank thee that thou
hast heard me.

11:42 and i knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the
people which stand by i said it, that they may believe that thou hast
sent me.

11:43 and when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice,
lazarus, come forth.

11:44 and he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with
graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin. jesus saith
unto them, loose him, and let him go.

11:45 then many of the jews which came to mary, and had seen the
things which jesus did, believed on him.

11:46 but some of them went their ways to the pharisees, and told them
what things jesus had done.

11:47 then gathered the chief priests and the pharisees a council, and
said, what do we? for this man doeth many miracles.

11:48 if we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him: and the
romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.

11:49 and one of them, named caiaphas, being the high priest that same
year, said unto them, ye know nothing at all, 11:50 nor consider that
it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and
that the whole nation perish not.

11:51 and this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that
year, he prophesied that jesus should die for that nation; 11:52 and
not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in
one the children of god that were scattered abroad.

11:53 then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put
him to death.

11:54 jesus therefore walked no more openly among the jews; but went
thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called
ephraim, and there continued with his disciples.

11:55 and the jews' passover was nigh at hand: and many went out of
the country up to jerusalem before the passover, to purify themselves.

11:56 then sought they for jesus, and spake among themselves, as they
stood in the temple, what think ye, that he will not come to the
feast?  11:57 now both the chief priests and the pharisees had given a
commandment, that, if any man knew where he were, he should shew it,
that they might take him.

12:1 then jesus six days before the passover came to bethany, where
lazarus was, which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.

12:2 there they made him a supper; and martha served: but lazarus was
one of them that sat at the table with him.

12:3 then took mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and
anointed the feet of jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the
house was filled with the odour of the ointment.

12:4 then saith one of his disciples, judas iscariot, simon's son,
which should betray him, 12:5 why was not this ointment sold for three
hundred pence, and given to the poor?  12:6 this he said, not that he
cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and
bare what was put therein.

12:7 then said jesus, let her alone: against the day of my burying
hath she kept this.

12:8 for the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always.

12:9 much people of the jews therefore knew that he was there: and
they came not for jesus' sake only, but that they might see lazarus
also, whom he had raised from the dead.

12:10 but the chief priests consulted that they might put lazarus also
to death; 12:11 because that by reason of him many of the jews went
away, and believed on jesus.

12:12 on the next day much people that were come to the feast, when
they heard that jesus was coming to jerusalem, 12:13 took branches of
palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, hosanna: blessed is
the king of israel that cometh in the name of the lord.

12:14 and jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is
written, 12:15 fear not, daughter of sion: behold, thy king cometh,
sitting on an ass's colt.

12:16 these things understood not his disciples at the first: but when
jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were
written of him, and that they had done these things unto him.

12:17 the people therefore that was with him when he called lazarus
out of his grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record.

12:18 for this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that
he had done this miracle.

12:19 the pharisees therefore said among themselves, perceive ye how
ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.

12:20 and there were certain greeks among them that came up to worship
at the feast: 12:21 the same came therefore to philip, which was of
bethsaida of galilee, and desired him, saying, sir, we would see
jesus.

12:22 philip cometh and telleth andrew: and again andrew and philip
tell jesus.

12:23 and jesus answered them, saying, the hour is come, that the son
of man should be glorified.

12:24 verily, verily, i say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into
the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth
much fruit.

12:25 he that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his
life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.

12:26 if any man serve me, let him follow me; and where i am, there
shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my father
honour.

12:27 now is my soul troubled; and what shall i say? father, save me
from this hour: but for this cause came i unto this hour.

12:28 father, glorify thy name. then came there a voice from heaven,
saying, i have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.

12:29 the people therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it
thundered: others said, an angel spake to him.

12:30 jesus answered and said, this voice came not because of me, but
for your sakes.

12:31 now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out.

12:32 and i, if i be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto
me.

12:33 this he said, signifying what death he should die.

12:34 the people answered him, we have heard out of the law that
christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, the son of man must be
lifted up? who is this son of man?  12:35 then jesus said unto them,
yet a little while is the light with you.

walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that
walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.

12:36 while ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the
children of light. these things spake jesus, and departed, and did
hide himself from them.

12:37 but though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they
believed not on him: 12:38 that the saying of esaias the prophet might
be fulfilled, which he spake, lord, who hath believed our report? and
to whom hath the arm of the lord been revealed?  12:39 therefore they
could not believe, because that esaias said again, 12:40 he hath
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted,
and i should heal them.

12:41 these things said esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of
him.

12:42 nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him;
but because of the pharisees they did not confess him, lest they
should be put out of the synagogue: 12:43 for they loved the praise of
men more than the praise of god.

12:44 jesus cried and said, he that believeth on me, believeth not on
me, but on him that sent me.

12:45 and he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.

12:46 i am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me
should not abide in darkness.

12:47 and if any man hear my words, and believe not, i judge him not:
for i came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

12:48 he that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that
judgeth him: the word that i have spoken, the same shall judge him in
the last day.

12:49 for i have not spoken of myself; but the father which sent me,
he gave me a commandment, what i should say, and what i should speak.

12:50 and i know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever
i speak therefore, even as the father said unto me, so i speak.

13:1 now before the feast of the passover, when jesus knew that his
hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the father,
having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the
end.

13:2 and supper being ended, the devil having now put into the heart
of judas iscariot, simon's son, to betray him; 13:3 jesus knowing that
the father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come
from god, and went to god; 13:4 he riseth from supper, and laid aside
his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.

13:5 after that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the
disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was
girded.

13:6 then cometh he to simon peter: and peter saith unto him, lord,
dost thou wash my feet?  13:7 jesus answered and said unto him, what i
do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

13:8 peter saith unto him, thou shalt never wash my feet. jesus
answered him, if i wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.

13:9 simon peter saith unto him, lord, not my feet only, but also my
hands and my head.

13:10 jesus saith to him, he that is washed needeth not save to wash
his feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all.

13:11 for he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, ye are not
all clean.

13:12 so after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments,
and was set down again, he said unto them, know ye what i have done to
you?  13:13 ye call me master and lord: and ye say well; for so i am.

13:14 if i then, your lord and master, have washed your feet; ye also
ought to wash one another's feet.

13:15 for i have given you an example, that ye should do as i have
done to you.

13:16 verily, verily, i say unto you, the servant is not greater than
his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him.

13:17 if ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

13:18 i speak not of you all: i know whom i have chosen: but that the
scripture may be fulfilled, he that eateth bread with me hath lifted
up his heel against me.

13:19 now i tell you before it come, that, when it is come to pass, ye
may believe that i am he.

13:20 verily, verily, i say unto you, he that receiveth whomsoever i
send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent
me.

13:21 when jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and
testified, and said, verily, verily, i say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me.

13:22 then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he
spake.

13:23 now there was leaning on jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom
jesus loved.

13:24 simon peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spake.

13:25 he then lying on jesus' breast saith unto him, lord, who is it?
13:26 jesus answered, he it is, to whom i shall give a sop, when i
have dipped it. and when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to judas
iscariot, the son of simon.

13:27 and after the sop satan entered into him. then said jesus unto
him, that thou doest, do quickly.

13:28 now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto
him.

13:29 for some of them thought, because judas had the bag, that jesus
had said unto him, buy those things that we have need of against the
feast; or, that he should give something to the poor.

13:30 he then having received the sop went immediately out: and it was
night.

13:31 therefore, when he was gone out, jesus said, now is the son of
man glorified, and god is glorified in him.

13:32 if god be glorified in him, god shall also glorify him in
himself, and shall straightway glorify him.

13:33 little children, yet a little while i am with you. ye shall seek
me: and as i said unto the jews, whither i go, ye cannot come; so now
i say to you.

13:34 a new commandment i give unto you, that ye love one another; as
i have loved you, that ye also love one another.

13:35 by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

13:36 simon peter said unto him, lord, whither goest thou? jesus
answered him, whither i go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou
shalt follow me afterwards.

13:37 peter said unto him, lord, why cannot i follow thee now? i will
lay down my life for thy sake.

13:38 jesus answered him, wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?
verily, verily, i say unto thee, the cock shall not crow, till thou
hast denied me thrice.

14:1 let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in god, believe also
in me.

14:2 in my father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, i
would have told you. i go to prepare a place for you.

14:3 and if i go and prepare a place for you, i will come again, and
receive you unto myself; that where i am, there ye may be also.

14:4 and whither i go ye know, and the way ye know.

14:5 thomas saith unto him, lord, we know not whither thou goest; and
how can we know the way?  14:6 jesus saith unto him, i am the way, the
truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the father, but by me.

14:7 if ye had known me, ye should have known my father also: and from
henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.

14:8 philip saith unto him, lord, shew us the father, and it sufficeth
us.

14:9 jesus saith unto him, have i been so long time with you, and yet
hast thou not known me, philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the
father; and how sayest thou then, shew us the father?  14:10 believest
thou not that i am in the father, and the father in me?  the words
that i speak unto you i speak not of myself: but the father that
dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.

14:11 believe me that i am in the father, and the father in me: or
else believe me for the very works' sake.

14:12 verily, verily, i say unto you, he that believeth on me, the
works that i do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall
he do; because i go unto my father.

14:13 and whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will i do, that the
father may be glorified in the son.

14:14 if ye shall ask any thing in my name, i will do it.

14:15 if ye love me, keep my commandments.

14:16 and i will pray the father, and he shall give you another
comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; 14:17 even the spirit
of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not,
neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and
shall be in you.

14:18 i will not leave you comfortless: i will come to you.

14:19 yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see
me: because i live, ye shall live also.

14:20 at that day ye shall know that i am in my father, and ye in me,
and i in you.

14:21 he that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that
loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my father, and i
will love him, and will manifest myself to him.

14:22 judas saith unto him, not iscariot, lord, how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?  14:23 jesus
answered and said unto him, if a man love me, he will keep my words:
and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him.

14:24 he that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the word which
ye hear is not mine, but the father's which sent me.

14:25 these things have i spoken unto you, being yet present with you.

14:26 but the comforter, which is the holy ghost, whom the father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things
to your remembrance, whatsoever i have said unto you.

14:27 peace i leave with you, my peace i give unto you: not as the
world giveth, give i unto you. let not your heart be troubled, neither
let it be afraid.

14:28 ye have heard how i said unto you, i go away, and come again
unto you. if ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because i said, i go unto
the father: for my father is greater than i.

14:29 and now i have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is
come to pass, ye might believe.

14:30 hereafter i will not talk much with you: for the prince of this
world cometh, and hath nothing in me.

14:31 but that the world may know that i love the father; and as the
father gave me commandment, even so i do. arise, let us go hence.

15:1 i am the true vine, and my father is the husbandman.

15:2 every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and
every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring
forth more fruit.

15:3 now ye are clean through the word which i have spoken unto you.

15:4 abide in me, and i in you. as the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide
in me.

15:5 i am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abideth in me, and i
in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do
nothing.

15:6 if a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they
are burned.

15:7 if ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what
ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

15:8 herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall
ye be my disciples.

15:9 as the father hath loved me, so have i loved you: continue ye in
my love.

15:10 if ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as i
have kept my father's commandments, and abide in his love.

15:11 these things have i spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be full.

15:12 this is my commandment, that ye love one another, as i have
loved you.

15:13 greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.

15:14 ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever i command you.

15:15 henceforth i call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not
what his lord doeth: but i have called you friends; for all things
that i have heard of my father i have made known unto you.

15:16 ye have not chosen me, but i have chosen you, and ordained you,
that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should
remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the father in my name, he may
give it you.

15:17 these things i command you, that ye love one another.

15:18 if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated
you.

15:19 if ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but
because ye are not of the world, but i have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hateth you.

15:20 remember the word that i said unto you, the servant is not
greater than his lord. if they have persecuted me, they will also
persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.

15:21 but all these things will they do unto you for my name's sake,
because they know not him that sent me.

15:22 if i had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin:
but now they have no cloak for their sin.

15:23 he that hateth me hateth my father also.

15:24 if i had not done among them the works which none other man did,
they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me
and my father.

15:25 but this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that
is written in their law, they hated me without a cause.

15:26 but when the comforter is come, whom i will send unto you from
the father, even the spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the
father, he shall testify of me: 15:27 and ye also shall bear witness,
because ye have been with me from the beginning.

16:1 these things have i spoken unto you, that ye should not be
offended.

16:2 they shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh,
that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth god service.

16:3 and these things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the father, nor me.

16:4 but these things have i told you, that when the time shall come,
ye may remember that i told you of them. and these things i said not
unto you at the beginning, because i was with you.

16:5 but now i go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh
me, whither goest thou?  16:6 but because i have said these things
unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart.

16:7 nevertheless i tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that i
go away: for if i go not away, the comforter will not come unto you;
but if i depart, i will send him unto you.

16:8 and when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment: 16:9 of sin, because they believe not
on me; 16:10 of righteousness, because i go to my father, and ye see
me no more; 16:11 of judgment, because the prince of this world is
judged.

16:12 i have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now.

16:13 howbeit when he, the spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you
into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.

16:14 he shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall
shew it unto you.

16:15 all things that the father hath are mine: therefore said i, that
he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you.

16:16 a little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little
while, and ye shall see me, because i go to the father.

16:17 then said some of his disciples among themselves, what is this
that he saith unto us, a little while, and ye shall not see me: and
again, a little while, and ye shall see me: and, because i go to the
father?  16:18 they said therefore, what is this that he saith, a
little while? we cannot tell what he saith.

16:19 now jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto
them, do ye enquire among yourselves of that i said, a little while,
and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see
me?  16:20 verily, verily, i say unto you, that ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

16:21 a woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is
come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.

16:22 and ye now therefore have sorrow: but i will see you again, and
your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.

16:23 and in that day ye shall ask me nothing. verily, verily, i say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give
it you.

16:24 hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full.

16:25 these things have i spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time
cometh, when i shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but i shall
shew you plainly of the father.

16:26 at that day ye shall ask in my name: and i say not unto you,
that i will pray the father for you: 16:27 for the father himself
loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that i came
out from god.

16:28 i came forth from the father, and am come into the world: again,
i leave the world, and go to the father.

16:29 his disciples said unto him, lo, now speakest thou plainly, and
speakest no proverb.

16:30 now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not
that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest
forth from god.

16:31 jesus answered them, do ye now believe?  16:32 behold, the hour
cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his
own, and shall leave me alone: and yet i am not alone, because the
father is with me.

16:33 these things i have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have
peace.

in the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; i have
overcome the world.

17:1 these words spake jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and
said, father, the hour is come; glorify thy son, that thy son also may
glorify thee: 17:2 as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that
he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.

17:3 and this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true
god, and jesus christ, whom thou hast sent.

17:4 i have glorified thee on the earth: i have finished the work
which thou gavest me to do.

17:5 and now, o father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the
glory which i had with thee before the world was.

17:6 i have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out
of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have
kept thy word.

17:7 now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me
are of thee.

17:8 for i have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and
they have received them, and have known surely that i came out from
thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.

17:9 i pray for them: i pray not for the world, but for them which
thou hast given me; for they are thine.

17:10 and all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and i am glorified
in them.

17:11 and now i am no more in the world, but these are in the world,
and i come to thee. holy father, keep through thine own name those
whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.

17:12 while i was with them in the world, i kept them in thy name:
those that thou gavest me i have kept, and none of them is lost, but
the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.

17:13 and now come i to thee; and these things i speak in the world,
that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

17:14 i have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them,
because they are not of the world, even as i am not of the world.

17:15 i pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but
that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.

17:16 they are not of the world, even as i am not of the world.

17:17 sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.

17:18 as thou hast sent me into the world, even so have i also sent
them into the world.

17:19 and for their sakes i sanctify myself, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.

17:20 neither pray i for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word; 17:21 that they all may be one; as
thou, father, art in me, and i in thee, that they also may be one in
us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.

17:22 and the glory which thou gavest me i have given them; that they
may be one, even as we are one: 17:23 i in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou
hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.

17:24 father, i will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with
me where i am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given
me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.

17:25 o righteous father, the world hath not known thee: but i have
known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me.

17:26 and i have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it:
that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and i in
them.

18:1 when jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his
disciples over the brook cedron, where was a garden, into the which he
entered, and his disciples.

18:2 and judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place: for jesus
ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples.

18:3 judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the
chief priests and pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches
and weapons.

18:4 jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him,
went forth, and said unto them, whom seek ye?  18:5 they answered him,
jesus of nazareth. jesus saith unto them, i am he.

and judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.

18:6 as soon then as he had said unto them, i am he, they went
backward, and fell to the ground.

18:7 then asked he them again, whom seek ye? and they said, jesus of
nazareth.

18:8 jesus answered, i have told you that i am he: if therefore ye
seek me, let these go their way: 18:9 that the saying might be
fulfilled, which he spake, of them which thou gavest me have i lost
none.

18:10 then simon peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high
priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. the servant's name was
malchus.

18:11 then said jesus unto peter, put up thy sword into the sheath:
the cup which my father hath given me, shall i not drink it?  18:12
then the band and the captain and officers of the jews took jesus, and
bound him, 18:13 and led him away to annas first; for he was father in
law to caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.

18:14 now caiaphas was he, which gave counsel to the jews, that it was
expedient that one man should die for the people.

18:15 and simon peter followed jesus, and so did another disciple:
that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with jesus
into the palace of the high priest.

18:16 but peter stood at the door without. then went out that other
disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her
that kept the door, and brought in peter.

18:17 then saith the damsel that kept the door unto peter, art not
thou also one of this man's disciples? he saith, i am not.

18:18 and the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire
of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and peter stood
with them, and warmed himself.

18:19 the high priest then asked jesus of his disciples, and of his
doctrine.

18:20 jesus answered him, i spake openly to the world; i ever taught
in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the jews always resort;
and in secret have i said nothing.

18:21 why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what i have said
unto them: behold, they know what i said.

18:22 and when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by
struck jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, answerest thou the
high priest so?  18:23 jesus answered him, if i have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?  18:24 now
annas had sent him bound unto caiaphas the high priest.

18:25 and simon peter stood and warmed himself. they said therefore
unto him, art not thou also one of his disciples? he denied it, and
said, i am not.

18:26 one of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose
ear peter cut off, saith, did not i see thee in the garden with him?
18:27 peter then denied again: and immediately the cock crew.

18:28 then led they jesus from caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: and
it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall,
lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover.

18:29 pilate then went out unto them, and said, what accusation bring
ye against this man?  18:30 they answered and said unto him, if he
were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.

18:31 then said pilate unto them, take ye him, and judge him according
to your law. the jews therefore said unto him, it is not lawful for us
to put any man to death: 18:32 that the saying of jesus might be
fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should die.

18:33 then pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called
jesus, and said unto him, art thou the king of the jews?  18:34 jesus
answered him, sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it
thee of me?  18:35 pilate answered, am i a jew? thine own nation and
the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?
18:36 jesus answered, my kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight, that i should not be
delivered to the jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.

18:37 pilate therefore said unto him, art thou a king then? jesus
answered, thou sayest that i am a king. to this end was i born, and
for this cause came i into the world, that i should bear witness unto
the truth. every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

18:38 pilate saith unto him, what is truth? and when he had said this,
he went out again unto the jews, and saith unto them, i find in him no
fault at all.

18:39 but ye have a custom, that i should release unto you one at the
passover: will ye therefore that i release unto you the king of the
jews?  18:40 then cried they all again, saying, not this man, but
barabbas. now barabbas was a robber.

19:1 then pilate therefore took jesus, and scourged him.

19:2 and the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his
head, and they put on him a purple robe, 19:3 and said, hail, king of
the jews! and they smote him with their hands.

19:4 pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, behold, i
bring him forth to you, that ye may know that i find no fault in him.

19:5 then came jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the
purple robe. and pilate saith unto them, behold the man!  19:6 when
the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out,
saying, crucify him, crucify him. pilate saith unto them, take ye him,
and crucify him: for i find no fault in him.

19:7 the jews answered him, we have a law, and by our law he ought to
die, because he made himself the son of god.

19:8 when pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid;
19:9 and went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto jesus,
whence art thou? but jesus gave him no answer.

19:10 then saith pilate unto him, speakest thou not unto me? knowest
thou not that i have power to crucify thee, and have power to release
thee?  19:11 jesus answered, thou couldest have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore he that
delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin.

19:12 and from thenceforth pilate sought to release him: but the jews
cried out, saying, if thou let this man go, thou art not caesar's
friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against caesar.

19:13 when pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought jesus forth,
and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the
pavement, but in the hebrew, gabbatha.

19:14 and it was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth
hour: and he saith unto the jews, behold your king!  19:15 but they
cried out, away with him, away with him, crucify him.

pilate saith unto them, shall i crucify your king? the chief priests
answered, we have no king but caesar.

19:16 then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. and
they took jesus, and led him away.

19:17 and he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the
place of a skull, which is called in the hebrew golgotha: 19:18 where
they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and
jesus in the midst.

19:19 and pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. and the
writing was jesus of nazareth the king of the jews.

19:20 this title then read many of the jews: for the place where jesus
was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in hebrew, and
greek, and latin.

19:21 then said the chief priests of the jews to pilate, write not,
the king of the jews; but that he said, i am king of the jews.

19:22 pilate answered, what i have written i have written.

19:23 then the soldiers, when they had crucified jesus, took his
garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his
coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.

19:24 they said therefore among themselves, let us not rend it, but
cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be
fulfilled, which saith, they parted my raiment among them, and for my
vesture they did cast lots. these things therefore the soldiers did.

19:25 now there stood by the cross of jesus his mother, and his
mother's sister, mary the wife of cleophas, and mary magdalene.

19:26 when jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing
by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, woman, behold thy son!
19:27 then saith he to the disciple, behold thy mother! and from that
hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

19:28 after this, jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, i thirst.

19:29 now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a
spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his mouth.

19:30 when jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, it is
finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

19:31 the jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the
bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that
sabbath day was an high day,) besought pilate that their legs might be
broken, and that they might be taken away.

19:32 then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other which was crucified with him.

19:33 but when they came to jesus, and saw that he was dead already,
they brake not his legs: 19:34 but one of the soldiers with a spear
pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.

19:35 and he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he
knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.

19:36 for these things were done, that the scripture should be
fulfilled, a bone of him shall not be broken.

19:37 and again another scripture saith, they shall look on him whom
they pierced.

19:38 and after this joseph of arimathaea, being a disciple of jesus,
but secretly for fear of the jews, besought pilate that he might take
away the body of jesus: and pilate gave him leave. he came therefore,
and took the body of jesus.

19:39 and there came also nicodemus, which at the first came to jesus
by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred
pound weight.

19:40 then took they the body of jesus, and wound it in linen clothes
with the spices, as the manner of the jews is to bury.

19:41 now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and
in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.

19:42 there laid they jesus therefore because of the jews' preparation
day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.

20:1 the first day of the week cometh mary magdalene early, when it
was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from
the sepulchre.

20:2 then she runneth, and cometh to simon peter, and to the other
disciple, whom jesus loved, and saith unto them, they have taken away
the lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid
him.

20:3 peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to
the sepulchre.

20:4 so they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun
peter, and came first to the sepulchre.

20:5 and he stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes
lying; yet went he not in.

20:6 then cometh simon peter following him, and went into the
sepulchre, and seeth the linen clothes lie, 20:7 and the napkin, that
was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped
together in a place by itself.

20:8 then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the
sepulchre, and he saw, and believed.

20:9 for as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again
from the dead.

20:10 then the disciples went away again unto their own home.

20:11 but mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she
wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre, 20:12 and seeth
two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the
feet, where the body of jesus had lain.

20:13 and they say unto her, woman, why weepest thou? she saith unto
them, because they have taken away my lord, and i know not where they
have laid him.

20:14 and when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw
jesus standing, and knew not that it was jesus.

20:15 jesus saith unto her, woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest
thou?  she, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, sir, if
thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and i
will take him away.

20:16 jesus saith unto her, mary. she turned herself, and saith unto
him, rabboni; which is to say, master.

20:17 jesus saith unto her, touch me not; for i am not yet ascended to
my father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, i ascend unto my
father, and your father; and to my god, and your god.

20:18 mary magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the
lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her.

20:19 then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week,
when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear
of the jews, came jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them,
peace be unto you.

20:20 and when he had so said, he shewed unto them his hands and his
side.

then were the disciples glad, when they saw the lord.

20:21 then said jesus to them again, peace be unto you: as my father
hath sent me, even so send i you.

20:22 and when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto
them, receive ye the holy ghost: 20:23 whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained.

20:24 but thomas, one of the twelve, called didymus, was not with them
when jesus came.

20:25 the other disciples therefore said unto him, we have seen the
lord.

but he said unto them, except i shall see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust
my hand into his side, i will not believe.

20:26 and after eight days again his disciples were within, and thomas
with them: then came jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the
midst, and said, peace be unto you.

20:27 then saith he to thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my
hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be
not faithless, but believing.

20:28 and thomas answered and said unto him, my lord and my god.

20:29 jesus saith unto him, thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou
hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed.

20:30 and many other signs truly did jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book: 20:31 but these are
written, that ye might believe that jesus is the christ, the son of
god; and that believing ye might have life through his name.

21:1 after these things jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at
the sea of tiberias; and on this wise shewed he himself.

21:2 there were together simon peter, and thomas called didymus, and
nathanael of cana in galilee, and the sons of zebedee, and two other
of his disciples.

21:3 simon peter saith unto them, i go a fishing. they say unto him,
we also go with thee. they went forth, and entered into a ship
immediately; and that night they caught nothing.

21:4 but when the morning was now come, jesus stood on the shore: but
the disciples knew not that it was jesus.

21:5 then jesus saith unto them, children, have ye any meat? they
answered him, no.

21:6 and he said unto them, cast the net on the right side of the
ship, and ye shall find. they cast therefore, and now they were not
able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.

21:7 therefore that disciple whom jesus loved saith unto peter, it is
the lord. now when simon peter heard that it was the lord, he girt his
fisher's coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into
the sea.

21:8 and the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not
far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net
with fishes.

21:9 as soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals
there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.

21:10 jesus saith unto them, bring of the fish which ye have now
caught.

21:11 simon peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great
fishes, an hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so
many, yet was not the net broken.

21:12 jesus saith unto them, come and dine. and none of the disciples
durst ask him, who art thou? knowing that it was the lord.

21:13 jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish
likewise.

21:14 this is now the third time that jesus shewed himself to his
disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.

21:15 so when they had dined, jesus saith to simon peter, simon, son
of jonas, lovest thou me more than these? he saith unto him, yea,
lord; thou knowest that i love thee. he saith unto him, feed my lambs.

21:16 he saith to him again the second time, simon, son of jonas,
lovest thou me? he saith unto him, yea, lord; thou knowest that i love
thee. he saith unto him, feed my sheep.

21:17 he saith unto him the third time, simon, son of jonas, lovest
thou me? peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time,
lovest thou me? and he said unto him, lord, thou knowest all things;
thou knowest that i love thee. jesus saith unto him, feed my sheep.

21:18 verily, verily, i say unto thee, when thou wast young, thou
girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou
shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall
gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.

21:19 this spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify god.
and when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, follow me.

21:20 then peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom jesus loved
following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, lord,
which is he that betrayeth thee?  21:21 peter seeing him saith to
jesus, lord, and what shall this man do?  21:22 jesus saith unto him,
if i will that he tarry till i come, what is that to thee? follow thou
me.

21:23 then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that
disciple should not die: yet jesus said not unto him, he shall not
die; but, if i will that he tarry till i come, what is that to thee?
21:24 this is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote
these things: and we know that his testimony is true.

21:25 and there are also many other things which jesus did, the which,
if they should be written every one, i suppose that even the world
itself could not contain the books that should be written. amen.




the acts of the apostles


1:1 the former treatise have i made, o theophilus, of all that jesus
began both to do and teach, 1:2 until the day in which he was taken
up, after that he through the holy ghost had given commandments unto
the apostles whom he had chosen: 1:3 to whom also he shewed himself
alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them
forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of
god: 1:4 and, being assembled together with them, commanded them that
they should not depart from jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the
father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me.

1:5 for john truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with
the holy ghost not many days hence.

1:6 when they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying,
lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to israel?  1:7
and he said unto them, it is not for you to know the times or the
seasons, which the father hath put in his own power.

1:8 but ye shall receive power, after that the holy ghost is come upon
you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in jerusalem, and in all
judaea, and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

1:9 and when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.

1:10 and while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up,
behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; 1:11 which also said,
ye men of galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same
jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

1:12 then returned they unto jerusalem from the mount called olivet,
which is from jerusalem a sabbath day's journey.

1:13 and when they were come in, they went up into an upper room,
where abode both peter, and james, and john, and andrew, philip, and
thomas, bartholomew, and matthew, james the son of alphaeus, and simon
zelotes, and judas the brother of james.

1:14 these all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication,
with the women, and mary the mother of jesus, and with his brethren.

1:15 and in those days peter stood up in the midst of the disciples,
and said, (the number of names together were about an hundred and
twenty,) 1:16 men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been
fulfilled, which the holy ghost by the mouth of david spake before
concerning judas, which was guide to them that took jesus.

1:17 for he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this
ministry.

1:18 now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and
falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels
gushed out.

1:19 and it was known unto all the dwellers at jerusalem; insomuch as
that field is called in their proper tongue, aceldama, that is to say,
the field of blood.

1:20 for it is written in the book of psalms, let his habitation be
desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let another
take.

1:21 wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time
that the lord jesus went in and out among us, 1:22 beginning from the
baptism of john, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must
one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.

1:23 and they appointed two, joseph called barsabas, who was surnamed
justus, and matthias.

1:24 and they prayed, and said, thou, lord, which knowest the hearts
of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen, 1:25 that he
may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which judas by
transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.

1:26 and they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon matthias;
and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

2:1 and when the day of pentecost was fully come, they were all with
one accord in one place.

2:2 and suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty
wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.

2:3 and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and
it sat upon each of them.

2:4 and they were all filled with the holy ghost, and began to speak
with other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance.

2:5 and there were dwelling at jerusalem jews, devout men, out of
every nation under heaven.

2:6 now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and
were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own
language.

2:7 and they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another,
behold, are not all these which speak galilaeans?  2:8 and how hear we
every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?  2:9 parthians, and
medes, and elamites, and the dwellers in mesopotamia, and in judaea,
and cappadocia, in pontus, and asia, 2:10 phrygia, and pamphylia, in
egypt, and in the parts of libya about cyrene, and strangers of rome,
jews and proselytes, 2:11 cretes and arabians, we do hear them speak
in our tongues the wonderful works of god.

2:12 and they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to
another, what meaneth this?  2:13 others mocking said, these men are
full of new wine.

2:14 but peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and
said unto them, ye men of judaea, and all ye that dwell at jerusalem,
be this known unto you, and hearken to my words: 2:15 for these are
not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the
day.

2:16 but this is that which was spoken by the prophet joel; 2:17 and
it shall come to pass in the last days, saith god, i will pour out of
my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams: 2:18 and on my servants and on my handmaidens i will
pour out in those days of my spirit; and they shall prophesy: 2:19 and
i will shew wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath;
blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke: 2:20 the sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and notable
day of the lord come: 2:21 and it shall come to pass, that whosoever
shall call on the name of the lord shall be saved.

2:22 ye men of israel, hear these words; jesus of nazareth, a man
approved of god among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which god
did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know: 2:23 him,
being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of god,
ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: 2:24 whom
god hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death: because it was
not possible that he should be holden of it.

2:25 for david speaketh concerning him, i foresaw the lord always
before my face, for he is on my right hand, that i should not be
moved: 2:26 therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad;
moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope: 2:27 because thou wilt not
leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption.

2:28 thou hast made known to me the ways of life; thou shalt make me
full of joy with thy countenance.

2:29 men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch
david, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us
unto this day.

2:30 therefore being a prophet, and knowing that god had sworn with an
oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh,
he would raise up christ to sit on his throne; 2:31 he seeing this
before spake of the resurrection of christ, that his soul was not left
in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption.

2:32 this jesus hath god raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.

2:33 therefore being by the right hand of god exalted, and having
received of the father the promise of the holy ghost, he hath shed
forth this, which ye now see and hear.

2:34 for david is not ascended into the heavens: but he saith himself,
the lord said unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand, 2:35 until i
make thy foes thy footstool.

2:36 therefore let all the house of israel know assuredly, that god
hath made the same jesus, whom ye have crucified, both lord and
christ.

2:37 now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and
said unto peter and to the rest of the apostles, men and brethren,
what shall we do?  2:38 then peter said unto them, repent, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of jesus christ for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.

2:39 for the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the lord our god shall call.

2:40 and with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, save
yourselves from this untoward generation.

2:41 then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the
same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

2:42 and they continued stedfastly in the apostles' doctrine and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

2:43 and fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were
done by the apostles.

2:44 and all that believed were together, and had all things common;
2:45 and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men,
as every man had need.

2:46 and they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness
and singleness of heart, 2:47 praising god, and having favour with all
the people. and the lord added to the church daily such as should be
saved.

3:1 now peter and john went up together into the temple at the hour of
prayer, being the ninth hour.

3:2 and a certain man lame from his mother's womb was carried, whom
they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called beautiful,
to ask alms of them that entered into the temple; 3:3 who seeing peter
and john about to go into the temple asked an alms.

3:4 and peter, fastening his eyes upon him with john, said, look on
us.

3:5 and he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of
them.

3:6 then peter said, silver and gold have i none; but such as i have
give i thee: in the name of jesus christ of nazareth rise up and walk.

3:7 and he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up: and
immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.

3:8 and he leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into
the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising god.

3:9 and all the people saw him walking and praising god: 3:10 and they
knew that it was he which sat for alms at the beautiful gate of the
temple: and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which
had happened unto him.

3:11 and as the lame man which was healed held peter and john, all the
people ran together unto them in the porch that is called solomon's,
greatly wondering.

3:12 and when peter saw it, he answered unto the people, ye men of
israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as
though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk?
3:13 the god of abraham, and of isaac, and of jacob, the god of our
fathers, hath glorified his son jesus; whom ye delivered up, and
denied him in the presence of pilate, when he was determined to let
him go.

3:14 but ye denied the holy one and the just, and desired a murderer
to be granted unto you; 3:15 and killed the prince of life, whom god
hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses.

3:16 and his name through faith in his name hath made this man strong,
whom ye see and know: yea, the faith which is by him hath given him
this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.

3:17 and now, brethren, i wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did
also your rulers.

3:18 but those things, which god before had shewed by the mouth of all
his prophets, that christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled.

3:19 repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the lord.

3:20 and he shall send jesus christ, which before was preached unto
you: 3:21 whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution
of all things, which god hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy
prophets since the world began.

3:22 for moses truly said unto the fathers, a prophet shall the lord
your god raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall
ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.

3:23 and it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear
that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.

3:24 yea, and all the prophets from samuel and those that follow
after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.

3:25 ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which
god made with our fathers, saying unto abraham, and in thy seed shall
all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

3:26 unto you first god, having raised up his son jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.

4:1 and as they spake unto the people, the priests, and the captain of
the temple, and the sadducees, came upon them, 4:2 being grieved that
they taught the people, and preached through jesus the resurrection
from the dead.

4:3 and they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next
day: for it was now eventide.

4:4 howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; and the number
of the men was about five thousand.

4:5 and it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders,
and scribes, 4:6 and annas the high priest, and caiaphas, and john,
and alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest,
were gathered together at jerusalem.

4:7 and when they had set them in the midst, they asked, by what
power, or by what name, have ye done this?  4:8 then peter, filled
with the holy ghost, said unto them, ye rulers of the people, and
elders of israel, 4:9 if we this day be examined of the good deed done
to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; 4:10 be it known
unto you all, and to all the people of israel, that by the name of
jesus christ of nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom god raised from the
dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.

4:11 this is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which
is become the head of the corner.

4:12 neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

4:13 now when they saw the boldness of peter and john, and perceived
that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they
took knowledge of them, that they had been with jesus.

4:14 and beholding the man which was healed standing with them, they
could say nothing against it.

4:15 but when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council,
they conferred among themselves, 4:16 saying, what shall we do to
these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is
manifest to all them that dwell in jerusalem; and we cannot deny it.

4:17 but that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly
threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this name.

4:18 and they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor
teach in the name of jesus.

4:19 but peter and john answered and said unto them, whether it be
right in the sight of god to hearken unto you more than unto god,
judge ye.

4:20 for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.

4:21 so when they had further threatened them, they let them go,
finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people: for
all men glorified god for that which was done.

4:22 for the man was above forty years old, on whom this miracle of
healing was shewed.

4:23 and being let go, they went to their own company, and reported
all that the chief priests and elders had said unto them.

4:24 and when they heard that, they lifted up their voice to god with
one accord, and said, lord, thou art god, which hast made heaven, and
earth, and the sea, and all that in them is: 4:25 who by the mouth of
thy servant david hast said, why did the heathen rage, and the people
imagine vain things?  4:26 the kings of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were gathered together against the lord, and against his
christ.

4:27 for of a truth against thy holy child jesus, whom thou hast
anointed, both herod, and pontius pilate, with the gentiles, and the
people of israel, were gathered together, 4:28 for to do whatsoever
thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.

4:29 and now, lord, behold their threatenings: and grant unto thy
servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy word, 4:30 by
stretching forth thine hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be
done by the name of thy holy child jesus.

4:31 and when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
assembled together; and they were all filled with the holy ghost, and
they spake the word of god with boldness.

4:32 and the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of
one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he
possessed was his own; but they had all things common.

4:33 and with great power gave the apostles witness of the
resurrection of the lord jesus: and great grace was upon them all.

4:34 neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were
possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold, 4:35 and laid them down at the apostles' feet:
and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need.

4:36 and joses, who by the apostles was surnamed barnabas, (which is,
being interpreted, the son of consolation,) a levite, and of the
country of cyprus, 4:37 having land, sold it, and brought the money,
and laid it at the apostles' feet.

5:1 but a certain man named ananias, with sapphira his wife, sold a
possession, 5:2 and kept back part of the price, his wife also being
privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles'
feet.

5:3 but peter said, ananias, why hath satan filled thine heart to lie
to the holy ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?
5:4 whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold,
was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in
thine heart?  thou hast not lied unto men, but unto god.

5:5 and ananias hearing these words fell down, and gave up the ghost:
and great fear came on all them that heard these things.

5:6 and the young men arose, wound him up, and carried him out, and
buried him.

5:7 and it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife,
not knowing what was done, came in.

5:8 and peter answered unto her, tell me whether ye sold the land for
so much? and she said, yea, for so much.

5:9 then peter said unto her, how is it that ye have agreed together
to tempt the spirit of the lord? behold, the feet of them which have
buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out.

5:10 then fell she down straightway at his feet, and yielded up the
ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, carrying
her forth, buried her by her husband.

5:11 and great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as
heard these things.

5:12 and by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders
wrought among the people; (and they were all with one accord in
solomon's porch.

5:13 and of the rest durst no man join himself to them: but the people
magnified them.

5:14 and believers were the more added to the lord, multitudes both of
men and women.)  5:15 insomuch that they brought forth the sick into
the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the
shadow of peter passing by might overshadow some of them.

5:16 there came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto
jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean
spirits: and they were healed every one.

5:17 then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him,
(which is the sect of the sadducees,) and were filled with
indignation, 5:18 and laid their hands on the apostles, and put them
in the common prison.

5:19 but the angel of the lord by night opened the prison doors, and
brought them forth, and said, 5:20 go, stand and speak in the temple
to the people all the words of this life.

5:21 and when they heard that, they entered into the temple early in
the morning, and taught. but the high priest came, and they that were
with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the
children of israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.

5:22 but when the officers came, and found them not in the prison,
they returned and told, 5:23 saying, the prison truly found we shut
with all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors:
but when we had opened, we found no man within.

5:24 now when the high priest and the captain of the temple and the
chief priests heard these things, they doubted of them whereunto this
would grow.

5:25 then came one and told them, saying, behold, the men whom ye put
in prison are standing in the temple, and teaching the people.

5:26 then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without
violence: for they feared the people, lest they should have been
stoned.

5:27 and when they had brought them, they set them before the council:
and the high priest asked them, 5:28 saying, did not we straitly
command you that ye should not teach in this name? and, behold, ye
have filled jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this
man's blood upon us.

5:29 then peter and the other apostles answered and said, we ought to
obey god rather than men.

5:30 the god of our fathers raised up jesus, whom ye slew and hanged
on a tree.

5:31 him hath god exalted with his right hand to be a prince and a
saviour, for to give repentance to israel, and forgiveness of sins.

5:32 and we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the holy
ghost, whom god hath given to them that obey him.

5:33 when they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took
counsel to slay them.

5:34 then stood there up one in the council, a pharisee, named
gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people,
and commanded to put the apostles forth a little space; 5:35 and said
unto them, ye men of israel, take heed to yourselves what ye intend to
do as touching these men.

5:36 for before these days rose up theudas, boasting himself to be
somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined
themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were
scattered, and brought to nought.

5:37 after this man rose up judas of galilee in the days of the
taxing, and drew away much people after him: he also perished; and
all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed.

5:38 and now i say unto you, refrain from these men, and let them
alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to
nought: 5:39 but if it be of god, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply
ye be found even to fight against god.

5:40 and to him they agreed: and when they had called the apostles,
and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name
of jesus, and let them go.

5:41 and they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.

5:42 and daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to
teach and preach jesus christ.

6:1 and in those days, when the number of the disciples was
multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the grecians against the
hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration.

6:2 then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them,
and said, it is not reason that we should leave the word of god, and
serve tables.

6:3 wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the holy ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over
this business.

6:4 but we will give ourselves continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of the word.

6:5 and the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose
stephen, a man full of faith and of the holy ghost, and philip, and
prochorus, and nicanor, and timon, and parmenas, and nicolas a
proselyte of antioch: 6:6 whom they set before the apostles: and when
they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.

6:7 and the word of god increased; and the number of the disciples
multiplied in jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests
were obedient to the faith.

6:8 and stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and
miracles among the people.

6:9 then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the
synagogue of the libertines, and cyrenians, and alexandrians, and of
them of cilicia and of asia, disputing with stephen.

6:10 and they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which he spake.

6:11 then they suborned men, which said, we have heard him speak
blasphemous words against moses, and against god.

6:12 and they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes,
and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the council,
6:13 and set up false witnesses, which said, this man ceaseth not to
speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law: 6:14 for
we have heard him say, that this jesus of nazareth shall destroy this
place, and shall change the customs which moses delivered us.

6:15 and all that sat in the council, looking stedfastly on him, saw
his face as it had been the face of an angel.

7:1 then said the high priest, are these things so?  7:2 and he said,
men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; the god of glory appeared unto
our father abraham, when he was in mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
charran, 7:3 and said unto him, get thee out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and come into the land which i shall shew thee.

7:4 then came he out of the land of the chaldaeans, and dwelt in
charran: and from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him
into this land, wherein ye now dwell.

7:5 and he gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set
his foot on: yet he promised that he would give it to him for a
possession, and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child.

7:6 and god spake on this wise, that his seed should sojourn in a
strange land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and
entreat them evil four hundred years.

7:7 and the nation to whom they shall be in bondage will i judge, said
god: and after that shall they come forth, and serve me in this place.

7:8 and he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so abraham begat
isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day; and isaac begat jacob; and
jacob begat the twelve patriarchs.

7:9 and the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold joseph into egypt: but
god was with him, 7:10 and delivered him out of all his afflictions,
and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of pharaoh king of egypt;
and he made him governor over egypt and all his house.

7:11 now there came a dearth over all the land of egypt and chanaan,
and great affliction: and our fathers found no sustenance.

7:12 but when jacob heard that there was corn in egypt, he sent out
our fathers first.

7:13 and at the second time joseph was made known to his brethren; and
joseph's kindred was made known unto pharaoh.

7:14 then sent joseph, and called his father jacob to him, and all his
kindred, threescore and fifteen souls.

7:15 so jacob went down into egypt, and died, he, and our fathers,
7:16 and were carried over into sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that
abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of emmor the father of
sychem.

7:17 but when the time of the promise drew nigh, which god had sworn
to abraham, the people grew and multiplied in egypt, 7:18 till another
king arose, which knew not joseph.

7:19 the same dealt subtilly with our kindred, and evil entreated our
fathers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they
might not live.

7:20 in which time moses was born, and was exceeding fair, and
nourished up in his father's house three months: 7:21 and when he was
cast out, pharaoh's daughter took him up, and nourished him for her
own son.

7:22 and moses was learned in all the wisdom of the egyptians, and was
mighty in words and in deeds.

7:23 and when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to
visit his brethren the children of israel.

7:24 and seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged
him that was oppressed, and smote the egyptian: 7:25 for he supposed
his brethren would have understood how that god by his hand would
deliver them: but they understood not.

7:26 and the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove, and
would have set them at one again, saying, sirs, ye are brethren; why
do ye wrong one to another?  7:27 but he that did his neighbour wrong
thrust him away, saying, who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?
7:28 wilt thou kill me, as thou diddest the egyptian yesterday?  7:29
then fled moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of
madian, where he begat two sons.

7:30 and when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the
wilderness of mount sina an angel of the lord in a flame of fire in a
bush.

7:31 when moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: and as he drew near
to behold it, the voice of the lord came unto him, 7:32 saying, i am
the god of thy fathers, the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and
the god of jacob. then moses trembled, and durst not behold.

7:33 then said the lord to him, put off thy shoes from thy feet: for
the place where thou standest is holy ground.

7:34 i have seen, i have seen the affliction of my people which is in
egypt, and i have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver
them. and now come, i will send thee into egypt.

7:35 this moses whom they refused, saying, who made thee a ruler and a
judge? the same did god send to be a ruler and a deliverer by the hand
of the angel which appeared to him in the bush.

7:36 he brought them out, after that he had shewed wonders and signs
in the land of egypt, and in the red sea, and in the wilderness forty
years.

7:37 this is that moses, which said unto the children of israel, a
prophet shall the lord your god raise up unto you of your brethren,
like unto me; him shall ye hear.

7:38 this is he, that was in the church in the wilderness with the
angel which spake to him in the mount sina, and with our fathers: who
received the lively oracles to give unto us: 7:39 to whom our fathers
would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned
back again into egypt, 7:40 saying unto aaron, make us gods to go
before us: for as for this moses, which brought us out of the land of
egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

7:41 and they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto
the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.

7:42 then god turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven;
as it is written in the book of the prophets, o ye house of israel,
have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of
forty years in the wilderness?  7:43 yea, ye took up the tabernacle of
moloch, and the star of your god remphan, figures which ye made to
worship them: and i will carry you away beyond babylon.

7:44 our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as
he had appointed, speaking unto moses, that he should make it
according to the fashion that he had seen.

7:45 which also our fathers that came after brought in with jesus into
the possession of the gentiles, whom god drave out before the face of
our fathers, unto the days of david; 7:46 who found favour before god,
and desired to find a tabernacle for the god of jacob.

7:47 but solomon built him an house.

7:48 howbeit the most high dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as
saith the prophet, 7:49 heaven is my throne, and earth is my
footstool: what house will ye build me? saith the lord: or what is the
place of my rest?  7:50 hath not my hand made all these things?  7:51
ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always
resist the holy ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye.

7:52 which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they
have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the just one; of
whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: 7:53 who have
received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.

7:54 when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and
they gnashed on him with their teeth.

7:55 but he, being full of the holy ghost, looked up stedfastly into
heaven, and saw the glory of god, and jesus standing on the right hand
of god, 7:56 and said, behold, i see the heavens opened, and the son
of man standing on the right hand of god.

7:57 then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears,
and ran upon him with one accord, 7:58 and cast him out of the city,
and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young
man's feet, whose name was saul.

7:59 and they stoned stephen, calling upon god, and saying, lord
jesus, receive my spirit.

7:60 and he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, lord, lay not
this sin to their charge. and when he had said this, he fell asleep.

8:1 and saul was consenting unto his death. and at that time there was
a great persecution against the church which was at jerusalem; and
they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of judaea and
samaria, except the apostles.

8:2 and devout men carried stephen to his burial, and made great
lamentation over him.

8:3 as for saul, he made havock of the church, entering into every
house, and haling men and women committed them to prison.

8:4 therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where
preaching the word.

8:5 then philip went down to the city of samaria, and preached christ
unto them.

8:6 and the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which
philip spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did.

8:7 for unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that
were possessed with them: and many taken with palsies, and that were
lame, were healed.

8:8 and there was great joy in that city.

8:9 but there was a certain man, called simon, which beforetime in the
same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of samaria, giving
out that himself was some great one: 8:10 to whom they all gave heed,
from the least to the greatest, saying, this man is the great power of
god.

8:11 and to him they had regard, because that of long time he had
bewitched them with sorceries.

8:12 but when they believed philip preaching the things concerning the
kingdom of god, and the name of jesus christ, they were baptized, both
men and women.

8:13 then simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he
continued with philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs
which were done.

8:14 now when the apostles which were at jerusalem heard that samaria
had received the word of god, they sent unto them peter and john: 8:15
who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might
receive the holy ghost: 8:16 (for as yet he was fallen upon none of
them: only they were baptized in the name of the lord jesus.)  8:17
then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy ghost.

8:18 and when simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands
the holy ghost was given, he offered them money, 8:19 saying, give me
also this power, that on whomsoever i lay hands, he may receive the
holy ghost.

8:20 but peter said unto him, thy money perish with thee, because thou
hast thought that the gift of god may be purchased with money.

8:21 thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is
not right in the sight of god.

8:22 repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray god, if perhaps
the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

8:23 for i perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity.

8:24 then answered simon, and said, pray ye to the lord for me, that
none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me.

8:25 and they, when they had testified and preached the word of the
lord, returned to jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many villages
of the samaritans.

8:26 and the angel of the lord spake unto philip, saying, arise, and
go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from jerusalem unto
gaza, which is desert.

8:27 and he arose and went: and, behold, a man of ethiopia, an eunuch
of great authority under candace queen of the ethiopians, who had the
charge of all her treasure, and had come to jerusalem for to worship,
8:28 was returning, and sitting in his chariot read esaias the
prophet.

8:29 then the spirit said unto philip, go near, and join thyself to
this chariot.

8:30 and philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet
esaias, and said, understandest thou what thou readest?  8:31 and he
said, how can i, except some man should guide me? and he desired
philip that he would come up and sit with him.

8:32 the place of the scripture which he read was this, he was led as
a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so
opened he not his mouth: 8:33 in his humiliation his judgment was
taken away: and who shall declare his generation? for his life is
taken from the earth.

8:34 and the eunuch answered philip, and said, i pray thee, of whom
speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?  8:35
then philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and
preached unto him jesus.

8:36 and as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water:
and the eunuch said, see, here is water; what doth hinder me to be
baptized?  8:37 and philip said, if thou believest with all thine
heart, thou mayest.

and he answered and said, i believe that jesus christ is the son of
god.

8:38 and he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down
both into the water, both philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him.

8:39 and when they were come up out of the water, the spirit of the
lord caught away philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went
on his way rejoicing.

8:40 but philip was found at azotus: and passing through he preached
in all the cities, till he came to caesarea.

9:1 and saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the lord, went unto the high priest, 9:2 and desired of
him letters to damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of
this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound
unto jerusalem.

9:3 and as he journeyed, he came near damascus: and suddenly there
shined round about him a light from heaven: 9:4 and he fell to the
earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, saul, saul, why persecutest
thou me?  9:5 and he said, who art thou, lord? and the lord said, i am
jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks.

9:6 and he trembling and astonished said, lord, what wilt thou have me
to do? and the lord said unto him, arise, and go into the city, and it
shall be told thee what thou must do.

9:7 and the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a
voice, but seeing no man.

9:8 and saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he
saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into
damascus.

9:9 and he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor
drink.

9:10 and there was a certain disciple at damascus, named ananias; and
to him said the lord in a vision, ananias. and he said, behold, i am
here, lord.

9:11 and the lord said unto him, arise, and go into the street which
is called straight, and enquire in the house of judas for one called
saul, of tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth, 9:12 and hath seen in a
vision a man named ananias coming in, and putting his hand on him,
that he might receive his sight.

9:13 then ananias answered, lord, i have heard by many of this man,
how much evil he hath done to thy saints at jerusalem: 9:14 and here
he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy
name.

9:15 but the lord said unto him, go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel
unto me, to bear my name before the gentiles, and kings, and the
children of israel: 9:16 for i will shew him how great things he must
suffer for my name's sake.

9:17 and ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting
his hands on him said, brother saul, the lord, even jesus, that
appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou
mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the holy ghost.

9:18 and immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales:
and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.

9:19 and when he had received meat, he was strengthened. then was saul
certain days with the disciples which were at damascus.

9:20 and straightway he preached christ in the synagogues, that he is
the son of god.

9:21 but all that heard him were amazed, and said; is not this he that
destroyed them which called on this name in jerusalem, and came hither
for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief
priests?  9:22 but saul increased the more in strength, and confounded
the jews which dwelt at damascus, proving that this is very christ.

9:23 and after that many days were fulfilled, the jews took counsel to
kill him: 9:24 but their laying await was known of saul. and they
watched the gates day and night to kill him.

9:25 then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the
wall in a basket.

9:26 and when saul was come to jerusalem, he assayed to join himself
to the disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not
that he was a disciple.

9:27 but barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and
declared unto them how he had seen the lord in the way, and that he
had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at damascus in the
name of jesus.

9:28 and he was with them coming in and going out at jerusalem.

9:29 and he spake boldly in the name of the lord jesus, and disputed
against the grecians: but they went about to slay him.

9:30 which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to caesarea,
and sent him forth to tarsus.

9:31 then had the churches rest throughout all judaea and galilee and
samaria, and were edified; and walking in the fear of the lord, and in
the comfort of the holy ghost, were multiplied.

9:32 and it came to pass, as peter passed throughout all quarters, he
came down also to the saints which dwelt at lydda.

9:33 and there he found a certain man named aeneas, which had kept his
bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy.

9:34 and peter said unto him, aeneas, jesus christ maketh thee whole:
arise, and make thy bed. and he arose immediately.

9:35 and all that dwelt at lydda and saron saw him, and turned to the
lord.

9:36 now there was at joppa a certain disciple named tabitha, which by
interpretation is called dorcas: this woman was full of good works and
almsdeeds which she did.

9:37 and it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died:
whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber.

9:38 and forasmuch as lydda was nigh to joppa, and the disciples had
heard that peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him
that he would not delay to come to them.

9:39 then peter arose and went with them. when he was come, they
brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him
weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which dorcas made, while
she was with them.

9:40 but peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and
turning him to the body said, tabitha, arise. and she opened her eyes:
and when she saw peter, she sat up.

9:41 and he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had
called the saints and widows, presented her alive.

9:42 and it was known throughout all joppa; and many believed in the
lord.

9:43 and it came to pass, that he tarried many days in joppa with one
simon a tanner.

10:1 there was a certain man in caesarea called cornelius, a centurion
of the band called the italian band, 10:2 a devout man, and one that
feared god with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and
prayed to god alway.

10:3 he saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an
angel of god coming in to him, and saying unto him, cornelius.

10:4 and when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, what is it,
lord?  and he said unto him, thy prayers and thine alms are come up
for a memorial before god.

10:5 and now send men to joppa, and call for one simon, whose surname
is peter: 10:6 he lodgeth with one simon a tanner, whose house is by
the sea side: he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.

10:7 and when the angel which spake unto cornelius was departed, he
called two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them
that waited on him continually; 10:8 and when he had declared all
these things unto them, he sent them to joppa.

10:9 on the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto
the city, peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth
hour: 10:10 and he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while
they made ready, he fell into a trance, 10:11 and saw heaven opened,
and a certain vessel descending upon him, as it had been a great sheet
knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth: 10:12 wherein
were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping things, and fowls of the air.

10:13 and there came a voice to him, rise, peter; kill, and eat.

10:14 but peter said, not so, lord; for i have never eaten any thing
that is common or unclean.

10:15 and the voice spake unto him again the second time, what god
hath cleansed, that call not thou common.

10:16 this was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into
heaven.

10:17 now while peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had
seen should mean, behold, the men which were sent from cornelius had
made enquiry for simon's house, and stood before the gate, 10:18 and
called, and asked whether simon, which was surnamed peter, were lodged
there.

10:19 while peter thought on the vision, the spirit said unto him,
behold, three men seek thee.

10:20 arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting
nothing: for i have sent them.

10:21 then peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from
cornelius; and said, behold, i am he whom ye seek: what is the cause
wherefore ye are come?  10:22 and they said, cornelius the centurion,
a just man, and one that feareth god, and of good report among all the
nation of the jews, was warned from god by an holy angel to send for
thee into his house, and to hear words of thee.

10:23 then called he them in, and lodged them. and on the morrow peter
went away with them, and certain brethren from joppa accompanied him.

10:24 and the morrow after they entered into caesarea. and cornelius
waited for them, and he had called together his kinsmen and near
friends.

10:25 and as peter was coming in, cornelius met him, and fell down at
his feet, and worshipped him.

10:26 but peter took him up, saying, stand up; i myself also am a man.

10:27 and as he talked with him, he went in, and found many that were
come together.

10:28 and he said unto them, ye know how that it is an unlawful thing
for a man that is a jew to keep company, or come unto one of another
nation; but god hath shewed me that i should not call any man common
or unclean.

10:29 therefore came i unto you without gainsaying, as soon as i was
sent for: i ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me?  10:30
and cornelius said, four days ago i was fasting until this hour; and
at the ninth hour i prayed in my house, and, behold, a man stood
before me in bright clothing, 10:31 and said, cornelius, thy prayer is
heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of god.

10:32 send therefore to joppa, and call hither simon, whose surname is
peter; he is lodged in the house of one simon a tanner by the sea
side: who, when he cometh, shall speak unto thee.

10:33 immediately therefore i sent to thee; and thou hast well done
that thou art come. now therefore are we all here present before god,
to hear all things that are commanded thee of god.

10:34 then peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth i perceive
that god is no respecter of persons: 10:35 but in every nation he that
feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.

10:36 the word which god sent unto the children of israel, preaching
peace by jesus christ: (he is lord of all:) 10:37 that word, i say, ye
know, which was published throughout all judaea, and began from
galilee, after the baptism which john preached; 10:38 how god anointed
jesus of nazareth with the holy ghost and with power: who went about
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for god
was with him.

10:39 and we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land
of the jews, and in jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree:
10:40 him god raised up the third day, and shewed him openly; 10:41
not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before god, even to
us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.

10:42 and he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify
that it is he which was ordained of god to be the judge of quick and
dead.

10:43 to him give all the prophets witness, that through his name
whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.

10:44 while peter yet spake these words, the holy ghost fell on all
them which heard the word.

10:45 and they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as
many as came with peter, because that on the gentiles also was poured
out the gift of the holy ghost.

10:46 for they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify god. then
answered peter, 10:47 can any man forbid water, that these should not
be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well as we?  10:48
and he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the lord. then
prayed they him to tarry certain days.

11:1 and the apostles and brethren that were in judaea heard that the
gentiles had also received the word of god.

11:2 and when peter was come up to jerusalem, they that were of the
circumcision contended with him, 11:3 saying, thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.

11:4 but peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded
it by order unto them, saying, 11:5 i was in the city of joppa
praying: and in a trance i saw a vision, a certain vessel descend, as
it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by four corners; and
it came even to me: 11:6 upon the which when i had fastened mine eyes,
i considered, and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping things, and fowls of the air.

11:7 and i heard a voice saying unto me, arise, peter; slay and eat.

11:8 but i said, not so, lord: for nothing common or unclean hath at
any time entered into my mouth.

11:9 but the voice answered me again from heaven, what god hath
cleansed, that call not thou common.

11:10 and this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into
heaven.

11:11 and, behold, immediately there were three men already come unto
the house where i was, sent from caesarea unto me.

11:12 and the spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. moreover
these six brethren accompanied me, and we entered into the man's
house: 11:13 and he shewed us how he had seen an angel in his house,
which stood and said unto him, send men to joppa, and call for simon,
whose surname is peter; 11:14 who shall tell thee words, whereby thou
and all thy house shall be saved.

11:15 and as i began to speak, the holy ghost fell on them, as on us
at the beginning.

11:16 then remembered i the word of the lord, how that he said, john
indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the holy
ghost.

11:17 forasmuch then as god gave them the like gift as he did unto us,
who believed on the lord jesus christ; what was i, that i could
withstand god?  11:18 when they heard these things, they held their
peace, and glorified god, saying, then hath god also to the gentiles
granted repentance unto life.

11:19 now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that
arose about stephen travelled as far as phenice, and cyprus, and
antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the jews only.

11:20 and some of them were men of cyprus and cyrene, which, when they
were come to antioch, spake unto the grecians, preaching the lord
jesus.

11:21 and the hand of the lord was with them: and a great number
believed, and turned unto the lord.

11:22 then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church
which was in jerusalem: and they sent forth barnabas, that he should
go as far as antioch.

11:23 who, when he came, and had seen the grace of god, was glad, and
exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto
the lord.

11:24 for he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and of faith:
and much people was added unto the lord.

11:25 then departed barnabas to tarsus, for to seek saul: 11:26 and
when he had found him, he brought him unto antioch. and it came to
pass, that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church, and
taught much people. and the disciples were called christians first in
antioch.

11:27 and in these days came prophets from jerusalem unto antioch.

11:28 and there stood up one of them named agabus, and signified by
the spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world:
which came to pass in the days of claudius caesar.

11:29 then the disciples, every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in judaea:
11:30 which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of
barnabas and saul.

12:1 now about that time herod the king stretched forth his hands to
vex certain of the church.

12:2 and he killed james the brother of john with the sword.

12:3 and because he saw it pleased the jews, he proceeded further to
take peter also. (then were the days of unleavened bread.)  12:4 and
when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him
to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after easter to
bring him forth to the people.

12:5 peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without
ceasing of the church unto god for him.

12:6 and when herod would have brought him forth, the same night peter
was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the
keepers before the door kept the prison.

12:7 and, behold, the angel of the lord came upon him, and a light
shined in the prison: and he smote peter on the side, and raised him
up, saying, arise up quickly. and his chains fell off from his hands.

12:8 and the angel said unto him, gird thyself, and bind on thy
sandals.

and so he did. and he saith unto him, cast thy garment about thee, and
follow me.

12:9 and he went out, and followed him; and wist not that it was true
which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision.

12:10 when they were past the first and the second ward, they came
unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of
his own accord: and they went out, and passed on through one street;
and forthwith the angel departed from him.

12:11 and when peter was come to himself, he said, now i know of a
surety, that the lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out
of the hand of herod, and from all the expectation of the people of
the jews.

12:12 and when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of
mary the mother of john, whose surname was mark; where many were
gathered together praying.

12:13 and as peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to
hearken, named rhoda.

12:14 and when she knew peter's voice, she opened not the gate for
gladness, but ran in, and told how peter stood before the gate.

12:15 and they said unto her, thou art mad. but she constantly
affirmed that it was even so. then said they, it is his angel.

12:16 but peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door,
and saw him, they were astonished.

12:17 but he, beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace,
declared unto them how the lord had brought him out of the prison. and
he said, go shew these things unto james, and to the brethren. and he
departed, and went into another place.

12:18 now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the
soldiers, what was become of peter.

12:19 and when herod had sought for him, and found him not, he
examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death.
and he went down from judaea to caesarea, and there abode.

12:20 and herod was highly displeased with them of tyre and sidon: but
they came with one accord to him, and, having made blastus the king's
chamberlain their friend, desired peace; because their country was
nourished by the king's country.

12:21 and upon a set day herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his
throne, and made an oration unto them.

12:22 and the people gave a shout, saying, it is the voice of a god,
and not of a man.

12:23 and immediately the angel of the lord smote him, because he gave
not god the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.

12:24 but the word of god grew and multiplied.

12:25 and barnabas and saul returned from jerusalem, when they had
fulfilled their ministry, and took with them john, whose surname was
mark.

13:1 now there were in the church that was at antioch certain prophets
and teachers; as barnabas, and simeon that was called niger, and
lucius of cyrene, and manaen, which had been brought up with herod the
tetrarch, and saul.

13:2 as they ministered to the lord, and fasted, the holy ghost said,
separate me barnabas and saul for the work whereunto i have called
them.

13:3 and when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, they sent them away.

13:4 so they, being sent forth by the holy ghost, departed unto
seleucia; and from thence they sailed to cyprus.

13:5 and when they were at salamis, they preached the word of god in
the synagogues of the jews: and they had also john to their minister.

13:6 and when they had gone through the isle unto paphos, they found a
certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a jew, whose name was barjesus:
13:7 which was with the deputy of the country, sergius paulus, a
prudent man; who called for barnabas and saul, and desired to hear the
word of god.

13:8 but elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation)
withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.

13:9 then saul, (who also is called paul,) filled with the holy ghost,
set his eyes on him.

13:10 and said, o full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of
the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the lord?  13:11 and now, behold, the hand
of the lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun
for a season. and immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness;
and he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand.

13:12 then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being
astonished at the doctrine of the lord.

13:13 now when paul and his company loosed from paphos, they came to
perga in pamphylia: and john departing from them returned to
jerusalem.

13:14 but when they departed from perga, they came to antioch in
pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down.

13:15 and after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of
the synagogue sent unto them, saying, ye men and brethren, if ye have
any word of exhortation for the people, say on.

13:16 then paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, men of
israel, and ye that fear god, give audience.

13:17 the god of this people of israel chose our fathers, and exalted
the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of egypt, and with
an high arm brought he them out of it.

13:18 and about the time of forty years suffered he their manners in
the wilderness.

13:19 and when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of chanaan,
he divided their land to them by lot.

13:20 and after that he gave unto them judges about the space of four
hundred and fifty years, until samuel the prophet.

13:21 and afterward they desired a king: and god gave unto them saul
the son of cis, a man of the tribe of benjamin, by the space of forty
years.

13:22 and when he had removed him, he raised up unto them david to be
their king; to whom also he gave their testimony, and said, i have
found david the son of jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall
fulfil all my will.

13:23 of this man's seed hath god according to his promise raised unto
israel a saviour, jesus: 13:24 when john had first preached before his
coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of israel.

13:25 and as john fulfilled his course, he said, whom think ye that i
am?  i am not he. but, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes
of his feet i am not worthy to loose.

13:26 men and brethren, children of the stock of abraham, and
whosoever among you feareth god, to you is the word of this salvation
sent.

13:27 for they that dwell at jerusalem, and their rulers, because they
knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every
sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him.

13:28 and though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they
pilate that he should be slain.

13:29 and when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they
took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre.

13:30 but god raised him from the dead: 13:31 and he was seen many
days of them which came up with him from galilee to jerusalem, who are
his witnesses unto the people.

13:32 and we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which
was made unto the fathers, 13:33 god hath fulfilled the same unto us
their children, in that he hath raised up jesus again; as it is also
written in the second psalm, thou art my son, this day have i begotten
thee.

13:34 and as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no
more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, i will give you
the sure mercies of david.

13:35 wherefore he saith also in another psalm, thou shalt not suffer
thine holy one to see corruption.

13:36 for david, after he had served his own generation by the will of
god, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption:
13:37 but he, whom god raised again, saw no corruption.

13:38 be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through
this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: 13:39 and by
him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the law of moses.

13:40 beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in
the prophets; 13:41 behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for
i work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe,
though a man declare it unto you.

13:42 and when the jews were gone out of the synagogue, the gentiles
besought that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath.

13:43 now when the congregation was broken up, many of the jews and
religious proselytes followed paul and barnabas: who, speaking to
them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of god.

13:44 and the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to
hear the word of god.

13:45 but when the jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with
envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by paul,
contradicting and blaspheming.

13:46 then paul and barnabas waxed bold, and said, it was necessary
that the word of god should first have been spoken to you: but seeing
ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life,
lo, we turn to the gentiles.

13:47 for so hath the lord commanded us, saying, i have set thee to be
a light of the gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the
ends of the earth.

13:48 and when the gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified
the word of the lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life
believed.

13:49 and the word of the lord was published throughout all the
region.

13:50 but the jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the
chief men of the city, and raised persecution against paul and
barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts.

13:51 but they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came
unto iconium.

13:52 and the disciples were filled with joy, and with the holy ghost.

14:1 and it came to pass in iconium, that they went both together into
the synagogue of the jews, and so spake, that a great multitude both
of the jews and also of the greeks believed.

14:2 but the unbelieving jews stirred up the gentiles, and made their
minds evil affected against the brethren.

14:3 long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the lord, which
gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and
wonders to be done by their hands.

14:4 but the multitude of the city was divided: and part held with the
jews, and part with the apostles.

14:5 and when there was an assault made both of the gentiles, and also
of the jews with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone
them, 14:6 they were ware of it, and fled unto lystra and derbe,
cities of lycaonia, and unto the region that lieth round about: 14:7
and there they preached the gospel.

14:8 and there sat a certain man at lystra, impotent in his feet,
being a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked: 14:9 the
same heard paul speak: who stedfastly beholding him, and perceiving
that he had faith to be healed, 14:10 said with a loud voice, stand
upright on thy feet. and he leaped and walked.

14:11 and when the people saw what paul had done, they lifted up their
voices, saying in the speech of lycaonia, the gods are come down to us
in the likeness of men.

14:12 and they called barnabas, jupiter; and paul, mercurius, because
he was the chief speaker.

14:13 then the priest of jupiter, which was before their city, brought
oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with
the people.

14:14 which when the apostles, barnabas and paul, heard of, they rent
their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, 14:15 and
saying, sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men of like passions
with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities
unto the living god, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and
all things that are therein: 14:16 who in times past suffered all
nations to walk in their own ways.

14:17 nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did
good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness.

14:18 and with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that
they had not done sacrifice unto them.

14:19 and there came thither certain jews from antioch and iconium,
who persuaded the people, and having stoned paul, drew him out of the
city, supposing he had been dead.

14:20 howbeit, as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and
came into the city: and the next day he departed with barnabas to
derbe.

14:21 and when they had preached the gospel to that city, and had
taught many, they returned again to lystra, and to iconium, and
antioch, 14:22 confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting
them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much
tribulation enter into the kingdom of god.

14:23 and when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had
prayed with fasting, they commended them to the lord, on whom they
believed.

14:24 and after they had passed throughout pisidia, they came to
pamphylia.

14:25 and when they had preached the word in perga, they went down
into attalia: 14:26 and thence sailed to antioch, from whence they had
been recommended to the grace of god for the work which they
fulfilled.

14:27 and when they were come, and had gathered the church together,
they rehearsed all that god had done with them, and how he had opened
the door of faith unto the gentiles.

14:28 and there they abode long time with the disciples.

15:1 and certain men which came down from judaea taught the brethren,
and said, except ye be circumcised after the manner of moses, ye
cannot be saved.

15:2 when therefore paul and barnabas had no small dissension and
disputation with them, they determined that paul and barnabas, and
certain other of them, should go up to jerusalem unto the apostles and
elders about this question.

15:3 and being brought on their way by the church, they passed through
phenice and samaria, declaring the conversion of the gentiles: and
they caused great joy unto all the brethren.

15:4 and when they were come to jerusalem, they were received of the
church, and of the apostles and elders, and they declared all things
that god had done with them.

15:5 but there rose up certain of the sect of the pharisees which
believed, saying, that it was needful to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the law of moses.

15:6 and the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this
matter.

15:7 and when there had been much disputing, peter rose up, and said
unto them, men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago god
made choice among us, that the gentiles by my mouth should hear the
word of the gospel, and believe.

15:8 and god, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them
the holy ghost, even as he did unto us; 15:9 and put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.

15:10 now therefore why tempt ye god, to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
15:11 but we believe that through the grace of the lord jesus christ
we shall be saved, even as they.

15:12 then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to
barnabas and paul, declaring what miracles and wonders god had wrought
among the gentiles by them.

15:13 and after they had held their peace, james answered, saying, men
and brethren, hearken unto me: 15:14 simeon hath declared how god at
the first did visit the gentiles, to take out of them a people for his
name.

15:15 and to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written,
15:16 after this i will return, and will build again the tabernacle of
david, which is fallen down; and i will build again the ruins thereof,
and i will set it up: 15:17 that the residue of men might seek after
the lord, and all the gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the
lord, who doeth all these things.

15:18 known unto god are all his works from the beginning of the
world.

15:19 wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from
among the gentiles are turned to god: 15:20 but that we write unto
them, that they abstain from pollutions of idols, and from
fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood.

15:21 for moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him,
being read in the synagogues every sabbath day.

15:22 then pleased it the apostles and elders with the whole church,
to send chosen men of their own company to antioch with paul and
barnabas; namely, judas surnamed barsabas and silas, chief men among
the brethren: 15:23 and they wrote letters by them after this manner;
the apostles and elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren
which are of the gentiles in antioch and syria and cilicia.

15:24 forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us
have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, ye must
be circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no such commandment:
15:25 it seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send
chosen men unto you with our beloved barnabas and paul, 15:26 men that
have hazarded their lives for the name of our lord jesus christ.

15:27 we have sent therefore judas and silas, who shall also tell you
the same things by mouth.

15:28 for it seemed good to the holy ghost, and to us, to lay upon you
no greater burden than these necessary things; 15:29 that ye abstain
from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye
shall do well. fare ye well.

15:30 so when they were dismissed, they came to antioch: and when they
had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle: 15:31
which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.

15:32 and judas and silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted
the brethren with many words, and confirmed them.

15:33 and after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in
peace from the brethren unto the apostles.

15:34 notwithstanding it pleased silas to abide there still.

15:35 paul also and barnabas continued in antioch, teaching and
preaching the word of the lord, with many others also.

15:36 and some days after paul said unto barnabas, let us go again and
visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of
the lord, and see how they do.

15:37 and barnabas determined to take with them john, whose surname
was mark.

15:38 but paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed
from them from pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.

15:39 and the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed
asunder one from the other: and so barnabas took mark, and sailed unto
cyprus; 15:40 and paul chose silas, and departed, being recommended by
the brethren unto the grace of god.

15:41 and he went through syria and cilicia, confirming the churches.

16:1 then came he to derbe and lystra: and, behold, a certain disciple
was there, named timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a
jewess, and believed; but his father was a greek: 16:2 which was well
reported of by the brethren that were at lystra and iconium.

16:3 him would paul have to go forth with him; and took and
circumcised him because of the jews which were in those quarters: for
they knew all that his father was a greek.

16:4 and as they went through the cities, they delivered them the
decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the apostles and elders
which were at jerusalem.

16:5 and so were the churches established in the faith, and increased
in number daily.

16:6 now when they had gone throughout phrygia and the region of
galatia, and were forbidden of the holy ghost to preach the word in
asia, 16:7 after they were come to mysia, they assayed to go into
bithynia: but the spirit suffered them not.

16:8 and they passing by mysia came down to troas.

16:9 and a vision appeared to paul in the night; there stood a man of
macedonia, and prayed him, saying, come over into macedonia, and help
us.

16:10 and after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to
go into macedonia, assuredly gathering that the lord had called us for
to preach the gospel unto them.

16:11 therefore loosing from troas, we came with a straight course to
samothracia, and the next day to neapolis; 16:12 and from thence to
philippi, which is the chief city of that part of macedonia, and a
colony: and we were in that city abiding certain days.

16:13 and on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side,
where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the
women which resorted thither.

16:14 and a certain woman named lydia, a seller of purple, of the city
of thyatira, which worshipped god, heard us: whose heart the lord
opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of paul.

16:15 and when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us,
saying, if ye have judged me to be faithful to the lord, come into my
house, and abide there. and she constrained us.

16:16 and it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her
masters much gain by soothsaying: 16:17 the same followed paul and us,
and cried, saying, these men are the servants of the most high god,
which shew unto us the way of salvation.

16:18 and this did she many days. but paul, being grieved, turned and
said to the spirit, i command thee in the name of jesus christ to come
out of her.

and he came out the same hour.

16:19 and when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone,
they caught paul and silas, and drew them into the marketplace unto
the rulers, 16:20 and brought them to the magistrates, saying, these
men, being jews, do exceedingly trouble our city, 16:21 and teach
customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe,
being romans.

16:22 and the multitude rose up together against them: and the
magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat them.

16:23 and when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them
into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely: 16:24 who,
having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and
made their feet fast in the stocks.

16:25 and at midnight paul and silas prayed, and sang praises unto
god: and the prisoners heard them.

16:26 and suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the
foundations of the prison were shaken: and immediately all the doors
were opened, and every one's bands were loosed.

16:27 and the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and
seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have
killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled.

16:28 but paul cried with a loud voice, saying, do thyself no harm:
for we are all here.

16:29 then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling,
and fell down before paul and silas, 16:30 and brought them out, and
said, sirs, what must i do to be saved?  16:31 and they said, believe
on the lord jesus christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.

16:32 and they spake unto him the word of the lord, and to all that
were in his house.

16:33 and he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their
stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway.

16:34 and when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before
them, and rejoiced, believing in god with all his house.

16:35 and when it was day, the magistrates sent the serjeants, saying,
let those men go.

16:36 and the keeper of the prison told this saying to paul, the
magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and go in
peace.

16:37 but paul said unto them, they have beaten us openly uncondemned,
being romans, and have cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us
out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us
out.

16:38 and the serjeants told these words unto the magistrates: and
they feared, when they heard that they were romans.

16:39 and they came and besought them, and brought them out, and
desired them to depart out of the city.

16:40 and they went out of the prison, and entered into the house of
lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and
departed.

17:1 now when they had passed through amphipolis and apollonia, they
came to thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the jews: 17:2 and
paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days
reasoned with them out of the scriptures, 17:3 opening and alleging,
that christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead;
and that this jesus, whom i preach unto you, is christ.

17:4 and some of them believed, and consorted with paul and silas; and
of the devout greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a
few.

17:5 but the jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and
set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of jason, and
sought to bring them out to the people.

17:6 and when they found them not, they drew jason and certain
brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying, these that have turned
the world upside down are come hither also; 17:7 whom jason hath
received: and these all do contrary to the decrees of caesar, saying
that there is another king, one jesus.

17:8 and they troubled the people and the rulers of the city, when
they heard these things.

17:9 and when they had taken security of jason, and of the other, they
let them go.

17:10 and the brethren immediately sent away paul and silas by night
unto berea: who coming thither went into the synagogue of the jews.

17:11 these were more noble than those in thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
scriptures daily, whether those things were so.

17:12 therefore many of them believed; also of honourable women which
were greeks, and of men, not a few.

17:13 but when the jews of thessalonica had knowledge that the word of
god was preached of paul at berea, they came thither also, and stirred
up the people.

17:14 and then immediately the brethren sent away paul to go as it
were to the sea: but silas and timotheus abode there still.

17:15 and they that conducted paul brought him unto athens: and
receiving a commandment unto silas and timotheus for to come to him
with all speed, they departed.

17:16 now while paul waited for them at athens, his spirit was stirred
in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.

17:17 therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the jews, and with
the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with
him.

17:18 then certain philosophers of the epicureans, and of the stoicks,
encountered him. and some said, what will this babbler say? other
some, he seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he
preached unto them jesus, and the resurrection.

17:19 and they took him, and brought him unto areopagus, saying, may
we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is?  17:20 for
thou bringest certain strange things to our ears: we would know
therefore what these things mean.

17:21 (for all the athenians and strangers which were there spent
their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new
thing.)  17:22 then paul stood in the midst of mars' hill, and said,
ye men of athens, i perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitious.

17:23 for as i passed by, and beheld your devotions, i found an altar
with this inscription, to the unknown god. whom therefore ye
ignorantly worship, him declare i unto you.

17:24 god that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he
is lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands;
17:25 neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any
thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; 17:26
and hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the
face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and
the bounds of their habitation; 17:27 that they should seek the lord,
if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far
from every one of us: 17:28 for in him we live, and move, and have our
being; as certain also of your own poets have said, for we are also
his offspring.

17:29 forasmuch then as we are the offspring of god, we ought not to
think that the godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven
by art and man's device.

17:30 and the times of this ignorance god winked at; but now
commandeth all men every where to repent: 17:31 because he hath
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness
by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance
unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.

17:32 and when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked: and others said, we will hear thee again of this matter.

17:33 so paul departed from among them.

17:34 howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the
which was dionysius the areopagite, and a woman named damaris, and
others with them.

18:1 after these things paul departed from athens, and came to
corinth; 18:2 and found a certain jew named aquila, born in pontus,
lately come from italy, with his wife priscilla; (because that
claudius had commanded all jews to depart from rome:) and came unto
them.

18:3 and because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and
wrought: for by their occupation they were tentmakers.

18:4 and he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded the
jews and the greeks.

18:5 and when silas and timotheus were come from macedonia, paul was
pressed in the spirit, and testified to the jews that jesus was
christ.

18:6 and when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his
raiment, and said unto them, your blood be upon your own heads; i am
clean; from henceforth i will go unto the gentiles.

18:7 and he departed thence, and entered into a certain man's house,
named justus, one that worshipped god, whose house joined hard to the
synagogue.

18:8 and crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the
lord with all his house; and many of the corinthians hearing believed,
and were baptized.

18:9 then spake the lord to paul in the night by a vision, be not
afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: 18:10 for i am with thee,
and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: for i have much people in
this city.

18:11 and he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word
of god among them.

18:12 and when gallio was the deputy of achaia, the jews made
insurrection with one accord against paul, and brought him to the
judgment seat, 18:13 saying, this fellow persuadeth men to worship god
contrary to the law.

18:14 and when paul was now about to open his mouth, gallio said unto
the jews, if it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, o ye jews,
reason would that i should bear with you: 18:15 but if it be a
question of words and names, and of your law, look ye to it; for i
will be no judge of such matters.

18:16 and he drave them from the judgment seat.

18:17 then all the greeks took sosthenes, the chief ruler of the
synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. and gallio cared for
none of those things.

18:18 and paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and then
took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into syria, and with
him priscilla and aquila; having shorn his head in cenchrea: for he
had a vow.

18:19 and he came to ephesus, and left them there: but he himself
entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the jews.

18:20 when they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he
consented not; 18:21 but bade them farewell, saying, i must by all
means keep this feast that cometh in jerusalem: but i will return
again unto you, if god will. and he sailed from ephesus.

18:22 and when he had landed at caesarea, and gone up, and saluted the
church, he went down to antioch.

18:23 and after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went
over all the country of galatia and phrygia in order, strengthening
all the disciples.

18:24 and a certain jew named apollos, born at alexandria, an eloquent
man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to ephesus.

18:25 this man was instructed in the way of the lord; and being
fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of
the lord, knowing only the baptism of john.

18:26 and he began to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when aquila
and priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto
him the way of god more perfectly.

18:27 and when he was disposed to pass into achaia, the brethren
wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive him: who, when he was come,
helped them much which had believed through grace: 18:28 for he
mightily convinced the jews, and that publickly, shewing by the
scriptures that jesus was christ.

19:1 and it came to pass, that, while apollos was at corinth, paul
having passed through the upper coasts came to ephesus: and finding
certain disciples, 19:2 he said unto them, have ye received the holy
ghost since ye believed?  and they said unto him, we have not so much
as heard whether there be any holy ghost.

19:3 and he said unto them, unto what then were ye baptized? and they
said, unto john's baptism.

19:4 then said paul, john verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him
which should come after him, that is, on christ jesus.

19:5 when they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the lord
jesus.

19:6 and when paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy ghost came
on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.

19:7 and all the men were about twelve.

19:8 and he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of
three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the
kingdom of god.

19:9 but when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil
of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated
the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one tyrannus.

19:10 and this continued by the space of two years; so that all they
which dwelt in asia heard the word of the lord jesus, both jews and
greeks.

19:11 and god wrought special miracles by the hands of paul: 19:12 so
that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons,
and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of
them.

19:13 then certain of the vagabond jews, exorcists, took upon them to
call over them which had evil spirits the name of the lord jesus,
saying, we adjure you by jesus whom paul preacheth.

19:14 and there were seven sons of one sceva, a jew, and chief of the
priests, which did so.

19:15 and the evil spirit answered and said, jesus i know, and paul i
know; but who are ye?  19:16 and the man in whom the evil spirit was
leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that
they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

19:17 and this was known to all the jews and greeks also dwelling at
ephesus; and fear fell on them all, and the name of the lord jesus was
magnified.

19:18 and many that believed came, and confessed, and shewed their
deeds.

19:19 many of them also which used curious arts brought their books
together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price
of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.

19:20 so mightily grew the word of god and prevailed.

19:21 after these things were ended, paul purposed in the spirit, when
he had passed through macedonia and achaia, to go to jerusalem,
saying, after i have been there, i must also see rome.

19:22 so he sent into macedonia two of them that ministered unto him,
timotheus and erastus; but he himself stayed in asia for a season.

19:23 and the same time there arose no small stir about that way.

19:24 for a certain man named demetrius, a silversmith, which made
silver shrines for diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen;
19:25 whom he called together with the workmen of like occupation, and
said, sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth.

19:26 moreover ye see and hear, that not alone at ephesus, but almost
throughout all asia, this paul hath persuaded and turned away much
people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands: 19:27
so that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but
also that the temple of the great goddess diana should be despised,
and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all asia and the world
worshippeth.

19:28 and when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and
cried out, saying, great is diana of the ephesians.

19:29 and the whole city was filled with confusion: and having caught
gaius and aristarchus, men of macedonia, paul's companions in travel,
they rushed with one accord into the theatre.

19:30 and when paul would have entered in unto the people, the
disciples suffered him not.

19:31 and certain of the chief of asia, which were his friends, sent
unto him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the
theatre.

19:32 some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the
assembly was confused: and the more part knew not wherefore they were
come together.

19:33 and they drew alexander out of the multitude, the jews putting
him forward. and alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made
his defence unto the people.

19:34 but when they knew that he was a jew, all with one voice about
the space of two hours cried out, great is diana of the ephesians.

19:35 and when the townclerk had appeased the people, he said, ye men
of ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of
the ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess diana, and of the
image which fell down from jupiter?  19:36 seeing then that these
things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do
nothing rashly.

19:37 for ye have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers
of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.

19:38 wherefore if demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him,
have a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are
deputies: let them implead one another.

19:39 but if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall
be determined in a lawful assembly.

19:40 for we are in danger to be called in question for this day's
uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this
concourse.

19:41 and when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.

20:1 and after the uproar was ceased, paul called unto him the
disciples, and embraced them, and departed for to go into macedonia.

20:2 and when he had gone over those parts, and had given them much
exhortation, he came into greece, 20:3 and there abode three months.
and when the jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into
syria, he purposed to return through macedonia.

20:4 and there accompanied him into asia sopater of berea; and of the
thessalonians, aristarchus and secundus; and gaius of derbe, and
timotheus; and of asia, tychicus and trophimus.

20:5 these going before tarried for us at troas.

20:6 and we sailed away from philippi after the days of unleavened
bread, and came unto them to troas in five days; where we abode seven
days.

20:7 and upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came
together to break bread, paul preached unto them, ready to depart on
the morrow; and continued his speech until midnight.

20:8 and there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were
gathered together.

20:9 and there sat in a window a certain young man named eutychus,
being fallen into a deep sleep: and as paul was long preaching, he
sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken
up dead.

20:10 and paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him said,
trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him.

20:11 when he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and
eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he
departed.

20:12 and they brought the young man alive, and were not a little
comforted.

20:13 and we went before to ship, and sailed unto assos, there
intending to take in paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to
go afoot.

20:14 and when he met with us at assos, we took him in, and came to
mitylene.

20:15 and we sailed thence, and came the next day over against chios;
and the next day we arrived at samos, and tarried at trogyllium; and
the next day we came to miletus.

20:16 for paul had determined to sail by ephesus, because he would not
spend the time in asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for him, to
be at jerusalem the day of pentecost.

20:17 and from miletus he sent to ephesus, and called the elders of
the church.

20:18 and when they were come to him, he said unto them, ye know, from
the first day that i came into asia, after what manner i have been
with you at all seasons, 20:19 serving the lord with all humility of
mind, and with many tears, and temptations, which befell me by the
lying in wait of the jews: 20:20 and how i kept back nothing that was
profitable unto you, but have shewed you, and have taught you
publickly, and from house to house, 20:21 testifying both to the jews,
and also to the greeks, repentance toward god, and faith toward our
lord jesus christ.

20:22 and now, behold, i go bound in the spirit unto jerusalem, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there: 20:23 save that the
holy ghost witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions
abide me.

20:24 but none of these things move me, neither count i my life dear
unto myself, so that i might finish my course with joy, and the
ministry, which i have received of the lord jesus, to testify the
gospel of the grace of god.

20:25 and now, behold, i know that ye all, among whom i have gone
preaching the kingdom of god, shall see my face no more.

20:26 wherefore i take you to record this day, that i am pure from the
blood of all men.

20:27 for i have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of
god.

20:28 take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over
the which the holy ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church
of god, which he hath purchased with his own blood.

20:29 for i know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

20:30 also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them.

20:31 therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years
i ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.

20:32 and now, brethren, i commend you to god, and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance
among all them which are sanctified.

20:33 i have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel.

20:34 yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered unto
my necessities, and to them that were with me.

20:35 i have shewed you all things, how that so labouring ye ought to
support the weak, and to remember the words of the lord jesus, how he
said, it is more blessed to give than to receive.

20:36 and when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with
them all.

20:37 and they all wept sore, and fell on paul's neck, and kissed him,
20:38 sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they
should see his face no more. and they accompanied him unto the ship.

21:1 and it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had
launched, we came with a straight course unto coos, and the day
following unto rhodes, and from thence unto patara: 21:2 and finding a
ship sailing over unto phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.

21:3 now when we had discovered cyprus, we left it on the left hand,
and sailed into syria, and landed at tyre: for there the ship was to
unlade her burden.

21:4 and finding disciples, we tarried there seven days: who said to
paul through the spirit, that he should not go up to jerusalem.

21:5 and when we had accomplished those days, we departed and went our
way; and they all brought us on our way, with wives and children, till
we were out of the city: and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed.

21:6 and when we had taken our leave one of another, we took ship; and
they returned home again.

21:7 and when we had finished our course from tyre, we came to
ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.

21:8 and the next day we that were of paul's company departed, and
came unto caesarea: and we entered into the house of philip the
evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode with him.

21:9 and the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.

21:10 and as we tarried there many days, there came down from judaea a
certain prophet, named agabus.

21:11 and when he was come unto us, he took paul's girdle, and bound
his own hands and feet, and said, thus saith the holy ghost, so shall
the jews at jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and shall
deliver him into the hands of the gentiles.

21:12 and when we heard these things, both we, and they of that place,
besought him not to go up to jerusalem.

21:13 then paul answered, what mean ye to weep and to break mine
heart?  for i am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at
jerusalem for the name of the lord jesus.

21:14 and when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, the will
of the lord be done.

21:15 and after those days we took up our carriages, and went up to
jerusalem.

21:16 there went with us also certain of the disciples of caesarea,
and brought with them one mnason of cyprus, an old disciple, with whom
we should lodge.

21:17 and when we were come to jerusalem, the brethren received us
gladly.

21:18 and the day following paul went in with us unto james; and all
the elders were present.

21:19 and when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what
things god had wrought among the gentiles by his ministry.

21:20 and when they heard it, they glorified the lord, and said unto
him, thou seest, brother, how many thousands of jews there are which
believe; and they are all zealous of the law: 21:21 and they are
informed of thee, that thou teachest all the jews which are among the
gentiles to forsake moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise
their children, neither to walk after the customs.

21:22 what is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together:
for they will hear that thou art come.

21:23 do therefore this that we say to thee: we have four men which
have a vow on them; 21:24 them take, and purify thyself with them, and
be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may
know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning thee,
are nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest
the law.

21:25 as touching the gentiles which believe, we have written and
concluded that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep
themselves from things offered to idols, and from blood, and from
strangled, and from fornication.

21:26 then paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with
them entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the
days of purification, until that an offering should be offered for
every one of them.

21:27 and when the seven days were almost ended, the jews which were
of asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people,
and laid hands on him, 21:28 crying out, men of israel, help: this is
the man, that teacheth all men every where against the people, and the
law, and this place: and further brought greeks also into the temple,
and hath polluted this holy place.

21:29 (for they had seen before with him in the city trophimus an
ephesian, whom they supposed that paul had brought into the temple.)
21:30 and all the city was moved, and the people ran together: and
they took paul, and drew him out of the temple: and forthwith the
doors were shut.

21:31 and as they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the chief
captain of the band, that all jerusalem was in an uproar.

21:32 who immediately took soldiers and centurions, and ran down unto
them: and when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, they left
beating of paul.

21:33 then the chief captain came near, and took him, and commanded
him to be bound with two chains; and demanded who he was, and what he
had done.

21:34 and some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude: and
when he could not know the certainty for the tumult, he commanded him
to be carried into the castle.

21:35 and when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne
of the soldiers for the violence of the people.

21:36 for the multitude of the people followed after, crying, away
with him.

21:37 and as paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the
chief captain, may i speak unto thee? who said, canst thou speak
greek?  21:38 art not thou that egyptian, which before these days
madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand
men that were murderers?  21:39 but paul said, i am a man which am a
jew of tarsus, a city in cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and, i
beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people.

21:40 and when he had given him licence, paul stood on the stairs, and
beckoned with the hand unto the people. and when there was made a
great silence, he spake unto them in the hebrew tongue, saying, 22:1
men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defence which i make now unto
you.

22:2 (and when they heard that he spake in the hebrew tongue to them,
they kept the more silence: and he saith,) 22:3 i am verily a man
which am a jew, born in tarsus, a city in cilicia, yet brought up in
this city at the feet of gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect
manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous toward god, as ye
all are this day.

22:4 and i persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering
into prisons both men and women.

22:5 as also the high priest doth bear me witness, and all the estate
of the elders: from whom also i received letters unto the brethren,
and went to damascus, to bring them which were there bound unto
jerusalem, for to be punished.

22:6 and it came to pass, that, as i made my journey, and was come
nigh unto damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a
great light round about me.

22:7 and i fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me,
saul, saul, why persecutest thou me?  22:8 and i answered, who art
thou, lord? and he said unto me, i am jesus of nazareth, whom thou
persecutest.

22:9 and they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid;
but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me.

22:10 and i said, what shall i do, lord? and the lord said unto me,
arise, and go into damascus; and there it shall be told thee of all
things which are appointed for thee to do.

22:11 and when i could not see for the glory of that light, being led
by the hand of them that were with me, i came into damascus.

22:12 and one ananias, a devout man according to the law, having a
good report of all the jews which dwelt there, 22:13 came unto me, and
stood, and said unto me, brother saul, receive thy sight. and the same
hour i looked up upon him.

22:14 and he said, the god of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou
shouldest know his will, and see that just one, and shouldest hear the
voice of his mouth.

22:15 for thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast
seen and heard.

22:16 and now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins, calling on the name of the lord.

22:17 and it came to pass, that, when i was come again to jerusalem,
even while i prayed in the temple, i was in a trance; 22:18 and saw
him saying unto me, make haste, and get thee quickly out of jerusalem:
for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.

22:19 and i said, lord, they know that i imprisoned and beat in every
synagogue them that believed on thee: 22:20 and when the blood of thy
martyr stephen was shed, i also was standing by, and consenting unto
his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.

22:21 and he said unto me, depart: for i will send thee far hence unto
the gentiles.

22:22 and they gave him audience unto this word, and then lifted up
their voices, and said, away with such a fellow from the earth: for it
is not fit that he should live.

22:23 and as they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw
dust into the air, 22:24 the chief captain commanded him to be brought
into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by scourging;
that he might know wherefore they cried so against him.

22:25 and as they bound him with thongs, paul said unto the centurion
that stood by, is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a roman,
and uncondemned?  22:26 when the centurion heard that, he went and
told the chief captain, saying, take heed what thou doest: for this
man is a roman.

22:27 then the chief captain came, and said unto him, tell me, art
thou a roman? he said, yea.

22:28 and the chief captain answered, with a great sum obtained i this
freedom. and paul said, but i was free born.

22:29 then straightway they departed from him which should have
examined him: and the chief captain also was afraid, after he knew
that he was a roman, and because he had bound him.

22:30 on the morrow, because he would have known the certainty
wherefore he was accused of the jews, he loosed him from his bands,
and commanded the chief priests and all their council to appear, and
brought paul down, and set him before them.

23:1 and paul, earnestly beholding the council, said, men and
brethren, i have lived in all good conscience before god until this
day.

23:2 and the high priest ananias commanded them that stood by him to
smite him on the mouth.

23:3 then said paul unto him, god shall smite thee, thou whited wall:
for sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be
smitten contrary to the law?  23:4 and they that stood by said,
revilest thou god's high priest?  23:5 then said paul, i wist not,
brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is written, thou shalt
not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.

23:6 but when paul perceived that the one part were sadducees, and the
other pharisees, he cried out in the council, men and brethren, i am a
pharisee, the son of a pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the
dead i am called in question.

23:7 and when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the
pharisees and the sadducees: and the multitude was divided.

23:8 for the sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither
angel, nor spirit: but the pharisees confess both.

23:9 and there arose a great cry: and the scribes that were of the
pharisees' part arose, and strove, saying, we find no evil in this
man: but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight
against god.

23:10 and when there arose a great dissension, the chief captain,
fearing lest paul should have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded
the soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from among them, and
to bring him into the castle.

23:11 and the night following the lord stood by him, and said, be of
good cheer, paul: for as thou hast testified of me in jerusalem, so
must thou bear witness also at rome.

23:12 and when it was day, certain of the jews banded together, and
bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had killed paul.

23:13 and they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy.

23:14 and they came to the chief priests and elders, and said, we have
bound ourselves under a great curse, that we will eat nothing until we
have slain paul.

23:15 now therefore ye with the council signify to the chief captain
that he bring him down unto you to morrow, as though ye would enquire
something more perfectly concerning him: and we, or ever he come near,
are ready to kill him.

23:16 and when paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait, he
went and entered into the castle, and told paul.

23:17 then paul called one of the centurions unto him, and said, bring
this young man unto the chief captain: for he hath a certain thing to
tell him.

23:18 so he took him, and brought him to the chief captain, and said,
paul the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to bring this
young man unto thee, who hath something to say unto thee.

23:19 then the chief captain took him by the hand, and went with him
aside privately, and asked him, what is that thou hast to tell me?
23:20 and he said, the jews have agreed to desire thee that thou
wouldest bring down paul to morrow into the council, as though they
would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly.

23:21 but do not thou yield unto them: for there lie in wait for him
of them more than forty men, which have bound themselves with an oath,
that they will neither eat nor drink till they have killed him: and
now are they ready, looking for a promise from thee.

23:22 so the chief captain then let the young man depart, and charged
him, see thou tell no man that thou hast shewed these things to me.

23:23 and he called unto him two centurions, saying, make ready two
hundred soldiers to go to caesarea, and horsemen threescore and ten,
and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night; 23:24 and
provide them beasts, that they may set paul on, and bring him safe
unto felix the governor.

23:25 and he wrote a letter after this manner: 23:26 claudius lysias
unto the most excellent governor felix sendeth greeting.

23:27 this man was taken of the jews, and should have been killed of
them: then came i with an army, and rescued him, having understood
that he was a roman.

23:28 and when i would have known the cause wherefore they accused
him, i brought him forth into their council: 23:29 whom i perceived to
be accused of questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his
charge worthy of death or of bonds.

23:30 and when it was told me how that the jews laid wait for the man,
i sent straightway to thee, and gave commandment to his accusers also
to say before thee what they had against him. farewell.

23:31 then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took paul, and
brought him by night to antipatris.

23:32 on the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and
returned to the castle: 23:33 who, when they came to caesarea and
delivered the epistle to the governor, presented paul also before him.

23:34 and when the governor had read the letter, he asked of what
province he was. and when he understood that he was of cilicia; 23:35
i will hear thee, said he, when thine accusers are also come. and he
commanded him to be kept in herod's judgment hall.

24:1 and after five days ananias the high priest descended with the
elders, and with a certain orator named tertullus, who informed the
governor against paul.

24:2 and when he was called forth, tertullus began to accuse him,
saying, seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very
worthy deeds are done unto this nation by thy providence, 24:3 we
accept it always, and in all places, most noble felix, with all
thankfulness.

24:4 notwithstanding, that i be not further tedious unto thee, i pray
thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few words.

24:5 for we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of
sedition among all the jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of
the sect of the nazarenes: 24:6 who also hath gone about to profane
the temple: whom we took, and would have judged according to our law.

24:7 but the chief captain lysias came upon us, and with great
violence took him away out of our hands, 24:8 commanding his accusers
to come unto thee: by examining of whom thyself mayest take knowledge
of all these things, whereof we accuse him.

24:9 and the jews also assented, saying that these things were so.

24:10 then paul, after that the governor had beckoned unto him to
speak, answered, forasmuch as i know that thou hast been of many years
a judge unto this nation, i do the more cheerfully answer for myself:
24:11 because that thou mayest understand, that there are yet but
twelve days since i went up to jerusalem for to worship.

24:12 and they neither found me in the temple disputing with any man,
neither raising up the people, neither in the synagogues, nor in the
city: 24:13 neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse
me.

24:14 but this i confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
heresy, so worship i the god of my fathers, believing all things which
are written in the law and in the prophets: 24:15 and have hope toward
god, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.

24:16 and herein do i exercise myself, to have always a conscience
void to offence toward god, and toward men.

24:17 now after many years i came to bring alms to my nation, and
offerings.

24:18 whereupon certain jews from asia found me purified in the
temple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult.

24:19 who ought to have been here before thee, and object, if they had
ought against me.

24:20 or else let these same here say, if they have found any evil
doing in me, while i stood before the council, 24:21 except it be for
this one voice, that i cried standing among them, touching the
resurrection of the dead i am called in question by you this day.

24:22 and when felix heard these things, having more perfect knowledge
of that way, he deferred them, and said, when lysias the chief captain
shall come down, i will know the uttermost of your matter.

24:23 and he commanded a centurion to keep paul, and to let him have
liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to
minister or come unto him.

24:24 and after certain days, when felix came with his wife drusilla,
which was a jewess, he sent for paul, and heard him concerning the
faith in christ.

24:25 and as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, felix trembled, and answered, go thy way for this time; when i
have a convenient season, i will call for thee.

24:26 he hoped also that money should have been given him of paul,
that he might loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and
communed with him.

24:27 but after two years porcius festus came into felix' room: and
felix, willing to shew the jews a pleasure, left paul bound.

25:1 now when festus was come into the province, after three days he
ascended from caesarea to jerusalem.

25:2 then the high priest and the chief of the jews informed him
against paul, and besought him, 25:3 and desired favour against him,
that he would send for him to jerusalem, laying wait in the way to
kill him.

25:4 but festus answered, that paul should be kept at caesarea, and
that he himself would depart shortly thither.

25:5 let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down
with me, and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness in him.

25:6 and when he had tarried among them more than ten days, he went
down unto caesarea; and the next day sitting on the judgment seat
commanded paul to be brought.

25:7 and when he was come, the jews which came down from jerusalem
stood round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against paul,
which they could not prove.

25:8 while he answered for himself, neither against the law of the
jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against caesar, have i
offended any thing at all.

25:9 but festus, willing to do the jews a pleasure, answered paul, and
said, wilt thou go up to jerusalem, and there be judged of these
things before me?  25:10 then said paul, i stand at caesar's judgment
seat, where i ought to be judged: to the jews have i done no wrong, as
thou very well knowest.

25:11 for if i be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of
death, i refuse not to die: but if there be none of these things
whereof these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them. i appeal
unto caesar.

25:12 then festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered,
hast thou appealed unto caesar? unto caesar shalt thou go.

25:13 and after certain days king agrippa and bernice came unto
caesarea to salute festus.

25:14 and when they had been there many days, festus declared paul's
cause unto the king, saying, there is a certain man left in bonds by
felix: 25:15 about whom, when i was at jerusalem, the chief priests
and the elders of the jews informed me, desiring to have judgment
against him.

25:16 to whom i answered, it is not the manner of the romans to
deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused have the
accusers face to face, and have licence to answer for himself
concerning the crime laid against him.

25:17 therefore, when they were come hither, without any delay on the
morrow i sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought
forth.

25:18 against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none
accusation of such things as i supposed: 25:19 but had certain
questions against him of their own superstition, and of one jesus,
which was dead, whom paul affirmed to be alive.

25:20 and because i doubted of such manner of questions, i asked him
whether he would go to jerusalem, and there be judged of these
matters.

25:21 but when paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of
augustus, i commanded him to be kept till i might send him to caesar.

25:22 then agrippa said unto festus, i would also hear the man myself.
to morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.

25:23 and on the morrow, when agrippa was come, and bernice, with
great pomp, and was entered into the place of hearing, with the chief
captains, and principal men of the city, at festus' commandment paul
was brought forth.

25:24 and festus said, king agrippa, and all men which are here
present with us, ye see this man, about whom all the multitude of the
jews have dealt with me, both at jerusalem, and also here, crying that
he ought not to live any longer.

25:25 but when i found that he had committed nothing worthy of death,
and that he himself hath appealed to augustus, i have determined to
send him.

25:26 of whom i have no certain thing to write unto my lord. wherefore
i have brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, o king
agrippa, that, after examination had, i might have somewhat to write.

25:27 for it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not
withal to signify the crimes laid against him.

26:1 then agrippa said unto paul, thou art permitted to speak for
thyself.

then paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself: 26:2 i
think myself happy, king agrippa, because i shall answer for myself
this day before thee touching all the things whereof i am accused of
the jews: 26:3 especially because i know thee to be expert in all
customs and questions which are among the jews: wherefore i beseech
thee to hear me patiently.

26:4 my manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among
mine own nation at jerusalem, know all the jews; 26:5 which knew me
from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most
straitest sect of our religion i lived a pharisee.

26:6 and now i stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of
god, unto our fathers: 26:7 unto which promise our twelve tribes,
instantly serving god day and night, hope to come. for which hope's
sake, king agrippa, i am accused of the jews.

26:8 why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that god
should raise the dead?  26:9 i verily thought with myself, that i
ought to do many things contrary to the name of jesus of nazareth.

26:10 which thing i also did in jerusalem: and many of the saints did
i shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests;
and when they were put to death, i gave my voice against them.

26:11 and i punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them
to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, i persecuted
them even unto strange cities.

26:12 whereupon as i went to damascus with authority and commission
from the chief priests, 26:13 at midday, o king, i saw in the way a
light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round
about me and them which journeyed with me.

26:14 and when we were all fallen to the earth, i heard a voice
speaking unto me, and saying in the hebrew tongue, saul, saul, why
persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

26:15 and i said, who art thou, lord? and he said, i am jesus whom
thou persecutest.

26:16 but rise, and stand upon thy feet: for i have appeared unto thee
for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these
things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which i will
appear unto thee; 26:17 delivering thee from the people, and from the
gentiles, unto whom now i send thee, 26:18 to open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto
god, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them which are sanctified by faith that is in me.

26:19 whereupon, o king agrippa, i was not disobedient unto the
heavenly vision: 26:20 but shewed first unto them of damascus, and at
jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of judaea, and then to the
gentiles, that they should repent and turn to god, and do works meet
for repentance.

26:21 for these causes the jews caught me in the temple, and went
about to kill me.

26:22 having therefore obtained help of god, i continue unto this day,
witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than
those which the prophets and moses did say should come: 26:23 that
christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise
from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the
gentiles.

26:24 and as he thus spake for himself, festus said with a loud voice,
paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad.

26:25 but he said, i am not mad, most noble festus; but speak forth
the words of truth and soberness.

26:26 for the king knoweth of these things, before whom also i speak
freely: for i am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from
him; for this thing was not done in a corner.

26:27 king agrippa, believest thou the prophets? i know that thou
believest.

26:28 then agrippa said unto paul, almost thou persuadest me to be a
christian.

26:29 and paul said, i would to god, that not only thou, but also all
that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as i am,
except these bonds.

26:30 and when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the governor,
and bernice, and they that sat with them: 26:31 and when they were
gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, this man doeth
nothing worthy of death or of bonds.

26:32 then said agrippa unto festus, this man might have been set at
liberty, if he had not appealed unto caesar.

27:1 and when it was determined that we should sail into italy, they
delivered paul and certain other prisoners unto one named julius, a
centurion of augustus' band.

27:2 and entering into a ship of adramyttium, we launched, meaning to
sail by the coasts of asia; one aristarchus, a macedonian of
thessalonica, being with us.

27:3 and the next day we touched at sidon. and julius courteously
entreated paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh
himself.

27:4 and when we had launched from thence, we sailed under cyprus,
because the winds were contrary.

27:5 and when we had sailed over the sea of cilicia and pamphylia, we
came to myra, a city of lycia.

27:6 and there the centurion found a ship of alexandria sailing into
italy; and he put us therein.

27:7 and when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come
over against cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under crete,
over against salmone; 27:8 and, hardly passing it, came unto a place
which is called the fair havens; nigh whereunto was the city of lasea.

27:9 now when much time was spent, and when sailing was now dangerous,
because the fast was now already past, paul admonished them, 27:10 and
said unto them, sirs, i perceive that this voyage will be with hurt
and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our
lives.

27:11 nevertheless the centurion believed the master and the owner of
the ship, more than those things which were spoken by paul.

27:12 and because the haven was not commodious to winter in, the more
part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might attain
to phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven of crete, and lieth
toward the south west and north west.

27:13 and when the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had
obtained their purpose, loosing thence, they sailed close by crete.

27:14 but not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind,
called euroclydon.

27:15 and when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the
wind, we let her drive.

27:16 and running under a certain island which is called clauda, we
had much work to come by the boat: 27:17 which when they had taken up,
they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should
fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven.

27:18 and we being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next day
they lightened the ship; 27:19 and the third day we cast out with our
own hands the tackling of the ship.

27:20 and when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no
small tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be saved was then
taken away.

27:21 but after long abstinence paul stood forth in the midst of them,
and said, sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed
from crete, and to have gained this harm and loss.

27:22 and now i exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no
loss of any man's life among you, but of the ship.

27:23 for there stood by me this night the angel of god, whose i am,
and whom i serve, 27:24 saying, fear not, paul; thou must be brought
before caesar: and, lo, god hath given thee all them that sail with
thee.

27:25 wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for i believe god, that it
shall be even as it was told me.

27:26 howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island.

27:27 but when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven up and
down in adria, about midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near
to some country; 27:28 and sounded, and found it twenty fathoms: and
when they had gone a little further, they sounded again, and found it
fifteen fathoms.

27:29 then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast
four anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day.

27:30 and as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they
had let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would
have cast anchors out of the foreship, 27:31 paul said to the
centurion and to the soldiers, except these abide in the ship, ye
cannot be saved.

27:32 then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her
fall off.

27:33 and while the day was coming on, paul besought them all to take
meat, saying, this day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and
continued fasting, having taken nothing.

27:34 wherefore i pray you to take some meat: for this is for your
health: for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you.

27:35 and when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to
god in presence of them all: and when he had broken it, he began to
eat.

27:36 then were they all of good cheer, and they also took some meat.

27:37 and we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and
sixteen souls.

27:38 and when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and
cast out the wheat into the sea.

27:39 and when it was day, they knew not the land: but they discovered
a certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it
were possible, to thrust in the ship.

27:40 and when they had taken up the anchors, they committed
themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up
the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.

27:41 and falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship
aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the
hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves.

27:42 and the soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of
them should swim out, and escape.

27:43 but the centurion, willing to save paul, kept them from their
purpose; and commanded that they which could swim should cast
themselves first into the sea, and get to land: 27:44 and the rest,
some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship.

and so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land.

28:1 and when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was
called melita.

28:2 and the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness: for they
kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present
rain, and because of the cold.

28:3 and when paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on
the fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his
hand.

28:4 and when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand,
they said among themselves, no doubt this man is a murderer, whom,
though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live.

28:5 and he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm.

28:6 howbeit they looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down
dead suddenly: but after they had looked a great while, and saw no
harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a
god.

28:7 in the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the
island, whose name was publius; who received us, and lodged us three
days courteously.

28:8 and it came to pass, that the father of publius lay sick of a
fever and of a bloody flux: to whom paul entered in, and prayed, and
laid his hands on him, and healed him.

28:9 so when this was done, others also, which had diseases in the
island, came, and were healed: 28:10 who also honoured us with many
honours; and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were
necessary.

28:11 and after three months we departed in a ship of alexandria,
which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was castor and pollux.

28:12 and landing at syracuse, we tarried there three days.

28:13 and from thence we fetched a compass, and came to rhegium: and
after one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to
puteoli: 28:14 where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with
them seven days: and so we went toward rome.

28:15 and from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to
meet us as far as appii forum, and the three taverns: whom when paul
saw, he thanked god, and took courage.

28:16 and when we came to rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners
to the captain of the guard: but paul was suffered to dwell by himself
with a soldier that kept him.

28:17 and it came to pass, that after three days paul called the chief
of the jews together: and when they were come together, he said unto
them, men and brethren, though i have committed nothing against the
people, or customs of our fathers, yet was i delivered prisoner from
jerusalem into the hands of the romans.

28:18 who, when they had examined me, would have let me go, because
there was no cause of death in me.

28:19 but when the jews spake against it, i was constrained to appeal
unto caesar; not that i had ought to accuse my nation of.

28:20 for this cause therefore have i called for you, to see you, and
to speak with you: because that for the hope of israel i am bound with
this chain.

28:21 and they said unto him, we neither received letters out of
judaea concerning thee, neither any of the brethren that came shewed
or spake any harm of thee.

28:22 but we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as
concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.

28:23 and when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him
into his lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of
god, persuading them concerning jesus, both out of the law of moses,
and out of the prophets, from morning till evening.

28:24 and some believed the things which were spoken, and some
believed not.

28:25 and when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after
that paul had spoken one word, well spake the holy ghost by esaias the
prophet unto our fathers, 28:26 saying, go unto this people, and say,
hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall
see, and not perceive: 28:27 for the heart of this people is waxed
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they
closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and i
should heal them.

28:28 be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of god is
sent unto the gentiles, and that they will hear it.

28:29 and when he had said these words, the jews departed, and had
great reasoning among themselves.

28:30 and paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and
received all that came in unto him, 28:31 preaching the kingdom of
god, and teaching those things which concern the lord jesus christ,
with all confidence, no man forbidding him.




the epistle of paul the apostle to the romans


1:1 paul, a servant of jesus christ, called to be an apostle,
separated unto the gospel of god, 1:2 (which he had promised afore by
his prophets in the holy scriptures,) 1:3 concerning his son jesus
christ our lord, which was made of the seed of david according to the
flesh; 1:4 and declared to be the son of god with power, according to
the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead: 1:5 by whom
we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the faith
among all nations, for his name: 1:6 among whom are ye also the called
of jesus christ: 1:7 to all that be in rome, beloved of god, called to
be saints: grace to you and peace from god our father, and the lord
jesus christ.

1:8 first, i thank my god through jesus christ for you all, that your
faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.

1:9 for god is my witness, whom i serve with my spirit in the gospel
of his son, that without ceasing i make mention of you always in my
prayers; 1:10 making request, if by any means now at length i might
have a prosperous journey by the will of god to come unto you.

1:11 for i long to see you, that i may impart unto you some spiritual
gift, to the end ye may be established; 1:12 that is, that i may be
comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.

1:13 now i would not have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes i
purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto,) that i might have
some fruit among you also, even as among other gentiles.

1:14 i am debtor both to the greeks, and to the barbarians; both to
the wise, and to the unwise.

1:15 so, as much as in me is, i am ready to preach the gospel to you
that are at rome also.

1:16 for i am not ashamed of the gospel of christ: for it is the power
of god unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the jew first,
and also to the greek.

1:17 for therein is the righteousness of god revealed from faith to
faith: as it is written, the just shall live by faith.

1:18 for the wrath of god is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness; 1:19 because that which may be known of god is
manifest in them; for god hath shewed it unto them.

1:20 for the invisible things of him from the creation of the world
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and godhead; so that they are without excuse: 1:21
because that, when they knew god, they glorified him not as god,
neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart was darkened.

1:22 professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, 1:23 and
changed the glory of the uncorruptible god into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping
things.

1:24 wherefore god also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts
of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves:
1:25 who changed the truth of god into a lie, and worshipped and
served the creature more than the creator, who is blessed for ever.
amen.

1:26 for this cause god gave them up unto vile affections: for even
their women did change the natural use into that which is against
nature: 1:27 and likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the
woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working
that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of
their error which was meet.

1:28 and even as they did not like to retain god in their knowledge,
god gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are
not convenient; 1:29 being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy,
murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, 1:30 backbiters, haters
of god, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things,
disobedient to parents, 1:31 without understanding, covenantbreakers,
without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: 1:32 who knowing
the judgment of god, that they which commit such things are worthy of
death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.

2:1 therefore thou art inexcusable, o man, whosoever thou art that
judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself;
for thou that judgest doest the same things.

2:2 but we are sure that the judgment of god is according to truth
against them which commit such things.

2:3 and thinkest thou this, o man, that judgest them which do such
things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of
god?  2:4 or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance
and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of god leadeth thee
to repentance?  2:5 but after thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and
revelation of the righteous judgment of god; 2:6 who will render to
every man according to his deeds: 2:7 to them who by patient
continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality,
eternal life: 2:8 but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, 2:9
tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of
the jew first, and also of the gentile; 2:10 but glory, honour, and
peace, to every man that worketh good, to the jew first, and also to
the gentile: 2:11 for there is no respect of persons with god.

2:12 for as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without
law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law;
2:13 (for not the hearers of the law are just before god, but the
doers of the law shall be justified.

2:14 for when the gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto
themselves: 2:15 which shew the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
mean while accusing or else excusing one another;) 2:16 in the day
when god shall judge the secrets of men by jesus christ according to
my gospel.

2:17 behold, thou art called a jew, and restest in the law, and makest
thy boast of god, 2:18 and knowest his will, and approvest the things
that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law; 2:19 and art
confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light of them
which are in darkness, 2:20 an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of
babes, which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law.

2:21 thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?
thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal?  2:22
thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit
adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?  2:23
thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law
dishonourest thou god?  2:24 for the name of god is blasphemed among
the gentiles through you, as it is written.

2:25 for circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if
thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.

2:26 therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the
law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?  2:27
and shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law,
judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the
law?  2:28 for he is not a jew, which is one outwardly; neither is
that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: 2:29 but he is a
jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in
the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of
god.

3:1 what advantage then hath the jew? or what profit is there of
circumcision?  3:2 much every way: chiefly, because that unto them
were committed the oracles of god.

3:3 for what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the
faith of god without effect?  3:4 god forbid: yea, let god be true,
but every man a liar; as it is written, that thou mightest be
justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged.

3:5 but if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of god, what
shall we say? is god unrighteous who taketh vengeance? (i speak as a
man) 3:6 god forbid: for then how shall god judge the world?  3:7 for
if the truth of god hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory;
why yet am i also judged as a sinner?  3:8 and not rather, (as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,) let us do
evil, that good may come? whose damnation is just.

3:9 what then? are we better than they? no, in no wise: for we have
before proved both jews and gentiles, that they are all under sin;
3:10 as it is written, there is none righteous, no, not one: 3:11
there is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after
god.

3:12 they are all gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

3:13 their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have
used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips: 3:14 whose mouth
is full of cursing and bitterness: 3:15 their feet are swift to shed
blood: 3:16 destruction and misery are in their ways: 3:17 and the way
of peace have they not known: 3:18 there is no fear of god before
their eyes.

3:19 now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to
them who are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all
the world may become guilty before god.

3:20 therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin.

3:21 but now the righteousness of god without the law is manifested,
being witnessed by the law and the prophets; 3:22 even the
righteousness of god which is by faith of jesus christ unto all and
upon all them that believe: for there is no difference: 3:23 for all
have sinned, and come short of the glory of god; 3:24 being justified
freely by his grace through the redemption that is in christ jesus:
3:25 whom god hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of god; 3:26 to declare, i say, at this
time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of
him which believeth in jesus.

3:27 where is boasting then? it is excluded. by what law? of works?
nay: but by the law of faith.

3:28 therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without
the deeds of the law.

3:29 is he the god of the jews only? is he not also of the gentiles?
yes, of the gentiles also: 3:30 seeing it is one god, which shall
justify the circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

3:31 do we then make void the law through faith? god forbid: yea, we
establish the law.

4:1 what shall we say then that abraham our father, as pertaining to
the flesh, hath found?  4:2 for if abraham were justified by works, he
hath whereof to glory; but not before god.

4:3 for what saith the scripture? abraham believed god, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness.

4:4 now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but
of debt.

4:5 but to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

4:6 even as david also describeth the blessedness of the man, unto
whom god imputeth righteousness without works, 4:7 saying, blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

4:8 blessed is the man to whom the lord will not impute sin.

4:9 cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon
the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was reckoned to abraham
for righteousness.

4:10 how was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in
uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

4:11 and he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that
he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not
circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also: 4:12
and the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision
only, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father
abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised.

4:13 for the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not
to abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the
righteousness of faith.

4:14 for if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void,
and the promise made of none effect: 4:15 because the law worketh
wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression.

4:16 therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end
the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is
of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of abraham; who is
the father of us all, 4:17 (as it is written, i have made thee a
father of many nations,) before him whom he believed, even god, who
quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though
they were.

4:18 who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the
father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, so shall
thy seed be.

4:19 and being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now
dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness
of sarah's womb: 4:20 he staggered not at the promise of god through
unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to god; 4:21 and being
fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to
perform.

4:22 and therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.

4:23 now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to
him; 4:24 but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe
on him that raised up jesus our lord from the dead; 4:25 who was
delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our
justification.

5:1 therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with god through
our lord jesus christ: 5:2 by whom also we have access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of god.

5:3 and not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that
tribulation worketh patience; 5:4 and patience, experience; and
experience, hope: 5:5 and hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of
god is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost which is given unto
us.

5:6 for when we were yet without strength, in due time christ died for
the ungodly.

5:7 for scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure
for a good man some would even dare to die.

5:8 but god commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet
sinners, christ died for us.

5:9 much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through him.

5:10 for if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to god by the
death of his son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his life.

5:11 and not only so, but we also joy in god through our lord jesus
christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.

5:12 wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: 5:13
(for until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when
there is no law.

5:14 nevertheless death reigned from adam to moses, even over them
that had not sinned after the similitude of adam's transgression, who
is the figure of him that was to come.

5:15 but not as the offence, so also is the free gift. for if through
the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of god, and the
gift by grace, which is by one man, jesus christ, hath abounded unto
many.

5:16 and not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many
offences unto justification.

5:17 for if by one man's offence death reigned by one; much more they
which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness
shall reign in life by one, jesus christ.)  5:18 therefore as by the
offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by
the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life.

5:19 for as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

5:20 moreover the law entered, that the offence might abound. but
where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: 5:21 that as sin hath
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness
unto eternal life by jesus christ our lord.

6:1 what shall we say then? shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound?  6:2 god forbid. how shall we, that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein?  6:3 know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized
into jesus christ were baptized into his death?  6:4 therefore we are
buried with him by baptism into death: that like as christ was raised
up from the dead by the glory of the father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life.

6:5 for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death,
we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: 6:6 knowing
this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

6:7 for he that is dead is freed from sin.

6:8 now if we be dead with christ, we believe that we shall also live
with him: 6:9 knowing that christ being raised from the dead dieth no
more; death hath no more dominion over him.

6:10 for in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he
liveth, he liveth unto god.

6:11 likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin,
but alive unto god through jesus christ our lord.

6:12 let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should
obey it in the lusts thereof.

6:13 neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin: but yield yourselves unto god, as those that are alive from
the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto god.

6:14 for sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under
the law, but under grace.

6:15 what then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but
under grace? god forbid.

6:16 know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey,
his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness?  6:17 but god be thanked, that ye were
the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered you.

6:18 being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of
righteousness.

6:19 i speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your
flesh: for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and
to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness.

6:20 for when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness.

6:21 what fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed?  for the end of those things is death.

6:22 but now being made free from sin, and become servants to god, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

6:23 for the wages of sin is death; but the gift of god is eternal
life through jesus christ our lord.

7:1 know ye not, brethren, (for i speak to them that know the law,)
how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?  7:2
for the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband
so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from
the law of her husband.

7:3 so then if, while her husband liveth, she be married to another
man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if her husband be dead,
she is free from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be
married to another man.

7:4 wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the
body of christ; that ye should be married to another, even to him who
is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto god.

7:5 for when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by
the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.

7:6 but now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we
were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the
oldness of the letter.

7:7 what shall we say then? is the law sin? god forbid. nay, i had not
known sin, but by the law: for i had not known lust, except the law
had said, thou shalt not covet.

7:8 but sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence. for without the law sin was dead.

7:9 for i was alive without the law once: but when the commandment
came, sin revived, and i died.

7:10 and the commandment, which was ordained to life, i found to be
unto death.

7:11 for sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by
it slew me.

7:12 wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just,
and good.

7:13 was then that which is good made death unto me? god forbid. but
sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is
good; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful.

7:14 for we know that the law is spiritual: but i am carnal, sold
under sin.

7:15 for that which i do i allow not: for what i would, that do i not;
but what i hate, that do i.

7:16 if then i do that which i would not, i consent unto the law that
it is good.

7:17 now then it is no more i that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.

7:18 for i know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good
thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which
is good i find not.

7:19 for the good that i would i do not: but the evil which i would
not, that i do.

7:20 now if i do that i would not, it is no more i that do it, but sin
that dwelleth in me.

7:21 i find then a law, that, when i would do good, evil is present
with me.

7:22 for i delight in the law of god after the inward man: 7:23 but i
see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.

7:24 o wretched man that i am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?  7:25 i thank god through jesus christ our lord. so then
with the mind i myself serve the law of god; but with the flesh the
law of sin.

8:1 there is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in christ
jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

8:2 for the law of the spirit of life in christ jesus hath made me
free from the law of sin and death.

8:3 for what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, god sending his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: 8:4 that the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit.

8:5 for they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh;
but they that are after the spirit the things of the spirit.

8:6 for to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded
is life and peace.

8:7 because the carnal mind is enmity against god: for it is not
subject to the law of god, neither indeed can be.

8:8 so then they that are in the flesh cannot please god.

8:9 but ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the
spirit of god dwell in you. now if any man have not the spirit of
christ, he is none of his.

8:10 and if christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the
spirit is life because of righteousness.

8:11 but if the spirit of him that raised up jesus from the dead dwell
in you, he that raised up christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his spirit that dwelleth in you.

8:12 therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh.

8:13 for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through
the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

8:14 for as many as are led by the spirit of god, they are the sons of
god.

8:15 for ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but
ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, abba, father.

8:16 the spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of god: 8:17 and if children, then heirs; heirs of god,
and joint-heirs with christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorified together.

8:18 for i reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

8:19 for the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the
manifestation of the sons of god.

8:20 for the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but
by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope, 8:21 because the
creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the children of god.

8:22 for we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in
pain together until now.

8:23 and not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits
of the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.

8:24 for we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for
what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?  8:25 but if we hope for
that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.

8:26 likewise the spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought: but the spirit itself maketh
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.

8:27 and he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the
spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the
will of god.

8:28 and we know that all things work together for good to them that
love god, to them who are the called according to his purpose.

8:29 for whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his son, that he might be the firstborn
among many brethren.

8:30 moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom
he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.

8:31 what shall we then say to these things? if god be for us, who can
be against us?  8:32 he that spared not his own son, but delivered him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things?  8:33 who shall lay any thing to the charge of god's elect? it
is god that justifieth.

8:34 who is he that condemneth? it is christ that died, yea rather,
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of god, who also
maketh intercession for us.

8:35 who shall separate us from the love of christ? shall tribulation,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword?  8:36 as it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day
long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.

8:37 nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him
that loved us.

8:38 for i am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
8:39 nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of god, which is in christ jesus our lord.

9:1 i say the truth in christ, i lie not, my conscience also bearing
me witness in the holy ghost, 9:2 that i have great heaviness and
continual sorrow in my heart.

9:3 for i could wish that myself were accursed from christ for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh: 9:4 who are israelites;
to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the law, and the service of god, and the promises; 9:5
whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh christ
came, who is over all, god blessed for ever. amen.

9:6 not as though the word of god hath taken none effect. for they are
not all israel, which are of israel: 9:7 neither, because they are the
seed of abraham, are they all children: but, in isaac shall thy seed
be called.

9:8 that is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not
the children of god: but the children of the promise are counted for
the seed.

9:9 for this is the word of promise, at this time will i come, and
sarah shall have a son.

9:10 and not only this; but when rebecca also had conceived by one,
even by our father isaac; 9:11 (for the children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of god
according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that
calleth;) 9:12 it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the
younger.

9:13 as it is written, jacob have i loved, but esau have i hated.

9:14 what shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with god? god
forbid.

9:15 for he saith to moses, i will have mercy on whom i will have
mercy, and i will have compassion on whom i will have compassion.

9:16 so then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of god that sheweth mercy.

9:17 for the scripture saith unto pharaoh, even for this same purpose
have i raised thee up, that i might shew my power in thee, and that my
name might be declared throughout all the earth.

9:18 therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardeneth.

9:19 thou wilt say then unto me, why doth he yet find fault? for who
hath resisted his will?  9:20 nay but, o man, who art thou that
repliest against god? shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why hast thou made me thus?  9:21 hath not the potter power over
the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another
unto dishonour?  9:22 what if god, willing to shew his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction: 9:23 and that he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore
prepared unto glory, 9:24 even us, whom he hath called, not of the
jews only, but also of the gentiles?  9:25 as he saith also in osee, i
will call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved,
which was not beloved.

9:26 and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said
unto them, ye are not my people; there shall they be called the
children of the living god.

9:27 esaias also crieth concerning israel, though the number of the
children of israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be
saved: 9:28 for he will finish the work, and cut it short in
righteousness: because a short work will the lord make upon the earth.

9:29 and as esaias said before, except the lord of sabaoth had left us
a seed, we had been as sodoma, and been made like unto gomorrha.

9:30 what shall we say then? that the gentiles, which followed not
after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of faith.

9:31 but israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath
not attained to the law of righteousness.

9:32 wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by
the works of the law. for they stumbled at that stumblingstone; 9:33
as it is written, behold, i lay in sion a stumblingstone and rock of
offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.

10:1 brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to god for israel is, that
they might be saved.

10:2 for i bear them record that they have a zeal of god, but not
according to knowledge.

10:3 for they being ignorant of god's righteousness, and going about
to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
unto the righteousness of god.

10:4 for christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one
that believeth.

10:5 for moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, that
the man which doeth those things shall live by them.

10:6 but the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise,
say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to
bring christ down from above:) 10:7 or, who shall descend into the
deep? (that is, to bring up christ again from the dead.)  10:8 but
what saith it? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach; 10:9 that if thou
shalt confess with thy mouth the lord jesus, and shalt believe in
thine heart that god hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved.

10:10 for with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

10:11 for the scripture saith, whosoever believeth on him shall not be
ashamed.

10:12 for there is no difference between the jew and the greek: for
the same lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.

10:13 for whosoever shall call upon the name of the lord shall be
saved.

10:14 how then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how
shall they hear without a preacher?  10:15 and how shall they preach,
except they be sent? as it is written, how beautiful are the feet of
them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things!  10:16 but they have not all obeyed the gospel. for esaias
saith, lord, who hath believed our report?  10:17 so then faith cometh
by hearing, and hearing by the word of god.

10:18 but i say, have they not heard? yes verily, their sound went
into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

10:19 but i say, did not israel know? first moses saith, i will
provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish
nation i will anger you.

10:20 but esaias is very bold, and saith, i was found of them that
sought me not; i was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.

10:21 but to israel he saith, all day long i have stretched forth my
hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.

11:1 i say then, hath god cast away his people? god forbid. for i also
am an israelite, of the seed of abraham, of the tribe of benjamin.

11:2 god hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. wot ye not
what the scripture saith of elias? how he maketh intercession to god
against israel saying, 11:3 lord, they have killed thy prophets, and
digged down thine altars; and i am left alone, and they seek my life.

11:4 but what saith the answer of god unto him? i have reserved to
myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the image of
baal.

11:5 even so then at this present time also there is a remnant
according to the election of grace.

11:6 and if by grace, then is it no more of works: otherwise grace is
no more grace. but if it be of works, then it is no more grace:
otherwise work is no more work.

11:7 what then? israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for;
but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

11:8 (according as it is written, god hath given them the spirit of
slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear;) unto this day.

11:9 and david saith, let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and
a stumblingblock, and a recompence unto them: 11:10 let their eyes be
darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their back alway.

11:11 i say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? god
forbid: but rather through their fall salvation is come unto the
gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy.

11:12 now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the gentiles; how much more their
fulness?  11:13 for i speak to you gentiles, inasmuch as i am the
apostle of the gentiles, i magnify mine office: 11:14 if by any means
i may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save
some of them.

11:15 for if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world,
what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?  11:16
for if the firstfruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root
be holy, so are the branches.

11:17 and if some of the branches be broken off, and thou, being a
wild olive tree, wert graffed in among them, and with them partakest
of the root and fatness of the olive tree; 11:18 boast not against the
branches. but if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root
thee.

11:19 thou wilt say then, the branches were broken off, that i might
be graffed in.

11:20 well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
standest by faith. be not highminded, but fear: 11:21 for if god
spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not
thee.

11:22 behold therefore the goodness and severity of god: on them which
fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his
goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.

11:23 and they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be
graffed in: for god is able to graff them in again.

11:24 for if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by
nature, and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree:
how much more shall these, which be the natural branches, be graffed
into their own olive tree?  11:25 for i would not, brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits; that blindness in part is happened to israel, until the
fulness of the gentiles be come in.

11:26 and so all israel shall be saved: as it is written, there shall
come out of sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from
jacob: 11:27 for this is my covenant unto them, when i shall take away
their sins.

11:28 as concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but
as touching the election, they are beloved for the father's sakes.

11:29 for the gifts and calling of god are without repentance.

11:30 for as ye in times past have not believed god, yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief: 11:31 even so have these also
now not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.

11:32 for god hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all.

11:33 o the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
god!  how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out!  11:34 for who hath known the mind of the lord? or who hath been
his counsellor?  11:35 or who hath first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed unto him again?  11:36 for of him, and through him, and to
him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. amen.

12:1 i beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of god, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto god,
which is your reasonable service.

12:2 and be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and
acceptable, and perfect, will of god.

12:3 for i say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think;
but to think soberly, according as god hath dealt to every man the
measure of faith.

12:4 for as we have many members in one body, and all members have not
the same office: 12:5 so we, being many, are one body in christ, and
every one members one of another.

12:6 having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given
to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion
of faith; 12:7 or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that
teacheth, on teaching; 12:8 or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he
that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with
diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.

12:9 let love be without dissimulation. abhor that which is evil;
cleave to that which is good.

12:10 be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in
honour preferring one another; 12:11 not slothful in business; fervent
in spirit; serving the lord; 12:12 rejoicing in hope; patient in
tribulation; continuing instant in prayer; 12:13 distributing to the
necessity of saints; given to hospitality.

12:14 bless them which persecute you: bless, and curse not.

12:15 rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

12:16 be of the same mind one toward another. mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate. be not wise in your own conceits.

12:17 recompense to no man evil for evil. provide things honest in the
sight of all men.

12:18 if it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with
all men.

12:19 dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place
unto wrath: for it is written, vengeance is mine; i will repay, saith
the lord.

12:20 therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give
him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head.

12:21 be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

13:1 let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. for there is no
power but of god: the powers that be are ordained of god.

13:2 whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance
of god: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

13:3 for rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. wilt
thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shalt have praise of the same: 13:4 for he is the minister of god to
thee for good. but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he
beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of god, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil.

13:5 wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake.

13:6 for for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are god's
ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.

13:7 render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is
due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.

13:8 owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth
another hath fulfilled the law.

13:9 for this, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not kill,
thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt
not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.

13:10 love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law.

13:11 and that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake
out of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.

13:12 the night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.

13:13 let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying.

13:14 but put ye on the lord jesus christ, and make not provision for
the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.

14:1 him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations.

14:2 for one believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is
weak, eateth herbs.

14:3 let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not
him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for god hath received him.

14:4 who art thou that judgest another man's servant? to his own
master he standeth or falleth. yea, he shall be holden up: for god is
able to make him stand.

14:5 one man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every
day alike. let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

14:6 he that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the lord; and he
that regardeth not the day, to the lord he doth not regard it. he that
eateth, eateth to the lord, for he giveth god thanks; and he that
eateth not, to the lord he eateth not, and giveth god thanks.

14:7 for none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.

14:8 for whether we live, we live unto the lord; and whether we die,
we die unto the lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the
lord's.

14:9 for to this end christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he
might be lord both of the dead and living.

14:10 but why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at
nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
christ.

14:11 for it is written, as i live, saith the lord, every knee shall
bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to god.

14:12 so then every one of us shall give account of himself to god.

14:13 let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his
brother's way.

14:14 i know, and am persuaded by the lord jesus, that there is
nothing unclean of itself: but to him that esteemeth any thing to be
unclean, to him it is unclean.

14:15 but if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou
not charitably. destroy not him with thy meat, for whom christ died.

14:16 let not then your good be evil spoken of: 14:17 for the kingdom
of god is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the holy ghost.

14:18 for he that in these things serveth christ is acceptable to god,
and approved of men.

14:19 let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another.

14:20 for meat destroy not the work of god. all things indeed are
pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence.

14:21 it is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any
thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

14:22 hast thou faith? have it to thyself before god. happy is he that
condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.

14:23 and he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not
of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

15:1 we then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please ourselves.

15:2 let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to
edification.

15:3 for even christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, the
reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.

15:4 for whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might
have hope.

15:5 now the god of patience and consolation grant you to be
likeminded one toward another according to christ jesus: 15:6 that ye
may with one mind and one mouth glorify god, even the father of our
lord jesus christ.

15:7 wherefore receive ye one another, as christ also received us to
the glory of god.

15:8 now i say that jesus christ was a minister of the circumcision
for the truth of god, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers:
15:9 and that the gentiles might glorify god for his mercy; as it is
written, for this cause i will confess to thee among the gentiles, and
sing unto thy name.

15:10 and again he saith, rejoice, ye gentiles, with his people.

15:11 and again, praise the lord, all ye gentiles; and laud him, all
ye people.

15:12 and again, esaias saith, there shall be a root of jesse, and he
that shall rise to reign over the gentiles; in him shall the gentiles
trust.

15:13 now the god of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the holy
ghost.

15:14 and i myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also
are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish
one another.

15:15 nevertheless, brethren, i have written the more boldly unto you
in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is
given to me of god, 15:16 that i should be the minister of jesus
christ to the gentiles, ministering the gospel of god, that the
offering up of the gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by
the holy ghost.

15:17 i have therefore whereof i may glory through jesus christ in
those things which pertain to god.

15:18 for i will not dare to speak of any of those things which christ
hath not wrought by me, to make the gentiles obedient, by word and
deed, 15:19 through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the
spirit of god; so that from jerusalem, and round about unto illyricum,
i have fully preached the gospel of christ.

15:20 yea, so have i strived to preach the gospel, not where christ
was named, lest i should build upon another man's foundation: 15:21
but as it is written, to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see:
and they that have not heard shall understand.

15:22 for which cause also i have been much hindered from coming to
you.

15:23 but now having no more place in these parts, and having a great
desire these many years to come unto you; 15:24 whensoever i take my
journey into spain, i will come to you: for i trust to see you in my
journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first i be
somewhat filled with your company.

15:25 but now i go unto jerusalem to minister unto the saints.

15:26 for it hath pleased them of macedonia and achaia to make a
certain contribution for the poor saints which are at jerusalem.

15:27 it hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. for if
the gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their
duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.

15:28 when therefore i have performed this, and have sealed to them
this fruit, i will come by you into spain.

15:29 and i am sure that, when i come unto you, i shall come in the
fulness of the blessing of the gospel of christ.

15:30 now i beseech you, brethren, for the lord jesus christ's sake,
and for the love of the spirit, that ye strive together with me in
your prayers to god for me; 15:31 that i may be delivered from them
that do not believe in judaea; and that my service which i have for
jerusalem may be accepted of the saints; 15:32 that i may come unto
you with joy by the will of god, and may with you be refreshed.

15:33 now the god of peace be with you all. amen.

16:1 i commend unto you phebe our sister, which is a servant of the
church which is at cenchrea: 16:2 that ye receive her in the lord, as
becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she
hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself
also.

16:3 greet priscilla and aquila my helpers in christ jesus: 16:4 who
have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only i give
thanks, but also all the churches of the gentiles.

16:5 likewise greet the church that is in their house. salute my
well-beloved epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of achaia unto christ.

16:6 greet mary, who bestowed much labour on us.

16:7 salute andronicus and junia, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners,
who are of note among the apostles, who also were in christ before me.

16:8 greet amplias my beloved in the lord.

16:9 salute urbane, our helper in christ, and stachys my beloved.

16:10 salute apelles approved in christ. salute them which are of
aristobulus' household.

16:11 salute herodion my kinsman. greet them that be of the household
of narcissus, which are in the lord.

16:12 salute tryphena and tryphosa, who labour in the lord. salute the
beloved persis, which laboured much in the lord.

16:13 salute rufus chosen in the lord, and his mother and mine.

16:14 salute asyncritus, phlegon, hermas, patrobas, hermes, and the
brethren which are with them.

16:15 salute philologus, and julia, nereus, and his sister, and
olympas, and all the saints which are with them.

16:16 salute one another with an holy kiss. the churches of christ
salute you.

16:17 now i beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid
them.

16:18 for they that are such serve not our lord jesus christ, but
their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple.

16:19 for your obedience is come abroad unto all men. i am glad
therefore on your behalf: but yet i would have you wise unto that
which is good, and simple concerning evil.

16:20 and the god of peace shall bruise satan under your feet shortly.
the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you. amen.

16:21 timotheus my workfellow, and lucius, and jason, and sosipater,
my kinsmen, salute you.

16:22 i tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the lord.

16:23 gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. erastus
the chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and quartus a brother.

16:24 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all. amen.

16:25 now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my
gospel, and the preaching of jesus christ, according to the revelation
of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, 16:26 but
now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according
to the commandment of the everlasting god, made known to all nations
for the obedience of faith: 16:27 to god only wise, be glory through
jesus christ for ever. amen.




the first epistle of paul the apostle to the corinthians


1:1 paul called to be an apostle of jesus christ through the will of
god, and sosthenes our brother, 1:2 unto the church of god which is at
corinth, to them that are sanctified in christ jesus, called to be
saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of jesus
christ our lord, both their's and our's: 1:3 grace be unto you, and
peace, from god our father, and from the lord jesus christ.

1:4 i thank my god always on your behalf, for the grace of god which
is given you by jesus christ; 1:5 that in every thing ye are enriched
by him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge; 1:6 even as the
testimony of christ was confirmed in you: 1:7 so that ye come behind
in no gift; waiting for the coming of our lord jesus christ: 1:8 who
shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our lord jesus christ.

1:9 god is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his
son jesus christ our lord.

1:10 now i beseech you, brethren, by the name of our lord jesus
christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the
same mind and in the same judgment.

1:11 for it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them
which are of the house of chloe, that there are contentions among you.

1:12 now this i say, that every one of you saith, i am of paul; and i
of apollos; and i of cephas; and i of christ.

1:13 is christ divided? was paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized in the name of paul?  1:14 i thank god that i baptized none
of you, but crispus and gaius; 1:15 lest any should say that i had
baptized in mine own name.

1:16 and i baptized also the household of stephanas: besides, i know
not whether i baptized any other.

1:17 for christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not
with wisdom of words, lest the cross of christ should be made of none
effect.

1:18 for the preaching of the cross is to them that perish
foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of god.

1:19 for it is written, i will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.

1:20 where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of
this world? hath not god made foolish the wisdom of this world?  1:21
for after that in the wisdom of god the world by wisdom knew not god,
it pleased god by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe.

1:22 for the jews require a sign, and the greeks seek after wisdom:
1:23 but we preach christ crucified, unto the jews a stumblingblock,
and unto the greeks foolishness; 1:24 but unto them which are called,
both jews and greeks, christ the power of god, and the wisdom of god.

1:25 because the foolishness of god is wiser than men; and the
weakness of god is stronger than men.

1:26 for ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: 1:27 but
god hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise;
and god hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty; 1:28 and base things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath god chosen, yea, and things which are not, to
bring to nought things that are: 1:29 that no flesh should glory in
his presence.

1:30 but of him are ye in christ jesus, who of god is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: 1:31
that, according as it is written, he that glorieth, let him glory in
the lord.

2:1 and i, brethren, when i came to you, came not with excellency of
speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of god.

2:2 for i determined not to know any thing among you, save jesus
christ, and him crucified.

2:3 and i was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling.

2:4 and my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of power: 2:5
that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of god.

2:6 howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to
nought: 2:7 but we speak the wisdom of god in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom, which god ordained before the world unto our glory: 2:8
which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it,
they would not have crucified the lord of glory.

2:9 but as it is written, eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which god hath prepared
for them that love him.

2:10 but god hath revealed them unto us by his spirit: for the spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of god.

2:11 for what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? even so the things of god knoweth no man, but the
spirit of god.

2:12 now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is of god; that we might know the things that are freely given
to us of god.

2:13 which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teacheth, but which the holy ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual
things with spiritual.

2:14 but the natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of
god: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned.

2:15 but he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man.

2:16 for who hath known the mind of the lord, that he may instruct
him?  but we have the mind of christ.

3:1 and i, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but
as unto carnal, even as unto babes in christ.

3:2 i have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were
not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

3:3 for ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?  3:4 for
while one saith, i am of paul; and another, i am of apollos; are ye
not carnal?  3:5 who then is paul, and who is apollos, but ministers
by whom ye believed, even as the lord gave to every man?  3:6 i have
planted, apollos watered; but god gave the increase.

3:7 so then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
watereth; but god that giveth the increase.

3:8 now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man
shall receive his own reward according to his own labour.

3:9 for we are labourers together with god: ye are god's husbandry, ye
are god's building.

3:10 according to the grace of god which is given unto me, as a wise
masterbuilder, i have laid the foundation, and another buildeth
thereon. but let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.

3:11 for other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is
jesus christ.

3:12 now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble; 3:13 every man's work shall be made
manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed
by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is.

3:14 if any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward.

3:15 if any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

3:16 know ye not that ye are the temple of god, and that the spirit of
god dwelleth in you?  3:17 if any man defile the temple of god, him
shall god destroy; for the temple of god is holy, which temple ye are.

3:18 let no man deceive himself. if any man among you seemeth to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

3:19 for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with god. for it is
written, he taketh the wise in their own craftiness.

3:20 and again, the lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they
are vain.

3:21 therefore let no man glory in men. for all things are your's;
3:22 whether paul, or apollos, or cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come; all are your's; 3:23 and
ye are christ's; and christ is god's.

4:1 let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of god.

4:2 moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.

4:3 but with me it is a very small thing that i should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment: yea, i judge not mine own self.

4:4 for i know nothing by myself; yet am i not hereby justified: but
he that judgeth me is the lord.

4:5 therefore judge nothing before the time, until the lord come, who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have
praise of god.

4:6 and these things, brethren, i have in a figure transferred to
myself and to apollos for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to
think of men above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed
up for one against another.

4:7 for who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou
that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost
thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?  4:8 now ye are full,
now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings without us: and i would to
god ye did reign, that we also might reign with you.

4:9 for i think that god hath set forth us the apostles last, as it
were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world,
and to angels, and to men.

4:10 we are fools for christ's sake, but ye are wise in christ; we are
weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised.

4:11 even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are
naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwellingplace; 4:12 and
labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being
persecuted, we suffer it: 4:13 being defamed, we intreat: we are made
as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto
this day.

4:14 i write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons i
warn you.

4:15 for though ye have ten thousand instructers in christ, yet have
ye not many fathers: for in christ jesus i have begotten you through
the gospel.

4:16 wherefore i beseech you, be ye followers of me.

4:17 for this cause have i sent unto you timotheus, who is my beloved
son, and faithful in the lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of
my ways which be in christ, as i teach every where in every church.

4:18 now some are puffed up, as though i would not come to you.

4:19 but i will come to you shortly, if the lord will, and will know,
not the speech of them which are puffed up, but the power.

4:20 for the kingdom of god is not in word, but in power.

4:21 what will ye? shall i come unto you with a rod, or in love, and
in the spirit of meekness?  5:1 it is reported commonly that there is
fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named
among the gentiles, that one should have his father's wife.

5:2 and ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that
hath done this deed might be taken away from among you.

5:3 for i verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have
judged already, as though i were present, concerning him that hath so
done this deed, 5:4 in the name of our lord jesus christ, when ye are
gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our lord jesus
christ, 5:5 to deliver such an one unto satan for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the lord jesus.

5:6 your glorying is not good. know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump?  5:7 purge out therefore the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. for even christ our
passover is sacrificed for us: 5:8 therefore let us keep the feast,
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness;
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

5:9 i wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators:
5:10 yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with
the covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye
needs go out of the world.

5:11 but now i have written unto you not to keep company, if any man
that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater,
or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not
to eat.

5:12 for what have i to do to judge them also that are without? do not
ye judge them that are within?  5:13 but them that are without god
judgeth. therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked person.

6:1 dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before
the unjust, and not before the saints?  6:2 do ye not know that the
saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you,
are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?  6:3 know ye not that
we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this life?
6:4 if then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set
them to judge who are least esteemed in the church.

6:5 i speak to your shame. is it so, that there is not a wise man
among you? no, not one that shall be able to judge between his
brethren?  6:6 but brother goeth to law with brother, and that before
the unbelievers.

6:7 now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to
law one with another. why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not
rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?  6:8 nay, ye do wrong, and
defraud, and that your brethren.

6:9 know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
god?  be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
6:10 nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of god.

6:11 and such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the lord jesus, and by
the spirit of our god.

6:12 all things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient:
all things are lawful for me, but i will not be brought under the
power of any.

6:13 meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: but god shall
destroy both it and them. now the body is not for fornication, but for
the lord; and the lord for the body.

6:14 and god hath both raised up the lord, and will also raise up us
by his own power.

6:15 know ye not that your bodies are the members of christ? shall i
then take the members of christ, and make them the members of an
harlot? god forbid.

6:16 what? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one
body?  for two, saith he, shall be one flesh.

6:17 but he that is joined unto the lord is one spirit.

6:18 flee fornication. every sin that a man doeth is without the body;
but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body.

6:19 what? know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy ghost
which is in you, which ye have of god, and ye are not your own?  6:20
for ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify god in your body,
and in your spirit, which are god's.

7:1 now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: it is good for
a man not to touch a woman.

7:2 nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own
wife, and let every woman have her own husband.

7:3 let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise
also the wife unto the husband.

7:4 the wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and
likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the
wife.

7:5 defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a
time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come
together again, that satan tempt you not for your incontinency.

7:6 but i speak this by permission, and not of commandment.

7:7 for i would that all men were even as i myself. but every man hath
his proper gift of god, one after this manner, and another after that.

7:8 i say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them
if they abide even as i.

7:9 but if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to
marry than to burn.

7:10 and unto the married i command, yet not i, but the lord, let not
the wife depart from her husband: 7:11 but and if she depart, let her
remain unmarried or be reconciled to her husband: and let not the
husband put away his wife.

7:12 but to the rest speak i, not the lord: if any brother hath a wife
that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not
put her away.

7:13 and the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he
be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.

7:14 for the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children
unclean; but now are they holy.

7:15 but if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. a brother or a
sister is not under bondage in such cases: but god hath called us to
peace.

7:16 for what knowest thou, o wife, whether thou shalt save thy
husband?  or how knowest thou, o man, whether thou shalt save thy
wife?  7:17 but as god hath distributed to every man, as the lord hath
called every one, so let him walk. and so ordain i in all churches.

7:18 is any man called being circumcised? let him not become
uncircumcised. is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be
circumcised.

7:19 circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the commandments of god.

7:20 let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

7:21 art thou called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou
mayest be made free, use it rather.

7:22 for he that is called in the lord, being a servant, is the lord's
freeman: likewise also he that is called, being free, is christ's
servant.

7:23 ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men.

7:24 brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with
god.

7:25 now concerning virgins i have no commandment of the lord: yet i
give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the lord to be
faithful.

7:26 i suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress, i
say, that it is good for a man so to be.

7:27 art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. art thou
loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.

7:28 but and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin
marry, she hath not sinned. nevertheless such shall have trouble in
the flesh: but i spare you.

7:29 but this i say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that
both they that have wives be as though they had none; 7:30 and they
that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not;
7:31 and they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion
of this world passeth away.

7:32 but i would have you without carefulness. he that is unmarried
careth for the things that belong to the lord, how he may please the
lord: 7:33 but he that is married careth for the things that are of
the world, how he may please his wife.

7:34 there is difference also between a wife and a virgin. the
unmarried woman careth for the things of the lord, that she may be
holy both in body and in spirit: but she that is married careth for
the things of the world, how she may please her husband.

7:35 and this i speak for your own profit; not that i may cast a snare
upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon
the lord without distraction.

7:36 but if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his
virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let
him do what he will, he sinneth not: let them marry.

7:37 nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in his heart, having no
necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath so decreed in
his heart that he will keep his virgin, doeth well.

7:38 so then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; but he that
giveth her not in marriage doeth better.

7:39 the wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; but
if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she
will; only in the lord.

7:40 but she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: and i
think also that i have the spirit of god.

8:1 now as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all
have knowledge. knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.

8:2 and if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing
yet as he ought to know.

8:3 but if any man love god, the same is known of him.

8:4 as concerning therefore the eating of those things that are
offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in
the world, and that there is none other god but one.

8:5 for though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in
earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,) 8:6 but to us there is
but one god, the father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and
one lord jesus christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

8:7 howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with
conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto
an idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled.

8:8 but meat commendeth us not to god: for neither, if we eat, are we
the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse.

8:9 but take heed lest by any means this liberty of your's become a
stumblingblock to them that are weak.

8:10 for if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the
idol's temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be
emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols; 8:11 and
through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom christ
died?  8:12 but when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their
weak conscience, ye sin against christ.

8:13 wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, i will eat no flesh
while the world standeth, lest i make my brother to offend.

9:1 am i not an apostle? am i not free? have i not seen jesus christ
our lord? are not ye my work in the lord?  9:2 if i be not an apostle
unto others, yet doubtless i am to you: for the seal of mine
apostleship are ye in the lord.

9:3 mine answer to them that do examine me is this, 9:4 have we not
power to eat and to drink?  9:5 have we not power to lead about a
sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the
lord, and cephas?  9:6 or i only and barnabas, have not we power to
forbear working?  9:7 who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges?
who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who
feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?  9:8 say i
these things as a man? or saith not the law the same also?  9:9 for it
is written in the law of moses, thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the
ox that treadeth out the corn. doth god take care for oxen?  9:10 or
saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes, no doubt, this is
written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that
thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.

9:11 if we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if
we shall reap your carnal things?  9:12 if others be partakers of this
power over you, are not we rather?  nevertheless we have not used this
power; but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of
christ.

9:13 do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live of
the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are
partakers with the altar?  9:14 even so hath the lord ordained that
they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.

9:15 but i have used none of these things: neither have i written
these things, that it should be so done unto me: for it were better
for me to die, than that any man should make my glorying void.

9:16 for though i preach the gospel, i have nothing to glory of: for
necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if i preach not the
gospel!  9:17 for if i do this thing willingly, i have a reward: but
if against my will, a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.

9:18 what is my reward then? verily that, when i preach the gospel, i
may make the gospel of christ without charge, that i abuse not my
power in the gospel.

9:19 for though i be free from all men, yet have i made myself servant
unto all, that i might gain the more.

9:20 and unto the jews i became as a jew, that i might gain the jews;
to them that are under the law, as under the law, that i might gain
them that are under the law; 9:21 to them that are without law, as
without law, (being not without law to god, but under the law to
christ,) that i might gain them that are without law.

9:22 to the weak became i as weak, that i might gain the weak: i am
made all things to all men, that i might by all means save some.

9:23 and this i do for the gospel's sake, that i might be partaker
thereof with you.

9:24 know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one
receiveth the prize? so run, that ye may obtain.

9:25 and every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all
things. now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an
incorruptible.

9:26 i therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight i, not as one
that beateth the air: 9:27 but i keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection: lest that by any means, when i have preached to others, i
myself should be a castaway.

10:1 moreover, brethren, i would not that ye should be ignorant, how
that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the
sea; 10:2 and were all baptized unto moses in the cloud and in the
sea; 10:3 and did all eat the same spiritual meat; 10:4 and did all
drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual rock
that followed them: and that rock was christ.

10:5 but with many of them god was not well pleased: for they were
overthrown in the wilderness.

10:6 now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not
lust after evil things, as they also lusted.

10:7 neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written,
the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

10:8 neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and
fell in one day three and twenty thousand.

10:9 neither let us tempt christ, as some of them also tempted, and
were destroyed of serpents.

10:10 neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer.

10:11 now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they
are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are
come.

10:12 wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he
fall.

10:13 there hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man:
but god is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it.

10:14 wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry.

10:15 i speak as to wise men; judge ye what i say.

10:16 the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of christ?  10:17 for we being many are one bread, and one
body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.

10:18 behold israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the
sacrifices partakers of the altar?  10:19 what say i then? that the
idol is any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is
any thing?  10:20 but i say, that the things which the gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to god: and i would not
that ye should have fellowship with devils.

10:21 ye cannot drink the cup of the lord, and the cup of devils: ye
cannot be partakers of the lord's table, and of the table of devils.

10:22 do we provoke the lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?
10:23 all things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient:
all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.

10:24 let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth.

10:25 whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question
for conscience sake: 10:26 for the earth is the lord's, and the
fulness thereof.

10:27 if any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be
disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question
for conscience sake.

10:28 but if any man say unto you, this is offered in sacrifice unto
idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake:
for the earth is the lord's, and the fulness thereof: 10:29
conscience, i say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my
liberty judged of another man's conscience?  10:30 for if i by grace
be a partaker, why am i evil spoken of for that for which i give
thanks?  10:31 whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of god.

10:32 give none offence, neither to the jews, nor to the gentiles, nor
to the church of god: 10:33 even as i please all men in all things,
not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved.

11:1 be ye followers of me, even as i also am of christ.

11:2 now i praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things,
and keep the ordinances, as i delivered them to you.

11:3 but i would have you know, that the head of every man is christ;
and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of christ is god.

11:4 every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered,
dishonoureth his head.

11:5 but every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head
uncovered dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if she
were shaven.

11:6 for if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it
be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.

11:7 for a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is
the image and glory of god: but the woman is the glory of the man.

11:8 for the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man.

11:9 neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the
man.

11:10 for this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because
of the angels.

11:11 nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the
woman without the man, in the lord.

11:12 for as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the
woman; but all things of god.

11:13 judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto god
uncovered?  11:14 doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a
man have long hair, it is a shame unto him?  11:15 but if a woman have
long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a
covering.

11:16 but if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the churches of god.

11:17 now in this that i declare unto you i praise you not, that ye
come together not for the better, but for the worse.

11:18 for first of all, when ye come together in the church, i hear
that there be divisions among you; and i partly believe it.

11:19 for there must be also heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you.

11:20 when ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to
eat the lord's supper.

11:21 for in eating every one taketh before other his own supper: and
one is hungry, and another is drunken.

11:22 what? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye
the church of god, and shame them that have not? what shall i say to
you? shall i praise you in this? i praise you not.

11:23 for i have received of the lord that which also i delivered unto
you, that the lord jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took
bread: 11:24 and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in
remembrance of me.

11:25 after the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped,
saying, this cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft
as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

11:26 for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
shew the lord's death till he come.

11:27 wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of
the lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
lord.

11:28 but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup.

11:29 for he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh
damnation to himself, not discerning the lord's body.

11:30 for this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep.

11:31 for if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.

11:32 but when we are judged, we are chastened of the lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world.

11:33 wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one
for another.

11:34 and if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not
together unto condemnation. and the rest will i set in order when i
come.

12:1 now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, i would not have you
ignorant.

12:2 ye know that ye were gentiles, carried away unto these dumb
idols, even as ye were led.

12:3 wherefore i give you to understand, that no man speaking by the
spirit of god calleth jesus accursed: and that no man can say that
jesus is the lord, but by the holy ghost.

12:4 now there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit.

12:5 and there are differences of administrations, but the same lord.

12:6 and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same god
which worketh all in all.

12:7 but the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to
profit withal.

12:8 for to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom; to another
the word of knowledge by the same spirit; 12:9 to another faith by the
same spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same spirit; 12:10
to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another
discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another
the interpretation of tongues: 12:11 but all these worketh that one
and the selfsame spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.

12:12 for as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the
members of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is christ.

12:13 for by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we
be jews or gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all
made to drink into one spirit.

12:14 for the body is not one member, but many.

12:15 if the foot shall say, because i am not the hand, i am not of
the body; is it therefore not of the body?  12:16 and if the ear shall
say, because i am not the eye, i am not of the body; is it therefore
not of the body?  12:17 if the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?  12:18
but now hath god set the members every one of them in the body, as it
hath pleased him.

12:19 and if they were all one member, where were the body?  12:20 but
now are they many members, yet but one body.

12:21 and the eye cannot say unto the hand, i have no need of thee:
nor again the head to the feet, i have no need of you.

12:22 nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary: 12:23 and those members of the body, which we
think to be less honourable, upon these we bestow more abundant
honour; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.

12:24 for our comely parts have no need: but god hath tempered the
body together, having given more abundant honour to that part which
lacked.

12:25 that there should be no schism in the body; but that the members
should have the same care one for another.

12:26 and whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it;
or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it.

12:27 now ye are the body of christ, and members in particular.

12:28 and god hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily
prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of
healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.

12:29 are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all
workers of miracles?  12:30 have all the gifts of healing? do all
speak with tongues? do all interpret?  12:31 but covet earnestly the
best gifts: and yet shew i unto you a more excellent way.

13:1 though i speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have
not charity, i am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.

13:2 and though i have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though i have all faith, so that i
could remove mountains, and have not charity, i am nothing.

13:3 and though i bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though i
give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
nothing.

13:4 charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, 13:5 doth not behave itself
unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no
evil; 13:6 rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 13:7
beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth
all things.

13:8 charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they
shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there
be knowledge, it shall vanish away.

13:9 for we know in part, and we prophesy in part.

13:10 but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away.

13:11 when i was a child, i spake as a child, i understood as a child,
i thought as a child: but when i became a man, i put away childish
things.

13:12 for now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face:
now i know in part; but then shall i know even as also i am known.

13:13 and now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the
greatest of these is charity.

14:1 follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that
ye may prophesy.

14:2 for he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men,
but unto god: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he
speaketh mysteries.

14:3 but he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort.

14:4 he that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he
that prophesieth edifieth the church.

14:5 i would that ye all spake with tongues but rather that ye
prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh
with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive
edifying.

14:6 now, brethren, if i come unto you speaking with tongues, what
shall i profit you, except i shall speak to you either by revelation,
or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?  14:7 and even
things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they
give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped
or harped?  14:8 for if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare himself to the battle?  14:9 so likewise ye, except ye utter
by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what
is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air.

14:10 there are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and
none of them is without signification.

14:11 therefore if i know not the meaning of the voice, i shall be
unto him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a
barbarian unto me.

14:12 even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek
that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.

14:13 wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that
he may interpret.

14:14 for if i pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my
understanding is unfruitful.

14:15 what is it then? i will pray with the spirit, and i will pray
with the understanding also: i will sing with the spirit, and i will
sing with the understanding also.

14:16 else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that
occupieth the room of the unlearned say amen at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?  14:17 for thou verily
givest thanks well, but the other is not edified.

14:18 i thank my god, i speak with tongues more than ye all: 14:19 yet
in the church i had rather speak five words with my understanding,
that by my voice i might teach others also, than ten thousand words in
an unknown tongue.

14:20 brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be
ye children, but in understanding be men.

14:21 in the law it is written, with men of other tongues and other
lips will i speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not
hear me, saith the lord.

14:22 wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but
to them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that
believe not, but for them which believe.

14:23 if therefore the whole church be come together into one place,
and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are
unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?  14:24
but if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: 14:25 and thus
are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his
face he will worship god, and report that god is in you of a truth.

14:26 how is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of
you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation,
hath an interpretation. let all things be done unto edifying.

14:27 if any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at
the most by three, and that by course; and let one interpret.

14:28 but if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the
church; and let him speak to himself, and to god.

14:29 let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge.

14:30 if any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the
first hold his peace.

14:31 for ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all
may be comforted.

14:32 and the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.

14:33 for god is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all
churches of the saints.

14:34 let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not
permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under
obedience as also saith the law.

14:35 and if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at
home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.

14:36 what? came the word of god out from you? or came it unto you
only?  14:37 if any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual,
let him acknowledge that the things that i write unto you are the
commandments of the lord.

14:38 but if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

14:39 wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak
with tongues.

14:40 let all things be done decently and in order.

15:1 moreover, brethren, i declare unto you the gospel which i
preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand;
15:2 by which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what i preached
unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.

15:3 for i delivered unto you first of all that which i also received,
how that christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; 15:4
and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according
to the scriptures: 15:5 and that he was seen of cephas, then of the
twelve: 15:6 after that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at
once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are
fallen asleep.

15:7 after that, he was seen of james; then of all the apostles.

15:8 and last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due
time.

15:9 for i am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called
an apostle, because i persecuted the church of god.

15:10 but by the grace of god i am what i am: and his grace which was
bestowed upon me was not in vain; but i laboured more abundantly than
they all: yet not i, but the grace of god which was with me.

15:11 therefore whether it were i or they, so we preach, and so ye
believed.

15:12 now if christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say
some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?  15:13 but
if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is christ not risen:
15:14 and if christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your
faith is also vain.

15:15 yea, and we are found false witnesses of god; because we have
testified of god that he raised up christ: whom he raised not up, if
so be that the dead rise not.

15:16 for if the dead rise not, then is not christ raised: 15:17 and
if christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins.

15:18 then they also which are fallen asleep in christ are perished.

15:19 if in this life only we have hope in christ, we are of all men
most miserable.

15:20 but now is christ risen from the dead, and become the
firstfruits of them that slept.

15:21 for since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection
of the dead.

15:22 for as in adam all die, even so in christ shall all be made
alive.

15:23 but every man in his own order: christ the firstfruits;
afterward they that are christ's at his coming.

15:24 then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom
to god, even the father; when he shall have put down all rule and all
authority and power.

15:25 for he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.

15:26 the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

15:27 for he hath put all things under his feet. but when he saith all
things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which
did put all things under him.

15:28 and when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the
son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him,
that god may be all in all.

15:29 else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the
dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?  15:30
and why stand we in jeopardy every hour?  15:31 i protest by your
rejoicing which i have in christ jesus our lord, i die daily.

15:32 if after the manner of men i have fought with beasts at ephesus,
what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink;
for to morrow we die.

15:33 be not deceived: evil communications corrupt good manners.

15:34 awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the
knowledge of god: i speak this to your shame.

15:35 but some man will say, how are the dead raised up? and with what
body do they come?  15:36 thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened, except it die: 15:37 and that which thou sowest, thou
sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of
wheat, or of some other grain: 15:38 but god giveth it a body as it
hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body.

15:39 all flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh
of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of
birds.

15:40 there are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the
glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is
another.

15:41 there is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon,
and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another
star in glory.

15:42 so also is the resurrection of the dead. it is sown in
corruption; it is raised in incorruption: 15:43 it is sown in
dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised
in power: 15:44 it is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual
body. there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.

15:45 and so it is written, the first man adam was made a living soul;
the last adam was made a quickening spirit.

15:46 howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is
natural; and afterward that which is spiritual.

15:47 the first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the
lord from heaven.

15:48 as is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is
the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.

15:49 and as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear
the image of the heavenly.

15:50 now this i say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of god; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.

15:51 behold, i shew you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed, 15:52 in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.

15:53 for this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality.

15:54 so when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and
this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written, death is swallowed up in victory.

15:55 o death, where is thy sting? o grave, where is thy victory?
15:56 the sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law.

15:57 but thanks be to god, which giveth us the victory through our
lord jesus christ.

15:58 therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable,
always abounding in the work of the lord, forasmuch as ye know that
your labour is not in vain in the lord.

16:1 now concerning the collection for the saints, as i have given
order to the churches of galatia, even so do ye.

16:2 upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in
store, as god hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when i
come.

16:3 and when i come, whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters,
them will i send to bring your liberality unto jerusalem.

16:4 and if it be meet that i go also, they shall go with me.

16:5 now i will come unto you, when i shall pass through macedonia:
for i do pass through macedonia.

16:6 and it may be that i will abide, yea, and winter with you, that
ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever i go.

16:7 for i will not see you now by the way; but i trust to tarry a
while with you, if the lord permit.

16:8 but i will tarry at ephesus until pentecost.

16:9 for a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are
many adversaries.

16:10 now if timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear:
for he worketh the work of the lord, as i also do.

16:11 let no man therefore despise him: but conduct him forth in
peace, that he may come unto me: for i look for him with the brethren.

16:12 as touching our brother apollos, i greatly desired him to come
unto you with the brethren: but his will was not at all to come at
this time; but he will come when he shall have convenient time.

16:13 watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.

16:14 let all your things be done with charity.

16:15 i beseech you, brethren, (ye know the house of stephanas, that
it is the firstfruits of achaia, and that they have addicted
themselves to the ministry of the saints,) 16:16 that ye submit
yourselves unto such, and to every one that helpeth with us, and
laboureth.

16:17 i am glad of the coming of stephanas and fortunatus and
achaicus: for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied.

16:18 for they have refreshed my spirit and your's: therefore
acknowledge ye them that are such.

16:19 the churches of asia salute you. aquila and priscilla salute you
much in the lord, with the church that is in their house.

16:20 all the brethren greet you. greet ye one another with
an holy kiss.

16:21 the salutation of me paul with mine own hand.

16:22 if any man love not the lord jesus christ, let him be
anathema maranatha.

16:23 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you.

16:24 my love be with you all in christ jesus. amen.




the second epistle of paul the apostle to the corinthians


1:1 paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the will of god, and timothy
our brother, unto the church of god which is at corinth, with all the
saints which are in all achaia: 1:2 grace be to you and peace from god
our father, and from the lord jesus christ.

1:3 blessed be god, even the father of our lord jesus christ, the
father of mercies, and the god of all comfort; 1:4 who comforteth us
in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are
in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of
god.

1:5 for as the sufferings of christ abound in us, so our consolation
also aboundeth by christ.

1:6 and whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and
salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings
which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your
consolation and salvation.

1:7 and our hope of you is stedfast, knowing, that as ye are partakers
of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation.

1:8 for we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which
came to us in asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above
strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life: 1:9 but we had the
sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves,
but in god which raiseth the dead: 1:10 who delivered us from so great
a death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver
us; 1:11 ye also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift
bestowed upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be given by
many on our behalf.

1:12 for our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of god, we have had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you-ward.

1:13 for we write none other things unto you, than what ye read or
acknowledge; and i trust ye shall acknowledge even to the end; 1:14 as
also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even
as ye also are our's in the day of the lord jesus.

1:15 and in this confidence i was minded to come unto you before, that
ye might have a second benefit; 1:16 and to pass by you into
macedonia, and to come again out of macedonia unto you, and of you to
be brought on my way toward judaea.

1:17 when i therefore was thus minded, did i use lightness? or the
things that i purpose, do i purpose according to the flesh, that with
me there should be yea yea, and nay nay?  1:18 but as god is true, our
word toward you was not yea and nay.

1:19 for the son of god, jesus christ, who was preached among you by
us, even by me and silvanus and timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in
him was yea.

1:20 for all the promises of god in him are yea, and in him amen, unto
the glory of god by us.

1:21 now he which stablisheth us with you in christ, and hath anointed
us, is god; 1:22 who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the
spirit in our hearts.

1:23 moreover i call god for a record upon my soul, that to spare you
i came not as yet unto corinth.

1:24 not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of
your joy: for by faith ye stand.

2:1 but i determined this with myself, that i would not come again to
you in heaviness.

2:2 for if i make you sorry, who is he then that maketh me glad, but
the same which is made sorry by me?  2:3 and i wrote this same unto
you, lest, when i came, i should have sorrow from them of whom i ought
to rejoice; having confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of
you all.

2:4 for out of much affliction and anguish of heart i wrote unto you
with many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know
the love which i have more abundantly unto you.

2:5 but if any have caused grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part:
that i may not overcharge you all.

2:6 sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted
of many.

2:7 so that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort
him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow.

2:8 wherefore i beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward
him.

2:9 for to this end also did i write, that i might know the proof of
you, whether ye be obedient in all things.

2:10 to whom ye forgive any thing, i forgive also: for if i forgave
any thing, to whom i forgave it, for your sakes forgave i it in the
person of christ; 2:11 lest satan should get an advantage of us: for
we are not ignorant of his devices.

2:12 furthermore, when i came to troas to preach christ's gospel, and
a door was opened unto me of the lord, 2:13 i had no rest in my
spirit, because i found not titus my brother: but taking my leave of
them, i went from thence into macedonia.

2:14 now thanks be unto god, which always causeth us to triumph in
christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every
place.

2:15 for we are unto god a sweet savour of christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish: 2:16 to the one we are the savour of
death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. and
who is sufficient for these things?  2:17 for we are not as many,
which corrupt the word of god: but as of sincerity, but as of god, in
the sight of god speak we in christ.

3:1 do we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we, as some
others, epistles of commendation to you, or letters of commendation
from you?  3:2 ye are our epistle written in our hearts, known and
read of all men: 3:3 forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the
epistle of christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the
spirit of the living god; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables
of the heart.

3:4 and such trust have we through christ to god-ward: 3:5 not that we
are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves; but
our sufficiency is of god; 3:6 who also hath made us able ministers of
the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the
letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.

3:7 but if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones,
was glorious, so that the children of israel could not stedfastly
behold the face of moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory
was to be done away: 3:8 how shall not the ministration of the spirit
be rather glorious?  3:9 for if the ministration of condemnation be
glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in
glory.

3:10 for even that which was made glorious had no glory in this
respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.

3:11 for if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remaineth is glorious.

3:12 seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of
speech: 3:13 and not as moses, which put a vail over his face, that
the children of israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that
which is abolished: 3:14 but their minds were blinded: for until this
day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old
testament; which vail is done away in christ.

3:15 but even unto this day, when moses is read, the vail is upon
their heart.

3:16 nevertheless when it shall turn to the lord, the vail shall be
taken away.

3:17 now the lord is that spirit: and where the spirit of the lord is,
there is liberty.

3:18 but we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
the lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as
by the spirit of the lord.

4:1 therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy,
we faint not; 4:2 but have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty,
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of god deceitfully;
but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's
conscience in the sight of god.

4:3 but if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: 4:4 in
whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of christ, who is
the image of god, should shine unto them.

4:5 for we preach not ourselves, but christ jesus the lord; and
ourselves your servants for jesus' sake.

4:6 for god, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of god in the face of jesus christ.

4:7 but we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of god, and not of us.

4:8 we are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair; 4:9 persecuted, but not forsaken; cast
down, but not destroyed; 4:10 always bearing about in the body the
dying of the lord jesus, that the life also of jesus might be made
manifest in our body.

4:11 for we which live are alway delivered unto death for jesus' sake,
that the life also of jesus might be made manifest in our mortal
flesh.

4:12 so then death worketh in us, but life in you.

4:13 we having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, i
believed, and therefore have i spoken; we also believe, and therefore
speak; 4:14 knowing that he which raised up the lord jesus shall raise
up us also by jesus, and shall present us with you.

4:15 for all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might
through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of god.

4:16 for which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed day by day.

4:17 for our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; 4:18 while we
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which
are not seen are eternal.

5:1 for we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of god, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens.

5:2 for in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with
our house which is from heaven: 5:3 if so be that being clothed we
shall not be found naked.

5:4 for we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not
for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might
be swallowed up of life.

5:5 now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is god, who
also hath given unto us the earnest of the spirit.

5:6 therefore we are always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the lord: 5:7 (for we walk by
faith, not by sight:) 5:8 we are confident, i say, and willing rather
to be absent from the body, and to be present with the lord.

5:9 wherefore we labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him.

5:10 for we must all appear before the judgment seat of christ; that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that
he hath done, whether it be good or bad.

5:11 knowing therefore the terror of the lord, we persuade men; but we
are made manifest unto god; and i trust also are made manifest in your
consciences.

5:12 for we commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you
occasion to glory on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to answer
them which glory in appearance, and not in heart.

5:13 for whether we be beside ourselves, it is to god: or whether we
be sober, it is for your cause.

5:14 for the love of christ constraineth us; because we thus judge,
that if one died for all, then were all dead: 5:15 and that he died
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.

5:16 wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though
we have known christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him
no more.

5:17 therefore if any man be in christ, he is a new creature: old
things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.

5:18 and all things are of god, who hath reconciled us to himself by
jesus christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation;
5:19 to wit, that god was in christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath committed
unto us the word of reconciliation.

5:20 now then we are ambassadors for christ, as though god did beseech
you by us: we pray you in christ's stead, be ye reconciled to god.

5:21 for he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we
might be made the righteousness of god in him.

6:1 we then, as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye
receive not the grace of god in vain.

6:2 (for he saith, i have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the
day of salvation have i succoured thee: behold, now is the accepted
time; behold, now is the day of salvation.)  6:3 giving no offence in
any thing, that the ministry be not blamed: 6:4 but in all things
approving ourselves as the ministers of god, in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, 6:5 in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings; 6:6
by pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the holy
ghost, by love unfeigned, 6:7 by the word of truth, by the power of
god, by the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
6:8 by honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report: as
deceivers, and yet true; 6:9 as unknown, and yet well known; as dying,
and, behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed; 6:10 as sorrowful,
yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing,
and yet possessing all things.

6:11 o ye corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is
enlarged.

6:12 ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own
bowels.

6:13 now for a recompence in the same, (i speak as unto my children,)
be ye also enlarged.

6:14 be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what
fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
hath light with darkness?  6:15 and what concord hath christ with
belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?  6:16 and
what agreement hath the temple of god with idols? for ye are the
temple of the living god; as god hath said, i will dwell in them, and
walk in them; and i will be their god, and they shall be my people.

6:17 wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the
lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and i will receive you.

6:18 and will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, saith the lord almighty.

7:1 having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of god.

7:2 receive us; we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we
have defrauded no man.

7:3 i speak not this to condemn you: for i have said before, that ye
are in our hearts to die and live with you.

7:4 great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my glorying of
you: i am filled with comfort, i am exceeding joyful in all our
tribulation.

7:5 for, when we were come into macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but
we were troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were
fears.

7:6 nevertheless god, that comforteth those that are cast down,
comforted us by the coming of titus; 7:7 and not by his coming only,
but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you, when he told
us your earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind toward me; so
that i rejoiced the more.

7:8 for though i made you sorry with a letter, i do not repent, though
i did repent: for i perceive that the same epistle hath made you
sorry, though it were but for a season.

7:9 now i rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed
to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye
might receive damage by us in nothing.

7:10 for godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be
repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.

7:11 for behold this selfsame thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of
yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement
desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! in all things ye have
approved yourselves to be clear in this matter.

7:12 wherefore, though i wrote unto you, i did it not for his cause
that had done the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but
that our care for you in the sight of god might appear unto you.

7:13 therefore we were comforted in your comfort: yea, and exceedingly
the more joyed we for the joy of titus, because his spirit was
refreshed by you all.

7:14 for if i have boasted any thing to him of you, i am not ashamed;
but as we spake all things to you in truth, even so our boasting,
which i made before titus, is found a truth.

7:15 and his inward affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he
remembereth the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye
received him.

7:16 i rejoice therefore that i have confidence in you in all things.

8:1 moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of god bestowed
on the churches of macedonia; 8:2 how that in a great trial of
affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded
unto the riches of their liberality.

8:3 for to their power, i bear record, yea, and beyond their power
they were willing of themselves; 8:4 praying us with much intreaty
that we would receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of the
ministering to the saints.

8:5 and this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own
selves to the lord, and unto us by the will of god.

8:6 insomuch that we desired titus, that as he had begun, so he would
also finish in you the same grace also.

8:7 therefore, as ye abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance,
and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us, see that
ye abound in this grace also.

8:8 i speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the forwardness of
others, and to prove the sincerity of your love.

8:9 for ye know the grace of our lord jesus christ, that, though he
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
poverty might be rich.

8:10 and herein i give my advice: for this is expedient for you, who
have begun before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year ago.

8:11 now therefore perform the doing of it; that as there was a
readiness to will, so there may be a performance also out of that
which ye have.

8:12 for if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to
that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not.

8:13 for i mean not that other men be eased, and ye burdened: 8:14 but
by an equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a supply
for their want, that their abundance also may be a supply for your
want: that there may be equality: 8:15 as it is written, he that had
gathered much had nothing over; and he that had gathered little had no
lack.

8:16 but thanks be to god, which put the same earnest care into the
heart of titus for you.

8:17 for indeed he accepted the exhortation; but being more forward,
of his own accord he went unto you.

8:18 and we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the
gospel throughout all the churches; 8:19 and not that only, but who
was also chosen of the churches to travel with us with this grace,
which is administered by us to the glory of the same lord, and
declaration of your ready mind: 8:20 avoiding this, that no man should
blame us in this abundance which is administered by us: 8:21 providing
for honest things, not only in the sight of the lord, but also in the
sight of men.

8:22 and we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes
proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the
great confidence which i have in you.

8:23 whether any do enquire of titus, he is my partner and
fellowhelper concerning you: or our brethren be enquired of, they are
the messengers of the churches, and the glory of christ.

8:24 wherefore shew ye to them, and before the churches, the proof of
your love, and of our boasting on your behalf.

9:1 for as touching the ministering to the saints, it is superfluous
for me to write to you: 9:2 for i know the forwardness of your mind,
for which i boast of you to them of macedonia, that achaia was ready a
year ago; and your zeal hath provoked very many.

9:3 yet have i sent the brethren, lest our boasting of you should be
in vain in this behalf; that, as i said, ye may be ready: 9:4 lest
haply if they of macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we
(that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in this same confident
boasting.

9:5 therefore i thought it necessary to exhort the brethren, that they
would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof
ye had notice before, that the same might be ready, as a matter of
bounty, and not as of covetousness.

9:6 but this i say, he which soweth sparingly shall reap also
sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also
bountifully.

9:7 every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give;
not grudgingly, or of necessity: for god loveth a cheerful giver.

9:8 and god is able to make all grace abound toward you; that ye,
always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good
work: 9:9 (as it is written, he hath dispersed abroad; he hath given
to the poor: his righteousness remaineth for ever.

9:10 now he that ministereth seed to the sower both minister bread for
your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of
your righteousness;) 9:11 being enriched in every thing to all
bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to god.

9:12 for the administration of this service not only supplieth the
want of the saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto
god; 9:13 whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify
god for your professed subjection unto the gospel of christ, and for
your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all men; 9:14 and by
their prayer for you, which long after you for the exceeding grace of
god in you.

9:15 thanks be unto god for his unspeakable gift.

10:1 now i paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of
christ, who in presence am base among you, but being absent am bold
toward you: 10:2 but i beseech you, that i may not be bold when i am
present with that confidence, wherewith i think to be bold against
some, which think of us as if we walked according to the flesh.

10:3 for though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh:
10:4 (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through god to the pulling down of strong holds;) 10:5 casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the
knowledge of god, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of christ; 10:6 and having in a readiness to revenge all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

10:7 do ye look on things after the outward appearance? if any man
trust to himself that he is christ's, let him of himself think this
again, that, as he is christ's, even so are we christ's.

10:8 for though i should boast somewhat more of our authority, which
the lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction,
i should not be ashamed: 10:9 that i may not seem as if i would
terrify you by letters.

10:10 for his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful; but his
bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible.

10:11 let such an one think this, that, such as we are in word by
letters when we are absent, such will we be also in deed when we are
present.

10:12 for we dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare
ourselves with some that commend themselves: but they measuring
themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves,
are not wise.

10:13 but we will not boast of things without our measure, but
according to the measure of the rule which god hath distributed to us,
a measure to reach even unto you.

10:14 for we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure, as though we
reached not unto you: for we are come as far as to you also in
preaching the gospel of christ: 10:15 not boasting of things without
our measure, that is, of other men's labours; but having hope, when
your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you according to
our rule abundantly, 10:16 to preach the gospel in the regions beyond
you, and not to boast in another man's line of things made ready to
our hand.

10:17 but he that glorieth, let him glory in the lord.

10:18 for not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the
lord commendeth.

11:1 would to god ye could bear with me a little in my folly: and
indeed bear with me.

11:2 for i am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for i have
espoused you to one husband, that i may present you as a chaste virgin
to christ.

11:3 but i fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled eve
through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in christ.

11:4 for if he that cometh preacheth another jesus, whom we have not
preached, or if ye receive another spirit, which ye have not received,
or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with
him.

11:5 for i suppose i was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles.

11:6 but though i be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have
been throughly made manifest among you in all things.

11:7 have i committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be
exalted, because i have preached to you the gospel of god freely?
11:8 i robbed other churches, taking wages of them, to do you service.

11:9 and when i was present with you, and wanted, i was chargeable to
no man: for that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from
macedonia supplied: and in all things i have kept myself from being
burdensome unto you, and so will i keep myself.

11:10 as the truth of christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this
boasting in the regions of achaia.

11:11 wherefore? because i love you not? god knoweth.

11:12 but what i do, that i will do, that i may cut off occasion from
them which desire occasion; that wherein they glory, they may be found
even as we.

11:13 for such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the apostles of christ.

11:14 and no marvel; for satan himself is transformed into an angel of
light.

11:15 therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be
transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be
according to their works.

11:16 i say again, let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a
fool receive me, that i may boast myself a little.

11:17 that which i speak, i speak it not after the lord, but as it
were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting.

11:18 seeing that many glory after the flesh, i will glory also.

11:19 for ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise.

11:20 for ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour
you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you
on the face.

11:21 i speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak.
howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (i speak foolishly,) i am bold
also.

11:22 are they hebrews? so am i. are they israelites? so am i. are
they the seed of abraham? so am i.

11:23 are they ministers of christ? (i speak as a fool) i am more; in
labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more
frequent, in deaths oft.

11:24 of the jews five times received i forty stripes save one.

11:25 thrice was i beaten with rods, once was i stoned, thrice i
suffered shipwreck, a night and a day i have been in the deep; 11:26
in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in
the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils
among false brethren; 11:27 in weariness and painfulness, in watchings
often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

11:28 beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me
daily, the care of all the churches.

11:29 who is weak, and i am not weak? who is offended, and i burn not?
11:30 if i must needs glory, i will glory of the things which concern
mine infirmities.

11:31 the god and father of our lord jesus christ, which is blessed
for evermore, knoweth that i lie not.

11:32 in damascus the governor under aretas the king kept the city of
the damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me: 11:33 and
through a window in a basket was i let down by the wall, and escaped
his hands.

12:1 it is not expedient for me doubtless to glory. i will come to
visions and revelations of the lord.

12:2 i knew a man in christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the
body, i cannot tell; or whether out of the body, i cannot tell: god
knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven.

12:3 and i knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body,
i cannot tell: god knoweth;) 12:4 how that he was caught up into
paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a
man to utter.

12:5 of such an one will i glory: yet of myself i will not glory, but
in mine infirmities.

12:6 for though i would desire to glory, i shall not be a fool; for i
will say the truth: but now i forbear, lest any man should think of me
above that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me.

12:7 and lest i should be exalted above measure through the abundance
of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of satan to buffet me, lest i should be exalted above
measure.

12:8 for this thing i besought the lord thrice, that it might depart
from me.

12:9 and he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness. most gladly therefore will i
rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of christ may rest upon
me.

12:10 therefore i take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for christ's sake: for
when i am weak, then am i strong.

12:11 i am become a fool in glorying; ye have compelled me: for i
ought to have been commended of you: for in nothing am i behind the
very chiefest apostles, though i be nothing.

12:12 truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all
patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.

12:13 for what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches,
except it be that i myself was not burdensome to you? forgive me this
wrong.

12:14 behold, the third time i am ready to come to you; and i will not
be burdensome to you: for i seek not your's but you: for the children
ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.

12:15 and i will very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the
more abundantly i love you, the less i be loved.

12:16 but be it so, i did not burden you: nevertheless, being crafty,
i caught you with guile.

12:17 did i make a gain of you by any of them whom i sent unto you?
12:18 i desired titus, and with him i sent a brother. did titus make a
gain of you? walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the
same steps?  12:19 again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you?
we speak before god in christ: but we do all things, dearly beloved,
for your edifying.

12:20 for i fear, lest, when i come, i shall not find you such as i
would, and that i shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest
there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings,
swellings, tumults: 12:21 and lest, when i come again, my god will
humble me among you, and that i shall bewail many which have sinned
already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and
lasciviousness which they have committed.

13:1 this is the third time i am coming to you. in the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established.

13:2 i told you before, and foretell you, as if i were present, the
second time; and being absent now i write to them which heretofore
have sinned, and to all other, that, if i come again, i will not
spare: 13:3 since ye seek a proof of christ speaking in me, which to
you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in you.

13:4 for though he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by
the power of god. for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with
him by the power of god toward you.

13:5 examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own
selves. know ye not your own selves, how that jesus christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates?  13:6 but i trust that ye shall know that we
are not reprobates.

13:7 now i pray to god that ye do no evil; not that we should appear
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as
reprobates.

13:8 for we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

13:9 for we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this
also we wish, even your perfection.

13:10 therefore i write these things being absent, lest being present
i should use sharpness, according to the power which the lord hath
given me to edification, and not to destruction.

13:11 finally, brethren, farewell. be perfect, be of good comfort, be
of one mind, live in peace; and the god of love and peace shall be
with you.

13:12 greet one another with an holy kiss.

13:13 all the saints salute you.

13:14 the grace of the lord jesus christ, and the love of god, and the
communion of the holy ghost, be with you all. amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to the galatians


1:1 paul, an apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by jesus
christ, and god the father, who raised him from the dead;) 1:2 and all
the brethren which are with me, unto the churches of galatia: 1:3
grace be to you and peace from god the father, and from our lord jesus
christ, 1:4 who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us
from this present evil world, according to the will of god and our
father: 1:5 to whom be glory for ever and ever. amen.

1:6 i marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into
the grace of christ unto another gospel: 1:7 which is not another; but
there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of
christ.

1:8 but though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed.

1:9 as we said before, so say i now again, if any man preach any other
gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.

1:10 for do i now persuade men, or god? or do i seek to please men?
for if i yet pleased men, i should not be the servant of christ.

1:11 but i certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached
of me is not after man.

1:12 for i neither received it of man, neither was i taught it, but by
the revelation of jesus christ.

1:13 for ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the jews'
religion, how that beyond measure i persecuted the church of god, and
wasted it: 1:14 and profited in the jews' religion above many my
equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the
traditions of my fathers.

1:15 but when it pleased god, who separated me from my mother's womb,
and called me by his grace, 1:16 to reveal his son in me, that i might
preach him among the heathen; immediately i conferred not with flesh
and blood: 1:17 neither went i up to jerusalem to them which were
apostles before me; but i went into arabia, and returned again unto
damascus.

1:18 then after three years i went up to jerusalem to see peter, and
abode with him fifteen days.

1:19 but other of the apostles saw i none, save james the lord's
brother.

1:20 now the things which i write unto you, behold, before god, i lie
not.

1:21 afterwards i came into the regions of syria and cilicia; 1:22 and
was unknown by face unto the churches of judaea which were in christ:
1:23 but they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times
past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed.

1:24 and they glorified god in me.

2:1 then fourteen years after i went up again to jerusalem with
barnabas, and took titus with me also.

2:2 and i went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that
gospel which i preach among the gentiles, but privately to them which
were of reputation, lest by any means i should run, or had run, in
vain.

2:3 but neither titus, who was with me, being a greek, was compelled
to be circumcised: 2:4 and that because of false brethren unawares
brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have
in christ jesus, that they might bring us into bondage: 2:5 to whom we
gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the
gospel might continue with you.

2:6 but of these who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it
maketh no matter to me: god accepteth no man's person:) for they who
seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me: 2:7 but
contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the gospel of the circumcision was unto peter;
2:8 (for he that wrought effectually in peter to the apostleship of
the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the gentiles:) 2:9
and when james, cephas, and john, who seemed to be pillars, perceived
the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and barnabas the
right hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and
they unto the circumcision.

2:10 only they would that we should remember the poor; the same which
i also was forward to do.

2:11 but when peter was come to antioch, i withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed.

2:12 for before that certain came from james, he did eat with the
gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the circumcision.

2:13 and the other jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that
barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.

2:14 but when i saw that they walked not uprightly according to the
truth of the gospel, i said unto peter before them all, if thou, being
a jew, livest after the manner of gentiles, and not as do the jews,
why compellest thou the gentiles to live as do the jews?  2:15 we who
are jews by nature, and not sinners of the gentiles, 2:16 knowing that
a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of
jesus christ, even we have believed in jesus christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of christ, and not by the works of the law: for
by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.

2:17 but if, while we seek to be justified by christ, we ourselves
also are found sinners, is therefore christ the minister of sin? god
forbid.

2:18 for if i build again the things which i destroyed, i make myself
a transgressor.

2:19 for i through the law am dead to the law, that i might live unto
god.

2:20 i am crucified with christ: neverthless i live; yet not i, but
christ liveth in me: and the life which i now live in the flesh i live
by the faith of the son of god, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

2:21 i do not frustrate the grace of god: for if righteousness come by
the law, then christ is dead in vain.

3:1 o foolish galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes jesus christ hath been evidently set
forth, crucified among you?  3:2 this only would i learn of you,
received ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of
faith?  3:3 are ye so foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye now
made perfect by the flesh?  3:4 have ye suffered so many things in
vain? if it be yet in vain.

3:5 he therefore that ministereth to you the spirit, and worketh
miracles among you, doeth he it by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith?  3:6 even as abraham believed god, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness.

3:7 know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of abraham.

3:8 and the scripture, foreseeing that god would justify the heathen
through faith, preached before the gospel unto abraham, saying, in
thee shall all nations be blessed.

3:9 so then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful abraham.

3:10 for as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse:
for it is written, cursed is every one that continueth not in all
things which are written in the book of the law to do them.

3:11 but that no man is justified by the law in the sight of god, it
is evident: for, the just shall live by faith.

3:12 and the law is not of faith: but, the man that doeth them shall
live in them.

3:13 christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangeth on a
tree: 3:14 that the blessing of abraham might come on the gentiles
through jesus christ; that we might receive the promise of the spirit
through faith.

3:15 brethren, i speak after the manner of men; though it be but a
man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth
thereto.

3:16 now to abraham and his seed were the promises made. he saith not,
and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
christ.

3:17 and this i say, that the covenant, that was confirmed before of
god in christ, the law, which was four hundred and thirty years after,
cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect.

3:18 for if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise:
but god gave it to abraham by promise.

3:19 wherefore then serveth the law? it was added because of
transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was
made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator.

3:20 now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but god is one.

3:21 is the law then against the promises of god? god forbid: for if
there had been a law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the law.

3:22 but the scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise
by faith of jesus christ might be given to them that believe.

3:23 but before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto
the faith which should afterwards be revealed.

3:24 wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto christ,
that we might be justified by faith.

3:25 but after that faith is come, we are no longer under a
schoolmaster.

3:26 for ye are all the children of god by faith in christ jesus.

3:27 for as many of you as have been baptized into christ have put on
christ.

3:28 there is neither jew nor greek, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in christ jesus.

3:29 and if ye be christ's, then are ye abraham's seed, and heirs
according to the promise.

4:1 now i say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth
nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all; 4:2 but is under
tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father.

4:3 even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the
elements of the world: 4:4 but when the fulness of the time was come,
god sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, 4:5 to
redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons.

4:6 and because ye are sons, god hath sent forth the spirit of his son
into your hearts, crying, abba, father.

4:7 wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son,
then an heir of god through christ.

4:8 howbeit then, when ye knew not god, ye did service unto them which
by nature are no gods.

4:9 but now, after that ye have known god, or rather are known of god,
how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye
desire again to be in bondage?  4:10 ye observe days, and months, and
times, and years.

4:11 i am afraid of you, lest i have bestowed upon you labour in vain.

4:12 brethren, i beseech you, be as i am; for i am as ye are: ye have
not injured me at all.

4:13 ye know how through infirmity of the flesh i preached the gospel
unto you at the first.

4:14 and my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor
rejected; but received me as an angel of god, even as christ jesus.

4:15 where is then the blessedness ye spake of? for i bear you record,
that, if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own
eyes, and have given them to me.

4:16 am i therefore become your enemy, because i tell you the truth?
4:17 they zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude
you, that ye might affect them.

4:18 but it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing,
and not only when i am present with you.

4:19 my little children, of whom i travail in birth again until christ
be formed in you, 4:20 i desire to be present with you now, and to
change my voice; for i stand in doubt of you.

4:21 tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the
law?  4:22 for it is written, that abraham had two sons, the one by a
bondmaid, the other by a freewoman.

4:23 but he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he
of the freewoman was by promise.

4:24 which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants;
the one from the mount sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is
agar.

4:25 for this agar is mount sinai in arabia, and answereth to
jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children.

4:26 but jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us
all.

4:27 for it is written, rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break
forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many
more children than she which hath an husband.

4:28 now we, brethren, as isaac was, are the children of promise.

4:29 but as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that
was born after the spirit, even so it is now.

4:30 nevertheless what saith the scripture? cast out the bondwoman and
her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son
of the freewoman.

4:31 so then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of
the free.

5:1 stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith christ hath made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

5:2 behold, i paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, christ
shall profit you nothing.

5:3 for i testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a
debtor to do the whole law.

5:4 christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are
justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace.

5:5 for we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by
faith.

5:6 for in jesus christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love.

5:7 ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the
truth?  5:8 this persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you.

5:9 a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

5:10 i have confidence in you through the lord, that ye will be none
otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment,
whosoever he be.

5:11 and i, brethren, if i yet preach circumcision, why do i yet
suffer persecution? then is the offence of the cross ceased.

5:12 i would they were even cut off which trouble you.

5:13 for, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.

5:14 for all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

5:15 but if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.

5:16 this i say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the
lust of the flesh.

5:17 for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.

5:18 but if ye be led of the spirit, ye are not under the law.

5:19 now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these;
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 5:20 idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, 5:21 envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such
like: of the which i tell you before, as i have also told you in time
past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of
god.

5:22 but the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, 5:23 meekness, temperance: against such
there is no law.

5:24 and they that are christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.

5:25 if we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit.

5:26 let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another.

6:1 brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering
thyself, lest thou also be tempted.

6:2 bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of christ.

6:3 for if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
deceiveth himself.

6:4 but let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.

6:5 for every man shall bear his own burden.

6:6 let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that
teacheth in all good things.

6:7 be not deceived; god is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he also reap.

6:8 for he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting.

6:9 and let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.

6:10 as we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.

6:11 ye see how large a letter i have written unto you with mine own
hand.

6:12 as many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they
constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer
persecution for the cross of christ.

6:13 for neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law; but
desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.

6:14 but god forbid that i should glory, save in the cross of our lord
jesus christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and i unto the
world.

6:15 for in christ jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

6:16 and as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the israel of god.

6:17 from henceforth let no man trouble me: for i bear in my body the
marks of the lord jesus.

6:18 brethren, the grace of our lord jesus christ be with your spirit.

amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to the ephesians


1:1 paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the will of god, to the
saints which are at ephesus, and to the faithful in christ jesus:
1:2 grace be to you, and peace, from god our father, and from the lord
jesus christ.

1:3 blessed be the god and father of our lord jesus christ, who hath
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in christ:
1:4 according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love:
1:5 having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by jesus
christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, 1:6 to
the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted
in the beloved.

1:7 in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace; 1:8 wherein he hath
abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; 1:9 having made known
unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which
he hath purposed in himself: 1:10 that in the dispensation of the
fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in christ,
both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him: 1:11 in
whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated
according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the
counsel of his own will: 1:12 that we should be to the praise of his
glory, who first trusted in christ.

1:13 in whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth,
the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, 1:14 which is the
earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased
possession, unto the praise of his glory.

1:15 wherefore i also, after i heard of your faith in the lord jesus,
and love unto all the saints, 1:16 cease not to give thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers; 1:17 that the god of our lord
jesus christ, the father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of
wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: 1:18 the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of
his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in
the saints, 1:19 and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,
1:20 which he wrought in christ, when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, 1:21 far above
all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name
that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come: 1:22 and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be
the head over all things to the church, 1:23 which is his body, the
fulness of him that filleth all in all.

2:1 and you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins;
2:2 wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this
world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit
that now worketh in the children of disobedience: 2:3 among whom also
we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by
nature the children of wrath, even as others.

2:4 but god, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
loved us, 2:5 even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us
together with christ, (by grace ye are saved;) 2:6 and hath raised us
up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in christ
jesus: 2:7 that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches
of his grace in his kindness toward us through christ jesus.

2:8 for by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
yourselves: it is the gift of god: 2:9 not of works, lest any man
should boast.

2:10 for we are his workmanship, created in christ jesus unto good
works, which god hath before ordained that we should walk in them.

2:11 wherefore remember, that ye being in time past gentiles in the
flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called the
circumcision in the flesh made by hands; 2:12 that at that time ye
were without christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without
god in the world: 2:13 but now in christ jesus ye who sometimes were
far off are made nigh by the blood of christ.

2:14 for he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down
the middle wall of partition between us; 2:15 having abolished in his
flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in
ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making
peace; 2:16 and that he might reconcile both unto god in one body by
the cross, having slain the enmity thereby: 2:17 and came and preached
peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh.

2:18 for through him we both have access by one spirit unto the
father.

2:19 now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but
fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of god; 2:20 and
are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, jesus
christ himself being the chief corner stone; 2:21 in whom all the
building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the
lord: 2:22 in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of
god through the spirit.

3:1 for this cause i paul, the prisoner of jesus christ for you
gentiles, 3:2 if ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of god
which is given me to you-ward: 3:3 how that by revelation he made
known unto me the mystery; (as i wrote afore in few words, 3:4
whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery
of christ) 3:5 which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of
men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the
spirit; 3:6 that the gentiles should be fellowheirs, and of the same
body, and partakers of his promise in christ by the gospel: 3:7
whereof i was made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of
god given unto me by the effectual working of his power.

3:8 unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace
given, that i should preach among the gentiles the unsearchable riches
of christ; 3:9 and to make all men see what is the fellowship of the
mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in god,
who created all things by jesus christ: 3:10 to the intent that now
unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known
by the church the manifold wisdom of god, 3:11 according to the
eternal purpose which he purposed in christ jesus our lord: 3:12 in
whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.

3:13 wherefore i desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you,
which is your glory.

3:14 for this cause i bow my knees unto the father of our lord jesus
christ, 3:15 of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named,
3:16 that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to
be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man; 3:17 that
christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and
grounded in love, 3:18 may be able to comprehend with all saints what
is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; 3:19 and to know
the love of christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled
with all the fulness of god.

3:20 now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, 3:21
unto him be glory in the church by christ jesus throughout all ages,
world without end. amen.

4:1 i therefore, the prisoner of the lord, beseech you that ye walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, 4:2 with all lowliness
and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; 4:3
endeavouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

4:4 there is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling; 4:5 one lord, one faith, one baptism, 4:6 one
god and father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you
all.

4:7 but unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure
of the gift of christ.

4:8 wherefore he saith, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men.

4:9 (now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first
into the lower parts of the earth?  4:10 he that descended is the same
also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things.)  4:11 and he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and
some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; 4:12 for the
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of christ: 4:13 till we all come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of god, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of christ: 4:14 that we
henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; 4:15 but speaking the
truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head,
even christ: 4:16 from whom the whole body fitly joined together and
compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the
body unto the edifying of itself in love.

4:17 this i say therefore, and testify in the lord, that ye henceforth
walk not as other gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, 4:18
having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of
god through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their heart: 4:19 who being past feeling have given themselves over
unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.

4:20 but ye have not so learned christ; 4:21 if so be that ye have
heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in jesus: 4:22
that ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which
is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; 4:23 and be renewed in
the spirit of your mind; 4:24 and that ye put on the new man, which
after god is created in righteousness and true holiness.

4:25 wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbour: for we are members one of another.

4:26 be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your
wrath: 4:27 neither give place to the devil.

4:28 let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour,
working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to
give to him that needeth.

4:29 let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto
the hearers.

4:30 and grieve not the holy spirit of god, whereby ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption.

4:31 let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all malice: 4:32 and be ye kind
one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as god for
christ's sake hath forgiven you.

5:1 be ye therefore followers of god, as dear children; 5:2 and walk
in love, as christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us
an offering and a sacrifice to god for a sweetsmelling savour.

5:3 but fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not
be once named among you, as becometh saints; 5:4 neither filthiness,
nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather
giving of thanks.

5:5 for this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor
covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom
of christ and of god.

5:6 let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these
things cometh the wrath of god upon the children of disobedience.

5:7 be not ye therefore partakers with them.

5:8 for ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the lord:
walk as children of light: 5:9 (for the fruit of the spirit is in all
goodness and righteousness and truth;) 5:10 proving what is acceptable
unto the lord.

5:11 and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.

5:12 for it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of
them in secret.

5:13 but all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light:
for whatsoever doth make manifest is light.

5:14 wherefore he saith, awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead, and christ shall give thee light.

5:15 see then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
5:16 redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

5:17 wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of
the lord is.

5:18 and be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with
the spirit; 5:19 speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the lord;
5:20 giving thanks always for all things unto god and the father in
the name of our lord jesus christ; 5:21 submitting yourselves one to
another in the fear of god.

5:22 wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the
lord.

5:23 for the husband is the head of the wife, even as christ is the
head of the church: and he is the saviour of the body.

5:24 therefore as the church is subject unto christ, so let the wives
be to their own husbands in every thing.

5:25 husbands, love your wives, even as christ also loved the church,
and gave himself for it; 5:26 that he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water by the word, 5:27 that he might present it
to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.

5:28 so ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. he that
loveth his wife loveth himself.

5:29 for no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and
cherisheth it, even as the lord the church: 5:30 for we are members of
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

5:31 for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall
be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.

5:32 this is a great mystery: but i speak concerning christ and the
church.

5:33 nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife
even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband.

6:1 children, obey your parents in the lord: for this is right.

6:2 honour thy father and mother; which is the first commandment with
promise; 6:3 that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long
on the earth.

6:4 and, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring
them up in the nurture and admonition of the lord.

6:5 servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to
the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as
unto christ; 6:6 not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the
servants of christ, doing the will of god from the heart; 6:7 with
good will doing service, as to the lord, and not to men: 6:8 knowing
that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of
the lord, whether he be bond or free.

6:9 and, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing
threatening: knowing that your master also is in heaven; neither is
there respect of persons with him.

6:10 finally, my brethren, be strong in the lord, and in the power of
his might.

6:11 put on the whole armour of god, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil.

6:12 for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.

6:13 wherefore take unto you the whole armour of god, that ye may be
able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.

6:14 stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and
having on the breastplate of righteousness; 6:15 and your feet shod
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; 6:16 above all, taking
the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked.

6:17 and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of god: 6:18 praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance and supplication for all saints; 6:19 and for me, that
utterance may be given unto me, that i may open my mouth boldly, to
make known the mystery of the gospel, 6:20 for which i am an
ambassador in bonds: that therein i may speak boldly, as i ought to
speak.

6:21 but that ye also may know my affairs, and how i do, tychicus, a
beloved brother and faithful minister in the lord, shall make known to
you all things: 6:22 whom i have sent unto you for the same purpose,
that ye might know our affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts.

6:23 peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from god the
father and the lord jesus christ.

6:24 grace be with all them that love our lord jesus christ in
sincerity.

amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to the philippians


1:1 paul and timotheus, the servants of jesus christ, to all the
saints in christ jesus which are at philippi, with the bishops and
deacons: 1:2 grace be unto you, and peace, from god our father, and
from the lord jesus christ.

1:3 i thank my god upon every remembrance of you, 1:4 always in every
prayer of mine for you all making request with joy, 1:5 for your
fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now; 1:6 being
confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in
you will perform it until the day of jesus christ: 1:7 even as it is
meet for me to think this of you all, because i have you in my heart;
inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of
the gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace.

1:8 for god is my record, how greatly i long after you all in the
bowels of jesus christ.

1:9 and this i pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and in all judgment; 1:10 that ye may approve things that
are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day
of christ.

1:11 being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by jesus
christ, unto the glory and praise of god.

1:12 but i would ye should understand, brethren, that the things which
happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the
gospel; 1:13 so that my bonds in christ are manifest in all the
palace, and in all other places; 1:14 and many of the brethren in the
lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the
word without fear.

1:15 some indeed preach christ even of envy and strife; and some also
of good will: 1:16 the one preach christ of contention, not sincerely,
supposing to add affliction to my bonds: 1:17 but the other of love,
knowing that i am set for the defence of the gospel.

1:18 what then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in
truth, christ is preached; and i therein do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice.

1:19 for i know that this shall turn to my salvation through your
prayer, and the supply of the spirit of jesus christ, 1:20 according
to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing i shall be
ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death.

1:21 for to me to live is christ, and to die is gain.

1:22 but if i live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet
what i shall choose i wot not.

1:23 for i am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with christ; which is far better: 1:24 nevertheless to abide in
the flesh is more needful for you.

1:25 and having this confidence, i know that i shall abide and
continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith; 1:26 that
your rejoicing may be more abundant in jesus christ for me by my
coming to you again.

1:27 only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of
christ: that whether i come and see you, or else be absent, i may hear
of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind
striving together for the faith of the gospel; 1:28 and in nothing
terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of god.

1:29 for unto you it is given in the behalf of christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake; 1:30 having the same
conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me.

2:1 if there be therefore any consolation in christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 2:2
fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being
of one accord, of one mind.

2:3 let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness
of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.

2:4 look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others.

2:5 let this mind be in you, which was also in christ jesus: 2:6 who,
being in the form of god, thought it not robbery to be equal with god:
2:7 but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men: 2:8 and being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross.

2:9 wherefore god also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name: 2:10 that at the name of jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under
the earth; 2:11 and that every tongue should confess that jesus christ
is lord, to the glory of god the father.

2:12 wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling.

2:13 for it is god which worketh in you both to will and to do of his
good pleasure.

2:14 do all things without murmurings and disputings: 2:15 that ye may
be blameless and harmless, the sons of god, without rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights
in the world; 2:16 holding forth the word of life; that i may rejoice
in the day of christ, that i have not run in vain, neither laboured in
vain.

2:17 yea, and if i be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith, i joy, and rejoice with you all.

2:18 for the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.

2:19 but i trust in the lord jesus to send timotheus shortly unto you,
that i also may be of good comfort, when i know your state.

2:20 for i have no man likeminded, who will naturally care for your
state.

2:21 for all seek their own, not the things which are jesus christ's.

2:22 but ye know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he
hath served with me in the gospel.

2:23 him therefore i hope to send presently, so soon as i shall see
how it will go with me.

2:24 but i trust in the lord that i also myself shall come shortly.

2:25 yet i supposed it necessary to send to you epaphroditus, my
brother, and companion in labour, and fellowsoldier, but your
messenger, and he that ministered to my wants.

2:26 for he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because
that ye had heard that he had been sick.

2:27 for indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but god had mercy on him;
and not on him only, but on me also, lest i should have sorrow upon
sorrow.

2:28 i sent him therefore the more carefully, that, when ye see him
again, ye may rejoice, and that i may be the less sorrowful.

2:29 receive him therefore in the lord with all gladness; and hold
such in reputation: 2:30 because for the work of christ he was nigh
unto death, not regarding his life, to supply your lack of service
toward me.

3:1 finally, my brethren, rejoice in the lord. to write the same
things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.

3:2 beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.

3:3 for we are the circumcision, which worship god in the spirit, and
rejoice in christ jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

3:4 though i might also have confidence in the flesh. if any other man
thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, i more: 3:5
circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of israel, of the tribe of
benjamin, an hebrew of the hebrews; as touching the law, a pharisee;
3:6 concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the
righteousness which is in the law, blameless.

3:7 but what things were gain to me, those i counted loss for christ.

3:8 yea doubtless, and i count all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of christ jesus my lord: for whom i have suffered the
loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that i may win christ,
3:9 and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is
of the law, but that which is through the faith of christ, the
righteousness which is of god by faith: 3:10 that i may know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable unto his death; 3:11 if by any means i might
attain unto the resurrection of the dead.

3:12 not as though i had already attained, either were already
perfect: but i follow after, if that i may apprehend that for which
also i am apprehended of christ jesus.

3:13 brethren, i count not myself to have apprehended: but this one
thing i do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before, 3:14 i press toward the mark
for the prize of the high calling of god in christ jesus.

3:15 let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if
in any thing ye be otherwise minded, god shall reveal even this unto
you.

3:16 nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

3:17 brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk
so as ye have us for an ensample.

3:18 (for many walk, of whom i have told you often, and now tell you
even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of christ: 3:19
whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is
in their shame, who mind earthly things.)  3:20 for our conversation
is in heaven; from whence also we look for the saviour, the lord jesus
christ: 3:21 who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself.

4:1 therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and
crown, so stand fast in the lord, my dearly beloved.

4:2 i beseech euodias, and beseech syntyche, that they be of the same
mind in the lord.

4:3 and i intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which
laboured with me in the gospel, with clement also, and with other my
fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life.

4:4 rejoice in the lord alway: and again i say, rejoice.

4:5 let your moderation be known unto all men. the lord is at hand.

4:6 be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto
god.

4:7 and the peace of god, which passeth all understanding, shall keep
your hearts and minds through christ jesus.

4:8 finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these
things.

4:9 those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do: and the god of peace shall be with you.

4:10 but i rejoiced in the lord greatly, that now at the last your
care of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye
lacked opportunity.

4:11 not that i speak in respect of want: for i have learned, in
whatsoever state i am, therewith to be content.

4:12 i know both how to be abased, and i know how to abound: every
where and in all things i am instructed both to be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.

4:13 i can do all things through christ which strengtheneth me.

4:14 notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye did communicate with
my affliction.

4:15 now ye philippians know also, that in the beginning of the
gospel, when i departed from macedonia, no church communicated with me
as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.

4:16 for even in thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my
necessity.

4:17 not because i desire a gift: but i desire fruit that may abound
to your account.

4:18 but i have all, and abound: i am full, having received of
epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odour of a sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to god.

4:19 but my god shall supply all your need according to his riches in
glory by christ jesus.

4:20 now unto god and our father be glory for ever and ever. amen.

4:21 salute every saint in christ jesus. the brethren which are with
me greet you.

4:22 all the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of caesar's
household.

4:23 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all. amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to the colossians


1:1  paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the will of god,
and timotheus our brother, 1:2  to the saints and faithful brethren
in christ which are at colosse: grace be unto you, and peace,
from god our father and the lord jesus christ.

1:3  we give thanks to god and the father of our lord jesus christ, praying
always for you,
1:4  since we heard of your faith in christ jesus, and of the love which ye
have to all the saints,
1:5  for the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard
before in the word of the truth of the gospel;
1:6  which is come unto you, as it is in all the world; and bringeth forth
fruit, as it doth also in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew the
grace of god in truth:
1:7  as ye also learned of epaphras our dear fellowservant, who is for you
a faithful minister of christ;
1:8  who also declared unto us your love in the spirit.

1:9  for this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his
will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding;
1:10  that ye might walk worthy of the lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of god;
1:11  strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto
all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness;
1:12  giving thanks unto the father, which hath made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light:
1:13  who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated
us into the kingdom of his dear son:
1:14  in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins:
1:15  who is the image of the invisible god, the firstborn of every
creature:
1:16  for by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:
1:17  and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

1:18  and he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the
firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.

1:19  for it pleased the father that in him should all fulness dwell;
1:20  and, having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to
reconcile all things unto himself; by him, i say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven.

1:21  and you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by
wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled
1:22  in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and
unblameable and unreproveable in his sight:
1:23  if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached
to every creature which is under heaven; whereof i paul am made a minister;
1:24  who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is
the church:
1:25  whereof i am made a minister, according to the dispensation of god
which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of god;
1:26  even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations,
but now is made manifest to his saints:
1:27  to whom god would make known what is the riches of the glory of this
mystery among the gentiles; which is christ in you, the hope of glory:
1:28  whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in christ jesus:
1:29  whereunto i also labour, striving according to his working, which
worketh in me mightily.

2:1  for i would that ye knew what great conflict i have for you, and for
them at laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh;
2:2  that their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and
unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgement of the mystery of god, and of the father, and of christ;
2:3  in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

2:4  and this i say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words.

2:5  for though i be absent in the flesh, yet am i with you in the spirit,
joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in
christ.

2:6  as ye have therefore received christ jesus the lord, so walk ye in
him:
2:7  rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have
been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.

2:8  beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
christ.

2:9  for in him dwelleth all the fulness of the godhead bodily.

2:10  and ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and
power:
2:11  in whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision
of christ:
2:12  buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of god, who hath raised him from the dead.

2:13  and you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your
flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses;
2:14  blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross;
2:15  and having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a shew of them
openly, triumphing over them in it.

2:16  let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of
an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days:
2:17  which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of christ.

2:18  let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
2:19  and not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and bands
having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the
increase of god.

2:20  wherefore if ye be dead with christ from the rudiments of the world,
why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances,
2:21  (touch not; taste not; handle not;
2:22  which all are to perish with the using;) after the commandments and
doctrines of men?
2:23  which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and neglecting of the body: not in any honour to the satisfying
of the flesh.

3:1  if ye then be risen with christ, seek those things which are above,
where christ sitteth on the right hand of god.

3:2  set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.

3:3  for ye are dead, and your life is hid with christ in god.

3:4  when christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.

3:5  mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry:
3:6  for which things' sake the wrath of god cometh on the children of
disobedience:
3:7  in the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them.

3:8  but now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthy communication out of your mouth.

3:9  lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with
his deeds;
3:10  and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the
image of him that created him:
3:11  where there is neither greek nor jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, barbarian, scythian, bond nor free: but christ is all, and in
all.

3:12  put on therefore, as the elect of god, holy and beloved, bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering;
3:13  forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any: even as christ forgave you, so also do ye.

3:14  and above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness.

3:15  and let the peace of god rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
are called in one body; and be ye thankful.

3:16  let the word of christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching
and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to the lord.

3:17  and whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the lord
jesus, giving thanks to god and the father by him.

3:18  wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the
lord.

3:19  husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.

3:20  children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing
unto the lord.

3:21  fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged.

3:22  servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh; not
with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing god;
3:23  and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the lord, and not unto
men;
3:24  knowing that of the lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the lord christ.

3:25  but he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath
done: and there is no respect of persons.

4:1  masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal; knowing
that ye also have a master in heaven.

4:2  continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving;
4:3  withal praying also for us, that god would open unto us a door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of christ, for which i am also in bonds:
4:4  that i may make it manifest, as i ought to speak.

4:5  walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time.

4:6  let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may
know how ye ought to answer every man.

4:7  all my state shall tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved
brother, and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the lord:
4:8  whom i have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know
your estate, and comfort your hearts;
4:9  with onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. they
shall make known unto you all things which are done here.

4:10  aristarchus my fellowprisoner saluteth you, and marcus, sister's son
to barnabas, (touching whom ye received commandments: if he come unto you,
receive him;)
4:11  and jesus, which is called justus, who are of the circumcision. these
only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom of god, which have been a comfort
unto me.

4:12  epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of christ, saluteth you,
always labouring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
complete in all the will of god.

4:13  for i bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them
that are in laodicea, and them in hierapolis.

4:14  luke, the beloved physician, and demas, greet you.

4:15  salute the brethren which are in laodicea, and nymphas, and the
church which is in his house.

4:16  and when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also
in the church of the laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from
laodicea.

4:17  and say to archippus, take heed to the ministry which thou hast
received in the lord, that thou fulfil it.

4:18  the salutation by the hand of me paul. remember my bonds. grace be
with you. amen.




the first epistle of paul the apostle to the thessalonians


1:1 paul, and silvanus, and timotheus, unto the church of the
thessalonians which is in god the father and in the lord jesus christ:
grace be unto you, and peace, from god our father, and the lord jesus
christ.

1:2 we give thanks to god always for you all, making mention of you in
our prayers; 1:3 remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and
labour of love, and patience of hope in our lord jesus christ, in the
sight of god and our father; 1:4 knowing, brethren beloved, your
election of god.

1:5 for our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power,
and in the holy ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner
of men we were among you for your sake.

1:6 and ye became followers of us, and of the lord, having received
the word in much affliction, with joy of the holy ghost.

1:7 so that ye were ensamples to all that believe in macedonia and
achaia.

1:8 for from you sounded out the word of the lord not only in
macedonia and achaia, but also in every place your faith to god-ward
is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing.

1:9 for they themselves shew of us what manner of entering in we had
unto you, and how ye turned to god from idols to serve the living and
true god; 1:10 and to wait for his son from heaven, whom he raised
from the dead, even jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.

2:1 for yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it
was not in vain: 2:2 but even after that we had suffered before, and
were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at philippi, we were bold in
our god to speak unto you the gospel of god with much contention.

2:3 for our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in
guile: 2:4 but as we were allowed of god to be put in trust with the
gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but god, which trieth
our hearts.

2:5 for neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor
a cloke of covetousness; god is witness: 2:6 nor of men sought we
glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been
burdensome, as the apostles of christ.

2:7 but we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her
children: 2:8 so being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing
to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of god only, but also our
own souls, because ye were dear unto us.

2:9 for ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring
night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we
preached unto you the gospel of god.

2:10 ye are witnesses, and god also, how holily and justly and
unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe: 2:11 as ye
know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a
father doth his children, 2:12 that ye would walk worthy of god, who
hath called you unto his kingdom and glory.

2:13 for this cause also thank we god without ceasing, because, when
ye received the word of god which ye heard of us, ye received it not
as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of god, which
effectually worketh also in you that believe.

2:14 for ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of god which
in judaea are in christ jesus: for ye also have suffered like things
of your own countrymen, even as they have of the jews: 2:15 who both
killed the lord jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us;
and they please not god, and are contrary to all men: 2:16 forbidding
us to speak to the gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their
sins alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

2:17 but we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time in
presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to see your
face with great desire.

2:18 wherefore we would have come unto you, even i paul, once and
again; but satan hindered us.

2:19 for what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even
ye in the presence of our lord jesus christ at his coming?  2:20 for
ye are our glory and joy.

3:1 wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to
be left at athens alone; 3:2 and sent timotheus, our brother, and
minister of god, and our fellowlabourer in the gospel of christ, to
establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith: 3:3 that no
man should be moved by these afflictions: for yourselves know that we
are appointed thereunto.

3:4 for verily, when we were with you, we told you before that we
should suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know.

3:5 for this cause, when i could no longer forbear, i sent to know
your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our
labour be in vain.

3:6 but now when timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good
tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance
of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you: 3:7
therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our affliction
and distress by your faith: 3:8 for now we live, if ye stand fast in
the lord.

3:9 for what thanks can we render to god again for you, for all the
joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our god; 3:10 night and day
praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect
that which is lacking in your faith?  3:11 now god himself and our
father, and our lord jesus christ, direct our way unto you.

3:12 and the lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: 3:13 to the end
he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before god, even
our father, at the coming of our lord jesus christ with all his
saints.

4:1 furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the
lord jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to
please god, so ye would abound more and more.

4:2 for ye know what commandments we gave you by the lord jesus.

4:3 for this is the will of god, even your sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication: 4:4 that every one of you should know
how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour; 4:5 not in the
lust of concupiscence, even as the gentiles which know not god: 4:6
that no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter: because
that the lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned
you and testified.

4:7 for god hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

4:8 he therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but god, who hath
also given unto us his holy spirit.

4:9 but as touching brotherly love ye need not that i write unto you:
for ye yourselves are taught of god to love one another.

4:10 and indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all
macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and
more; 4:11 and that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you; 4:12 that ye may
walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may have lack
of nothing.

4:13 but i would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have
no hope.

4:14 for if we believe that jesus died and rose again, even so them
also which sleep in jesus will god bring with him.

4:15 for this we say unto you by the word of the lord, that we which
are alive and remain unto the coming of the lord shall not prevent
them which are asleep.

4:16 for the lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of god: and the dead in
christ shall rise first: 4:17 then we which are alive and remain shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the lord in the
air: and so shall we ever be with the lord.

4:18 wherefore comfort one another with these words.

5:1 but of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that i
write unto you.

5:2 for yourselves know perfectly that the day of the lord so cometh
as a thief in the night.

5:3 for when they shall say, peace and safety; then sudden destruction
cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall
not escape.

5:4 but ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should
overtake you as a thief.

5:5 ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we
are not of the night, nor of darkness.

5:6 therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be
sober.

5:7 for they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken
are drunken in the night.

5:8 but let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the
breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of
salvation.

5:9 for god hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by
our lord jesus christ, 5:10 who died for us, that, whether we wake or
sleep, we should live together with him.

5:11 wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another,
even as also ye do.

5:12 and we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among
you, and are over you in the lord, and admonish you; 5:13 and to
esteem them very highly in love for their work's sake. and be at peace
among yourselves.

5:14 now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort
the feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.

5:15 see that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow
that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men.

5:16 rejoice evermore.

5:17 pray without ceasing.

5:18 in every thing give thanks: for this is the will of god in christ
jesus concerning you.

5:19 quench not the spirit.

5:20 despise not prophesyings.

5:21 prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

5:22 abstain from all appearance of evil.

5:23 and the very god of peace sanctify you wholly; and i pray god
your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our lord jesus christ.

5:24 faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it.

5:25 brethren, pray for us.

5:26 greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.

5:27 i charge you by the lord that this epistle be read unto all the
holy brethren.

5:28 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you. amen.




the second epistle of paul the apostle to the thessalonians


1:1 paul, and silvanus, and timotheus, unto the church of the
thessalonians in god our father and the lord jesus christ: 1:2 grace
unto you, and peace, from god our father and the lord jesus christ.

1:3 we are bound to thank god always for you, brethren, as it is meet,
because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every
one of you all toward each other aboundeth; 1:4 so that we ourselves
glory in you in the churches of god for your patience and faith in all
your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure: 1:5 which is a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of god, that ye may be
counted worthy of the kingdom of god, for which ye also suffer: 1:6
seeing it is a righteous thing with god to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you; 1:7 and to you who are troubled rest with us,
when the lord jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels, 1:8 in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not
god, and that obey not the gospel of our lord jesus christ: 1:9 who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the lord, and from the glory of his power; 1:10 when he shall come to
be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe
(because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.

1:11 wherefore also we pray always for you, that our god would count
you worthy of this calling, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of faith with power: 1:12 that the name of our
lord jesus christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to
the grace of our god and the lord jesus christ.

2:1 now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our lord jesus
christ, and by our gathering together unto him, 2:2 that ye be not
soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter as from us, as that the day of christ is at hand.

2:3 let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition; 2:4 who opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called god, or that is worshipped; so that he as god
sitteth in the temple of god, shewing himself that he is god.

2:5 remember ye not, that, when i was yet with you, i told you these
things?  2:6 and now ye know what withholdeth that he might be
revealed in his time.

2:7 for the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now
letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way.

2:8 and then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming: 2:9 even him, whose coming is after the
working of satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, 2:10 and
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish;
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved.

2:11 and for this cause god shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie: 2:12 that they all might be damned who believed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

2:13 but we are bound to give thanks alway to god for you, brethren
beloved of the lord, because god hath from the beginning chosen you to
salvation through sanctification of the spirit and belief of the
truth: 2:14 whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of
the glory of our lord jesus christ.

2:15 therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye
have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle.

2:16 now our lord jesus christ himself, and god, even our father,
which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and
good hope through grace, 2:17 comfort your hearts, and stablish you in
every good word and work.

3:1 finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the lord may have
free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: 3:2 and that we
may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have
not faith.

3:3 but the lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you
from evil.

3:4 and we have confidence in the lord touching you, that ye both do
and will do the things which we command you.

3:5 and the lord direct your hearts into the love of god, and into the
patient waiting for christ.

3:6 now we command you, brethren, in the name of our lord jesus
christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh
disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us.

3:7 for yourselves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not
ourselves disorderly among you; 3:8 neither did we eat any man's bread
for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you: 3:9 not because we have not
power, but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us.

3:10 for even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if
any would not work, neither should he eat.

3:11 for we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly,
working not at all, but are busybodies.

3:12 now them that are such we command and exhort by our lord jesus
christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.

3:13 but ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing.

3:14 and if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.

3:15 yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

3:16 now the lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means.
the lord be with you all.

3:17 the salutation of paul with mine own hand, which is the token in
every epistle: so i write.

3:18 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all. amen.




the first epistle of paul the apostle to timothy


1:1 paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the commandment of god our
saviour, and lord jesus christ, which is our hope; 1:2 unto timothy,
my own son in the faith: grace, mercy, and peace, from god our father
and jesus christ our lord.

1:3 as i besought thee to abide still at ephesus, when i went into
macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other
doctrine, 1:4 neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies,
which minister questions, rather than godly edifying which is in
faith: so do.

1:5 now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: 1:6 from which some
having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling; 1:7 desiring to
be teachers of the law; understanding neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm.

1:8 but we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully; 1:9
knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for
unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers,
for manslayers, 1:10 for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves
with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if
there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine; 1:11
according to the glorious gospel of the blessed god, which was
committed to my trust.

1:12 and i thank christ jesus our lord, who hath enabled me, for that
he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry; 1:13 who was
before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but i obtained
mercy, because i did it ignorantly in unbelief.

1:14 and the grace of our lord was exceeding abundant with faith and
love which is in christ jesus.

1:15 this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that
christ jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom i am chief.

1:16 howbeit for this cause i obtained mercy, that in me first jesus
christ might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

1:17 now unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
god, be honour and glory for ever and ever. amen.

1:18 this charge i commit unto thee, son timothy, according to the
prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest war a
good warfare; 1:19 holding faith, and a good conscience; which some
having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck: 1:20 of whom is
hymenaeus and alexander; whom i have delivered unto satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme.

2:1 i exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; 2:2 for
kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

2:3 for this is good and acceptable in the sight of god our saviour;
2:4 who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth.

2:5 for there is one god, and one mediator between god and men, the
man christ jesus; 2:6 who gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testified in due time.

2:7 whereunto i am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (i speak the
truth in christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the gentiles in faith and
verity.

2:8 i will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands,
without wrath and doubting.

2:9 in like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array; 2:10 but (which becometh women
professing godliness) with good works.

2:11 let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.

2:12 but i suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over
the man, but to be in silence.

2:13 for adam was first formed, then eve.

2:14 and adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in
the transgression.

2:15 notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they
continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.

3:1 this is a true saying, if a man desire the office of a bishop, he
desireth a good work.

3:2 a bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to
teach; 3:3 not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre;
but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; 3:4 one that ruleth well his
own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity; 3:5
(for if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
care of the church of god?)  3:6 not a novice, lest being lifted up
with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.

3:7 moreover he must have a good report of them which are without;
lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.

3:8 likewise must the deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given
to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre; 3:9 holding the mystery of
the faith in a pure conscience.

3:10 and let these also first be proved; then let them use the office
of a deacon, being found blameless.

3:11 even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober,
faithful in all things.

3:12 let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their
children and their own houses well.

3:13 for they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to
themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in
christ jesus.

3:14 these things write i unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly:
3:15 but if i tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to
behave thyself in the house of god, which is the church of the living
god, the pillar and ground of the truth.

3:16 and without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: god
was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels,
preached unto the gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
glory.

4:1 now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils; 4:2 speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their
conscience seared with a hot iron; 4:3 forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which god hath created to be
received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth.

4:4 for every creature of god is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving: 4:5 for it is sanctified by the word
of god and prayer.

4:6 if thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou
shalt be a good minister of jesus christ, nourished up in the words of
faith and of good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained.

4:7 but refuse profane and old wives' fables, and exercise thyself
rather unto godliness.

4:8 for bodily exercise profiteth little: but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

4:9 this is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.

4:10 for therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we
trust in the living god, who is the saviour of all men, specially of
those that believe.

4:11 these things command and teach.

4:12 let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith,
in purity.

4:13 till i come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine.

4:14 neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.

4:15 meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy
profiting may appear to all.

4:16 take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them:
for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear
thee.

5:1 rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father; and the younger
men as brethren; 5:2 the elder women as mothers; the younger as
sisters, with all purity.

5:3 honour widows that are widows indeed.

5:4 but if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to
shew piety at home, and to requite their parents: for that is good and
acceptable before god.

5:5 now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in god, and
continueth in supplications and prayers night and day.

5:6 but she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.

5:7 and these things give in charge, that they may be blameless.

5:8 but if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his
own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.

5:9 let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years
old, having been the wife of one man.

5:10 well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children,
if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints' feet, if
she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every
good work.

5:11 but the younger widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax
wanton against christ, they will marry; 5:12 having damnation, because
they have cast off their first faith.

5:13 and withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to
house; and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking
things which they ought not.

5:14 i will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children,
guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak
reproachfully.

5:15 for some are already turned aside after satan.

5:16 if any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve
them, and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that
are widows indeed.

5:17 let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour,
especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.

5:18 for the scripture saith, thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn. and, the labourer is worthy of his reward.

5:19 against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or
three witnesses.

5:20 them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

5:21 i charge thee before god, and the lord jesus christ, and the
elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one
before another, doing nothing by partiality.

5:22 lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins: keep thyself pure.

5:23 drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's
sake and thine often infirmities.

5:24 some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment;
and some men they follow after.

5:25 likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand; and
they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

6:1 let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters
worthy of all honour, that the name of god and his doctrine be not
blasphemed.

6:2 and they that have believing masters, let them not despise them,
because they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they
are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. these things teach
and exhort.

6:3 if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our lord jesus christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness; 6:4 he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting
about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, 6:5 perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness:
from such withdraw thyself.

6:6 but godliness with contentment is great gain.

6:7 for we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out.

6:8 and having food and raiment let us be therewith content.

6:9 but they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition.

6:10 for the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows.

6:11 but thou, o man of god, flee these things; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.

6:12 fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life,
whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession
before many witnesses.

6:13 i give thee charge in the sight of god, who quickeneth all
things, and before christ jesus, who before pontius pilate witnessed a
good confession; 6:14 that thou keep this commandment without spot,
unrebukable, until the appearing of our lord jesus christ: 6:15 which
in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only potentate, the
king of kings, and lord of lords; 6:16 who only hath immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath
seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. amen.

6:17 charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living god, who
giveth us richly all things to enjoy; 6:18 that they do good, that
they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; 6:19 laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

6:20 o timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so
called: 6:21 which some professing have erred concerning the faith.
grace be with thee. amen.




the second epistle of paul the apostle to timothy


1:1 paul, an apostle of jesus christ by the will of god, according to
the promise of life which is in christ jesus, 1:2 to timothy,
my dearly beloved son: grace, mercy, and peace, from god the father
and christ jesus our lord.

1:3 i thank god, whom i serve from my forefathers with pure
conscience, that without ceasing i have remembrance of thee in my
prayers night and day; 1:4 greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful
of thy tears, that i may be filled with joy; 1:5 when i call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in
thy grandmother lois, and thy mother eunice; and i am persuaded that
in thee also.

1:6 wherefore i put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of
god, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.

1:7 for god hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind.

1:8 be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our lord, nor of
me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel
according to the power of god; 1:9 who hath saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
own purpose and grace, which was given us in christ jesus before the
world began, 1:10 but is now made manifest by the appearing of our
saviour jesus christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life
and immortality to light through the gospel: 1:11 whereunto i am
appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the gentiles.

1:12 for the which cause i also suffer these things: nevertheless i am
not ashamed: for i know whom i have believed, and am persuaded that he
is able to keep that which i have committed unto him against that day.

1:13 hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me,
in faith and love which is in christ jesus.

1:14 that good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the holy
ghost which dwelleth in us.

1:15 this thou knowest, that all they which are in asia be turned away
from me; of whom are phygellus and hermogenes.

1:16 the lord give mercy unto the house of onesiphorus; for he oft
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: 1:17 but, when he was
in rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me.

1:18 the lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the lord in
that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at ephesus,
thou knowest very well.

2:1 thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in christ
jesus.

2:2 and the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also.

2:3 thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of jesus christ.

2:4 no man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.

2:5 and if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully.

2:6 the husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the
fruits.

2:7 consider what i say; and the lord give thee understanding in all
things.

2:8 remember that jesus christ of the seed of david was raised from
the dead according to my gospel: 2:9 wherein i suffer trouble, as an
evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of god is not bound.

2:10 therefore i endure all things for the elect's sakes, that they
may also obtain the salvation which is in christ jesus with eternal
glory.

2:11 it is a faithful saying: for if we be dead with him, we shall
also live with him: 2:12 if we suffer, we shall also reign with him:
if we deny him, he also will deny us: 2:13 if we believe not, yet he
abideth faithful: he cannot deny himself.

2:14 of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the
lord that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the
subverting of the hearers.

2:15 study to shew thyself approved unto god, a workman that needeth
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.

2:16 but shun profane and vain babblings: for they will increase unto
more ungodliness.

2:17 and their word will eat as doth a canker: of whom is hymenaeus
and philetus; 2:18 who concerning the truth have erred, saying that
the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some.

2:19 nevertheless the foundation of god standeth sure, having this
seal, the lord knoweth them that are his. and, let every one that
nameth the name of christ depart from iniquity.

2:20 but in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of
silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to
dishonour.

2:21 if a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared
unto every good work.

2:22 flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith,
charity, peace, with them that call on the lord out of a pure heart.

2:23 but foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do
gender strifes.

2:24 and the servant of the lord must not strive; but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, 2:25 in meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves; if god peradventure will give them repentance
to the acknowledging of the truth; 2:26 and that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.

3:1 this know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.

3:2 for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 3:3
without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, 3:4 traitors, heady,
highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of god; 3:5 having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

3:6 for of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts, 3:7
ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

3:8 now as jannes and jambres withstood moses, so do these also resist
the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

3:9 but they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men, as their's also was.

3:10 but thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose,
faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, 3:11 persecutions,
afflictions, which came unto me at antioch, at iconium, at lystra;
what persecutions i endured: but out of them all the lord delivered
me.

3:12 yea, and all that will live godly in christ jesus shall suffer
persecution.

3:13 but evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving,
and being deceived.

3:14 but continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast
been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; 3:15 and that
from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in christ jesus.

3:16 all scripture is given by inspiration of god, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: 3:17 that the man of god may be perfect, throughly
furnished unto all good works.

4:1 i charge thee therefore before god, and the lord jesus christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom;
4:2 preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.

4:3 for the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine;
but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers,
having itching ears; 4:4 and they shall turn away their ears from the
truth, and shall be turned unto fables.

4:5 but watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of
an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry.

4:6 for i am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is
at hand.

4:7 i have fought a good fight, i have finished my course, i have kept
the faith: 4:8 henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at
that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing.

4:9 do thy diligence to come shortly unto me: 4:10 for demas hath
forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto
thessalonica; crescens to galatia, titus unto dalmatia.

4:11 only luke is with me. take mark, and bring him with thee: for he
is profitable to me for the ministry.

4:12 and tychicus have i sent to ephesus.

4:13 the cloke that i left at troas with carpus, when thou comest,
bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.

4:14 alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the lord reward him
according to his works: 4:15 of whom be thou ware also; for he hath
greatly withstood our words.

4:16 at my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me:
i pray god that it may not be laid to their charge.

4:17 notwithstanding the lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that
by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the gentiles
might hear: and i was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.

4:18 and the lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory for ever and
ever. amen.

4:19 salute prisca and aquila, and the household of onesiphorus.

4:20 erastus abode at corinth: but trophimus have i left at miletum
sick.

4:21 do thy diligence to come before winter. eubulus greeteth thee,
and pudens, and linus, and claudia, and all the brethren.

4:22 the lord jesus christ be with thy spirit. grace be with you.
amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to titus


1:1 paul, a servant of god, and an apostle of jesus christ, according
to the faith of god's elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which
is after godliness; 1:2 in hope of eternal life, which god, that
cannot lie, promised before the world began; 1:3 but hath in due times
manifested his word through preaching, which is committed unto me
according to the commandment of god our saviour; 1:4 to titus, mine
own son after the common faith: grace, mercy, and peace, from god the
father and the lord jesus christ our saviour.

1:5 for this cause left i thee in crete, that thou shouldest set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as
i had appointed thee: 1:6 if any be blameless, the husband of one
wife, having faithful children not accused of riot or unruly.

1:7 for a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of god; not
selfwilled, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given
to filthy lucre; 1:8 but a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men,
sober, just, holy, temperate; 1:9 holding fast the faithful word as he
hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort
and to convince the gainsayers.

1:10 for there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers,
specially they of the circumcision: 1:11 whose mouths must be stopped,
who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for
filthy lucre's sake.

1:12 one of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, the
cretians are alway liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.

1:13 this witness is true. wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they
may be sound in the faith; 1:14 not giving heed to jewish fables, and
commandments of men, that turn from the truth.

1:15 unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled
and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is
defiled.

1:16 they profess that they know god; but in works they deny him,
being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.

2:1 but speak thou the things which become sound doctrine: 2:2 that
the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity,
in patience.

2:3 the aged women likewise, that they be in behaviour as becometh
holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good
things; 2:4 that they may teach the young women to be sober, to love
their husbands, to love their children, 2:5 to be discreet, chaste,
keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word
of god be not blasphemed.

2:6 young men likewise exhort to be sober minded.

2:7 in all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works: in doctrine
shewing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, 2:8 sound speech, that
cannot be condemned; that he that is of the contrary part may be
ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.

2:9 exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to
please them well in all things; not answering again; 2:10 not
purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the
doctrine of god our saviour in all things.

2:11 for the grace of god that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all
men, 2:12 teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world;
2:13 looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great god and our saviour jesus christ; 2:14 who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works.

2:15 these things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.
let no man despise thee.

3:1 put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to
obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work, 3:2 to speak evil of
no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shewing all meekness unto all
men.

3:3 for we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another.

3:4 but after that the kindness and love of god our saviour toward man
appeared, 3:5 not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the holy ghost; 3:6 which he shed on us abundantly
through jesus christ our saviour; 3:7 that being justified by his
grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

3:8 this is a faithful saying, and these things i will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in god might be
careful to maintain good works. these things are good and profitable
unto men.

3:9 but avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and
strivings about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.

3:10 a man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition
reject; 3:11 knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth,
being condemned of himself.

3:12 when i shall send artemas unto thee, or tychicus, be diligent to
come unto me to nicopolis: for i have determined there to winter.

3:13 bring zenas the lawyer and apollos on their journey diligently,
that nothing be wanting unto them.

3:14 and let our's also learn to maintain good works for necessary
uses, that they be not unfruitful.

3:15 all that are with me salute thee. greet them that love us in the
faith. grace be with you all. amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to philemon


1:1 paul, a prisoner of jesus christ, and timothy our brother, unto
philemon our dearly beloved, and fellowlabourer, 1:2 and to our
beloved apphia, and archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the church in
thy house: 1:3 grace to you, and peace, from god our father and the
lord jesus christ.

1:4 i thank my god, making mention of thee always in my prayers, 1:5
hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the lord jesus,
and toward all saints; 1:6 that the communication of thy faith may
become effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in
you in christ jesus.

1:7 for we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the
bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother.

1:8 wherefore, though i might be much bold in christ to enjoin thee
that which is convenient, 1:9 yet for love's sake i rather beseech
thee, being such an one as paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of
jesus christ.

1:10 i beseech thee for my son onesimus, whom i have begotten in my
bonds: 1:11 which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now
profitable to thee and to me: 1:12 whom i have sent again: thou
therefore receive him, that is, mine own bowels: 1:13 whom i would
have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered unto
me in the bonds of the gospel: 1:14 but without thy mind would i do
nothing; that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but
willingly.

1:15 for perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou
shouldest receive him for ever; 1:16 not now as a servant, but above a
servant, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto
thee, both in the flesh, and in the lord?  1:17 if thou count me
therefore a partner, receive him as myself.

1:18 if he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine
account; 1:19 i paul have written it with mine own hand, i will repay
it: albeit i do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own
self besides.

1:20 yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the lord: refresh my
bowels in the lord.

1:21 having confidence in thy obedience i wrote unto thee, knowing
that thou wilt also do more than i say.

1:22 but withal prepare me also a lodging: for i trust that through
your prayers i shall be given unto you.

1:23 there salute thee epaphras, my fellowprisoner in christ jesus;
1:24 marcus, aristarchus, demas, lucas, my fellowlabourers.

1:25 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with your spirit. amen.




the epistle of paul the apostle to the hebrews


1:1 god, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past
unto the fathers by the prophets, 1:2 hath in these last days spoken
unto us by his son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom
also he made the worlds; 1:3 who being the brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the
word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on
the right hand of the majesty on high: 1:4 being made so much better
than the angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent
name than they.

1:5 for unto which of the angels said he at any time, thou art my son,
this day have i begotten thee? and again, i will be to him a father,
and he shall be to me a son?  1:6 and again, when he bringeth in the
firstbegotten into the world, he saith, and let all the angels of god
worship him.

1:7 and of the angels he saith, who maketh his angels spirits, and his
ministers a flame of fire.

1:8 but unto the son he saith, thy throne, o god, is for ever and
ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom.

1:9 thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore god,
even thy god, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows.

1:10 and, thou, lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the
earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands: 1:11 they shall
perish; but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a
garment; 1:12 and as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall
be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

1:13 but to which of the angels said he at any time, sit on my right
hand, until i make thine enemies thy footstool?  1:14 are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation?  2:1 therefore we ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let
them slip.

2:2 for if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward;
2:3 how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at
the first began to be spoken by the lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him; 2:4 god also bearing them witness, both with
signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the holy
ghost, according to his own will?  2:5 for unto the angels hath he not
put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak.

2:6 but one in a certain place testified, saying, what is man, that
thou art mindful of him? or the son of man that thou visitest him?
2:7 thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him
with glory and honour, and didst set him over the works of thy hands:
2:8 thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. for in that
he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put
under him.

but now we see not yet all things put under him.

2:9 but we see jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for
the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the
grace of god should taste death for every man.

2:10 for it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings.

2:11 for both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all
of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, 2:12
saying, i will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the
church will i sing praise unto thee.

2:13 and again, i will put my trust in him. and again, behold i and
the children which god hath given me.

2:14 forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood,
he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil;
2:15 and deliver them who through fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to bondage.

2:16 for verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took
on him the seed of abraham.

2:17 wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in
things pertaining to god, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people.

2:18 for in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to
succour them that are tempted.

3:1 wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling,
consider the apostle and high priest of our profession, christ jesus;
3:2 who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also moses was
faithful in all his house.

3:3 for this man was counted worthy of more glory than moses, inasmuch
as he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house.

3:4 for every house is builded by some man; but he that built all
things is god.

3:5 and moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for
a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; 3:6 but
christ as a son over his own house; whose house are we, if we hold
fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.

3:7 wherefore (as the holy ghost saith, to day if ye will hear his
voice, 3:8 harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day
of temptation in the wilderness: 3:9 when your fathers tempted me,
proved me, and saw my works forty years.

3:10 wherefore i was grieved with that generation, and said, they do
alway err in their heart; and they have not known my ways.

3:11 so i sware in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest.)  3:12
take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living god.

3:13 but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day; lest any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

3:14 for we are made partakers of christ, if we hold the beginning of
our confidence stedfast unto the end; 3:15 while it is said, to day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.

3:16 for some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that
came out of egypt by moses.

3:17 but with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them
that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness?  3:18 and to
whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them
that believed not?  3:19 so we see that they could not enter in
because of unbelief.

4:1 let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.

4:2 for unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the
word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them
that heard it.

4:3 for we which have believed do enter into rest, as he said, as i
have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the
works were finished from the foundation of the world.

4:4 for he spake in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise,
and god did rest the seventh day from all his works.

4:5 and in this place again, if they shall enter into my rest.

4:6 seeing therefore it remaineth that some must enter therein, and
they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of unbelief:
4:7 again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in david, to day, after
so long a time; as it is said, to day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts.

4:8 for if jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have
spoken of another day.

4:9 there remaineth therefore a rest to the people of god.

4:10 for he that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from
his own works, as god did from his.

4:11 let us labour therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man
fall after the same example of unbelief.

4:12 for the word of god is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any
twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart.

4:13 neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight:
but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we
have to do.

4:14 seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into
the heavens, jesus the son of god, let us hold fast our profession.

4:15 for we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we
are, yet without sin.

4:16 let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

5:1 for every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in
things pertaining to god, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices
for sins: 5:2 who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them
that are out of the way; for that he himself also is compassed with
infirmity.

5:3 and by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for
himself, to offer for sins.

5:4 and no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called
of god, as was aaron.

5:5 so also christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest;
but he that said unto him, thou art my son, to day have i begotten
thee.

5:6 as he saith also in another place, thou art a priest for ever
after the order of melchisedec.

5:7 who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to
save him from death, and was heard in that he feared; 5:8 though he
were a son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;
5:9 and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him; 5:10 called of god an high priest after
the order of melchisedec.

5:11 of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered,
seeing ye are dull of hearing.

5:12 for when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of
god; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

5:13 for every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of
righteousness: for he is a babe.

5:14 but strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even
those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil.

6:1 therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of christ, let us
go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance
from dead works, and of faith toward god, 6:2 of the doctrine of
baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead,
and of eternal judgment.

6:3 and this will we do, if god permit.

6:4 for it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy
ghost, 6:5 and have tasted the good word of god, and the powers of the
world to come, 6:6 if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the son of god afresh,
and put him to an open shame.

6:7 for the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it,
and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receiveth blessing from god: 6:8 but that which beareth thorns and
briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be
burned.

6:9 but, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things
that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.

6:10 for god is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of
love, which ye have shewed toward his name, in that ye have ministered
to the saints, and do minister.

6:11 and we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to
the full assurance of hope unto the end: 6:12 that ye be not slothful,
but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises.

6:13 for when god made promise to abraham, because he could swear by
no greater, he sware by himself, 6:14 saying, surely blessing i will
bless thee, and multiplying i will multiply thee.

6:15 and so, after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise.

6:16 for men verily swear by the greater: and an oath for confirmation
is to them an end of all strife.

6:17 wherein god, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: 6:18
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for god to
lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to
lay hold upon the hope set before us: 6:19 which hope we have as an
anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into
that within the veil; 6:20 whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of
melchisedec.

7:1 for this melchisedec, king of salem, priest of the most high god,
who met abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed
him; 7:2 to whom also abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by
interpretation king of righteousness, and after that also king of
salem, which is, king of peace; 7:3 without father, without mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life;
but made like unto the son of god; abideth a priest continually.

7:4 now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the patriarch
abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.

7:5 and verily they that are of the sons of levi, who receive the
office of the priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the
people according to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they
come out of the loins of abraham: 7:6 but he whose descent is not
counted from them received tithes of abraham, and blessed him that had
the promises.

7:7 and without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better.

7:8 and here men that die receive tithes; but there he receiveth them,
of whom it is witnessed that he liveth.

7:9 and as i may so say, levi also, who receiveth tithes, payed tithes
in abraham.

7:10 for he was yet in the loins of his father, when melchisedec met
him.

7:11 if therefore perfection were by the levitical priesthood, (for
under it the people received the law,) what further need was there
that another priest should rise after the order of melchisedec, and
not be called after the order of aaron?  7:12 for the priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law.

7:13 for he of whom these things are spoken pertaineth to another
tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the altar.

7:14 for it is evident that our lord sprang out of juda; of which
tribe moses spake nothing concerning priesthood.

7:15 and it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of
melchisedec there ariseth another priest, 7:16 who is made, not after
the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless
life.

7:17 for he testifieth, thou art a priest for ever after the order of
melchisedec.

7:18 for there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going
before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

7:19 for the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better
hope did; by the which we draw nigh unto god.

7:20 and inasmuch as not without an oath he was made priest: 7:21 (for
those priests were made without an oath; but this with an oath by him
that said unto him, the lord sware and will not repent, thou art a
priest for ever after the order of melchisedec:) 7:22 by so much was
jesus made a surety of a better testament.

7:23 and they truly were many priests, because they were not suffered
to continue by reason of death: 7:24 but this man, because he
continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood.

7:25 wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto god by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.

7:26 for such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;
7:27 who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people's: for this
he did once, when he offered up himself.

7:28 for the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the
word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the son, who is
consecrated for evermore.

8:1 now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: we have
such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the
majesty in the heavens; 8:2 a minister of the sanctuary, and of the
true tabernacle, which the lord pitched, and not man.

8:3 for every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices:
wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to
offer.

8:4 for if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that
there are priests that offer gifts according to the law: 8:5 who serve
unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as moses was
admonished of god when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, see,
saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to
thee in the mount.

8:6 but now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much
also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established
upon better promises.

8:7 for if that first covenant had been faultless, then should no
place have been sought for the second.

8:8 for finding fault with them, he saith, behold, the days come,
saith the lord, when i will make a new covenant with the house of
israel and with the house of judah: 8:9 not according to the covenant
that i made with their fathers in the day when i took them by the hand
to lead them out of the land of egypt; because they continued not in
my covenant, and i regarded them not, saith the lord.

8:10 for this is the covenant that i will make with the house of
israel after those days, saith the lord; i will put my laws into their
mind, and write them in their hearts: and i will be to them a god, and
they shall be to me a people: 8:11 and they shall not teach every man
his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know the lord: for
all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.

8:12 for i will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins
and their iniquities will i remember no more.

8:13 in that he saith, a new covenant, he hath made the first old. now
that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away.

9:1 then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine
service, and a worldly sanctuary.

9:2 for there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the
candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the
sanctuary.

9:3 and after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the
holiest of all; 9:4 which had the golden censer, and the ark of the
covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot
that had manna, and aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the
covenant; 9:5 and over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the
mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.

9:6 now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always
into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of god.

9:7 but into the second went the high priest alone once every year,
not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of
the people: 9:8 the holy ghost this signifying, that the way into the
holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first
tabernacle was yet standing: 9:9 which was a figure for the time then
present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could
not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the
conscience; 9:10 which stood only in meats and drinks, and divers
washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of
reformation.

9:11 but christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to
say, not of this building; 9:12 neither by the blood of goats and
calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us.

9:13 for if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an
heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the
flesh: 9:14 how much more shall the blood of christ, who through the
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to god, purge your
conscience from dead works to serve the living god?  9:15 and for this
cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death,
for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance.

9:16 for where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the
death of the testator.

9:17 for a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is
of no strength at all while the testator liveth.

9:18 whereupon neither the first testament was dedicated without
blood.

9:19 for when moses had spoken every precept to all the people
according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with
water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and
all the people, 9:20 saying, this is the blood of the testament which
god hath enjoined unto you.

9:21 moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the
vessels of the ministry.

9:22 and almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and
without shedding of blood is no remission.

9:23 it was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the
heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things
themselves with better sacrifices than these.

9:24 for christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to
appear in the presence of god for us: 9:25 nor yet that he should
offer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place
every year with blood of others; 9:26 for then must he often have
suffered since the foundation of the world: but now once in the end of
the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself.

9:27 and as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
judgment: 9:28 so christ was once offered to bear the sins of many;
and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time
without sin unto salvation.

10:1 for the law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the
very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they
offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.

10:2 for then would they not have ceased to be offered? because that
the worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of
sins.

10:3 but in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins
every year.

10:4 for it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats
should take away sins.

10:5 wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith, sacrifice and
offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me: 10:6 in
burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure.

10:7 then said i, lo, i come (in the volume of the book it is written
of me,) to do thy will, o god.

10:8 above when he said, sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings
and offering for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure
therein; which are offered by the law; 10:9 then said he, lo, i come
to do thy will, o god. he taketh away the first, that he may establish
the second.

10:10 by the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the
body of jesus christ once for all.

10:11 and every priest standeth daily ministering and offering
oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: 10:12
but this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever,
sat down on the right hand of god; 10:13 from henceforth expecting
till his enemies be made his footstool.

10:14 for by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.

10:15 whereof the holy ghost also is a witness to us: for after that
he had said before, 10:16 this is the covenant that i will make with
them after those days, saith the lord, i will put my laws into their
hearts, and in their minds will i write them; 10:17 and their sins and
iniquities will i remember no more.

10:18 now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for
sin.

10:19 having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest
by the blood of jesus, 10:20 by a new and living way, which he hath
consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; 10:21
and having an high priest over the house of god; 10:22 let us draw
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water.

10:23 let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering;
(for he is faithful that promised;) 10:24 and let us consider one
another to provoke unto love and to good works: 10:25 not forsaking
the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; but
exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching.

10:26 for if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, 10:27 but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the adversaries.

10:28 he that despised moses' law died without mercy under two or
three witnesses: 10:29 of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall
he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the son of god, and
hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified,
an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace?
10:30 for we know him that hath said, vengeance belongeth unto me, i
will recompense, saith the lord. and again, the lord shall judge his
people.

10:31 it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living god.

10:32 but call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions; 10:33 partly,
whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions;
and partly, whilst ye became companions of them that were so used.

10:34 for ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven a
better and an enduring substance.

10:35 cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great
recompence of reward.

10:36 for ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will
of god, ye might receive the promise.

10:37 for yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry.

10:38 now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.

10:39 but we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them
that believe to the saving of the soul.

11:1 now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen.

11:2 for by it the elders obtained a good report.

11:3 through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the
word of god, so that things which are seen were not made of things
which do appear.

11:4 by faith abel offered unto god a more excellent sacrifice than
cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, god
testifying of his gifts: and by it he being dead yet speaketh.

11:5 by faith enoch was translated that he should not see death; and
was not found, because god had translated him: for before his
translation he had this testimony, that he pleased god.

11:6 but without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that
cometh to god must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him.

11:7 by faith noah, being warned of god of things not seen as yet,
moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the
which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness
which is by faith.

11:8 by faith abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which
he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out,
not knowing whither he went.

11:9 by faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange
country, dwelling in tabernacles with isaac and jacob, the heirs with
him of the same promise: 11:10 for he looked for a city which hath
foundations, whose builder and maker is god.

11:11 through faith also sara herself received strength to conceive
seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she
judged him faithful who had promised.

11:12 therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so
many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by
the sea shore innumerable.

11:13 these all died in faith, not having received the promises, but
having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced
them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the
earth.

11:14 for they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a
country.

11:15 and truly, if they had been mindful of that country from whence
they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.

11:16 but now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly:
wherefore god is not ashamed to be called their god: for he hath
prepared for them a city.

11:17 by faith abraham, when he was tried, offered up isaac: and he
that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son, 11:18
of whom it was said, that in isaac shall thy seed be called: 11:19
accounting that god was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from
whence also he received him in a figure.

11:20 by faith isaac blessed jacob and esau concerning things to come.

11:21 by faith jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of
joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.

11:22 by faith joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of
the children of israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones.

11:23 by faith moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his
parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not
afraid of the king's commandment.

11:24 by faith moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of pharaoh's daughter; 11:25 choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of god, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; 11:26 esteeming the reproach of christ greater riches
than the treasures in egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of
the reward.

11:27 by faith he forsook egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king:
for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.

11:28 through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood,
lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them.

11:29 by faith they passed through the red sea as by dry land: which
the egyptians assaying to do were drowned.

11:30 by faith the walls of jericho fell down, after they were
compassed about seven days.

11:31 by faith the harlot rahab perished not with them that believed
not, when she had received the spies with peace.

11:32 and what shall i more say? for the time would fail me to tell of
gedeon, and of barak, and of samson, and of jephthae; of david also,
and samuel, and of the prophets: 11:33 who through faith subdued
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths
of lions.

11:34 quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword,
out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to
flight the armies of the aliens.

11:35 women received their dead raised to life again: and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better
resurrection: 11:36 and others had trial of cruel mockings and
scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: 11:37 they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being
destitute, afflicted, tormented; 11:38 (of whom the world was not
worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and
caves of the earth.

11:39 and these all, having obtained a good report through faith,
received not the promise: 11:40 god having provided some better thing
for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.

12:1 wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which
doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is
set before us, 12:2 looking unto jesus the author and finisher of our
faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne
of god.

12:3 for consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.

12:4 ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin.

12:5 and ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as
unto children, my son, despise not thou the chastening of the lord,
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: 12:6 for whom the lord loveth
he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.

12:7 if ye endure chastening, god dealeth with you as with sons; for
what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?  12:8 but if ye be
without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards,
and not sons.

12:9 furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us,
and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection
unto the father of spirits, and live?  12:10 for they verily for a few
days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his holiness.

12:11 now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.

12:12 wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees; 12:13 and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is
lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed.

12:14 follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the lord: 12:15 looking diligently lest any man fail of the
grace of god; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you,
and thereby many be defiled; 12:16 lest there be any fornicator, or
profane person, as esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright.

12:17 for ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though
he sought it carefully with tears.

12:18 for ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and
that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
12:19 and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which voice
they that heard intreated that the word should not be spoken to them
any more: 12:20 (for they could not endure that which was commanded,
and if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or
thrust through with a dart: 12:21 and so terrible was the sight, that
moses said, i exceedingly fear and quake:) 12:22 but ye are come unto
mount sion, and unto the city of the living god, the heavenly
jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, 12:23 to the
general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in
heaven, and to god the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect, 12:24 and to jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and
to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of
abel.

12:25 see that ye refuse not him that speaketh. for if they escaped
not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven: 12:26
whose voice then shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying,
yet once more i shake not the earth only, but also heaven.

12:27 and this word, yet once more, signifieth the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things
which cannot be shaken may remain.

12:28 wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us
have grace, whereby we may serve god acceptably with reverence and
godly fear: 12:29 for our god is a consuming fire.

13:1 let brotherly love continue.

13:2 be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have
entertained angels unawares.

13:3 remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them
which suffer adversity, as being yourselves also in the body.

13:4 marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled: but
whoremongers and adulterers god will judge.

13:5 let your conversation be without covetousness; and be content
with such things as ye have: for he hath said, i will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee.

13:6 so that we may boldly say, the lord is my helper, and i will not
fear what man shall do unto me.

13:7 remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the word of god: whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation.

13:8 jesus christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

13:9 be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines. for it is
a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats,
which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.

13:10 we have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve
the tabernacle.

13:11 for the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the
sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp.

13:12 wherefore jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his
own blood, suffered without the gate.

13:13 let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his
reproach.

13:14 for here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.

13:15 by him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to god
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name.

13:16 but to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such
sacrifices god is well pleased.

13:17 obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves:
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable
for you.

13:18 pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all
things willing to live honestly.

13:19 but i beseech you the rather to do this, that i may be restored
to you the sooner.

13:20 now the god of peace, that brought again from the dead our lord
jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, 13:21 make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight,
through jesus christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. amen.

13:22 and i beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation: for
i have written a letter unto you in few words.

13:23 know ye that our brother timothy is set at liberty; with whom,
if he come shortly, i will see you.

13:24 salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the saints.

they of italy salute you.

13:25 grace be with you all. amen.




the general epistle of james


1:1 james, a servant of god and of the lord jesus christ,
to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.

1:2 my brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers
temptations; 1:3 knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh
patience.

1:4 but let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing.

1:5 if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of god, that giveth to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

1:6 but let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. for he that wavereth
is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.

1:7 for let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the
lord.

1:8 a double minded man is unstable in all his ways.

1:9 let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: 1:10
but the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the
grass he shall pass away.

1:11 for the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it
withereth the grass, and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of
the fashion of it perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade away in
his ways.

1:12 blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the lord hath
promised to them that love him.

1:13 let no man say when he is tempted, i am tempted of god: for god
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man: 1:14 but
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed.

1:15 then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin,
when it is finished, bringeth forth death.

1:16 do not err, my beloved brethren.

1:17 every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning.

1:18 of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we
should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.

1:19 wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear,
slow to speak, slow to wrath: 1:20 for the wrath of man worketh not
the righteousness of god.

1:21 wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is
able to save your souls.

1:22 but be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
own selves.

1:23 for if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like
unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: 1:24 for he
beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what
manner of man he was.

1:25 but whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth
therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this
man shall be blessed in his deed.

1:26 if any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

1:27 pure religion and undefiled before god and the father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world.

2:1 my brethren, have not the faith of our lord jesus christ, the lord
of glory, with respect of persons.

2:2 for if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in
goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; 2:3
and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto
him, sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, stand thou
there, or sit here under my footstool: 2:4 are ye not then partial in
yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?  2:5 hearken, my
beloved brethren, hath not god chosen the poor of this world rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that
love him?  2:6 but ye have despised the poor. do not rich men oppress
you, and draw you before the judgment seats?  2:7 do not they
blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called?  2:8 if ye
fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself, ye do well: 2:9 but if ye have respect to
persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors.

2:10 for whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all.

2:11 for he that said, do not commit adultery, said also, do not kill.
now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressor of the law.

2:12 so speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law
of liberty.

2:13 for he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no
mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.

2:14 what doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith,
and have not works? can faith save him?  2:15 if a brother or sister
be naked, and destitute of daily food, 2:16 and one of you say unto
them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye
give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it
profit?  2:17 even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being
alone.

2:18 yea, a man may say, thou hast faith, and i have works: shew me
thy faith without thy works, and i will shew thee my faith by my
works.

2:19 thou believest that there is one god; thou doest well: the devils
also believe, and tremble.

2:20 but wilt thou know, o vain man, that faith without works is dead?
2:21 was not abraham our father justified by works, when he had
offered isaac his son upon the altar?  2:22 seest thou how faith
wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?  2:23 and
the scripture was fulfilled which saith, abraham believed god, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the friend
of god.

2:24 ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only.

2:25 likewise also was not rahab the harlot justified by works, when
she had received the messengers, and had sent them out another way?
2:26 for as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead also.

3:1 my brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive
the greater condemnation.

3:2 for in many things we offend all. if any man offend not in word,
the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.

3:3 behold, we put bits in the horses' mouths, that they may obey us;
and we turn about their whole body.

3:4 behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are
driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small
helm, whithersoever the governor listeth.

3:5 even so the tongue is a little member, and boasteth great things.

behold, how great a matter a little fire kindleth!  3:6 and the tongue
is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our members,
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of
nature; and it is set on fire of hell.

3:7 for every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of
things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankind: 3:8 but
the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison.

3:9 therewith bless we god, even the father; and therewith curse we
men, which are made after the similitude of god.

3:10 out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. my
brethren, these things ought not so to be.

3:11 doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and
bitter?  3:12 can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries?
either a vine, figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and
fresh.

3:13 who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him
shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.

3:14 but if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory
not, and lie not against the truth.

3:15 this wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish.

3:16 for where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every
evil work.

3:17 but the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

3:18 and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace.

4:1 from whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not
hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?  4:2 ye lust, and
have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and
war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.

4:3 ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume
it upon your lusts.

4:4 ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of
the world is enmity with god? whosoever therefore will be a friend of
the world is the enemy of god.

4:5 do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, the spirit that
dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?  4:6 but he giveth more grace.
wherefore he saith, god resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the
humble.

4:7 submit yourselves therefore to god. resist the devil, and he will
flee from you.

4:8 draw nigh to god, and he will draw nigh to you. cleanse your
hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded.

4:9 be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness.

4:10 humble yourselves in the sight of the lord, and he shall lift you
up.

4:11 speak not evil one of another, brethren. he that speaketh evil of
his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of the law, and
judgeth the law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the
law, but a judge.

4:12 there is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: who
art thou that judgest another?  4:13 go to now, ye that say, to day or
to morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and
buy and sell, and get gain: 4:14 whereas ye know not what shall be on
the morrow. for what is your life? it is even a vapour, that appeareth
for a little time, and then vanisheth away.

4:15 for that ye ought to say, if the lord will, we shall live, and do
this, or that.

4:16 but now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil.

4:17 therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to
him it is sin.

5:1 go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you.

5:2 your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten.

5:3 your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. ye have
heaped treasure together for the last days.

5:4 behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of
them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the lord of
sabaoth.

5:5 ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have
nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

5:6 ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you.

5:7 be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the lord.

behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth,
and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter
rain.

5:8 be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the
lord draweth nigh.

5:9 grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned:
behold, the judge standeth before the door.

5:10 take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of
the lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience.

5:11 behold, we count them happy which endure. ye have heard of the
patience of job, and have seen the end of the lord; that the lord is
very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

5:12 but above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea be
yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.

5:13 is any among you afflicted? let him pray. is any merry? let him
sing psalms.

5:14 is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church;
and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the
lord: 5:15 and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the lord
shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him.

5:16 confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed. the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
availeth much.

5:17 elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by
the space of three years and six months.

5:18 and he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.

5:19 brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert
him; 5:20 let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins.




the first epistle general of peter


1:1 peter, an apostle of jesus christ, to the strangers scattered
throughout pontus, galatia, cappadocia, asia, and bithynia, 1:2 elect
according to the foreknowledge of god the father, through
sanctification of the spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the
blood of jesus christ: grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied.

1:3 blessed be the god and father of our lord jesus christ, which
according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively
hope by the resurrection of jesus christ from the dead, 1:4 to an
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away,
reserved in heaven for you, 1:5 who are kept by the power of god
through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.

1:6 wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be,
ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: 1:7 that the trial
of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth,
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour
and glory at the appearing of jesus christ: 1:8 whom having not seen,
ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory: 1:9 receiving the end of your
faith, even the salvation of your souls.

1:10 of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you:
1:11 searching what, or what manner of time the spirit of christ which
was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings
of christ, and the glory that should follow.

1:12 unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them
that have preached the gospel unto you with the holy ghost sent down
from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.

1:13 wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to
the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
of jesus christ; 1:14 as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves
according to the former lusts in your ignorance: 1:15 but as he which
hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;
1:16 because it is written, be ye holy; for i am holy.

1:17 and if ye call on the father, who without respect of persons
judgeth according to every man's work, pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear: 1:18 forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers; 1:19 but with
the precious blood of christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without
spot: 1:20 who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
world, but was manifest in these last times for you, 1:21 who by him
do believe in god, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him
glory; that your faith and hope might be in god.

1:22 seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through
the spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one
another with a pure heart fervently: 1:23 being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of god, which
liveth and abideth for ever.

1:24 for all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower
of grass. the grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away:
1:25 but the word of the lord endureth for ever. and this is the word
which by the gospel is preached unto you.

2:1 wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, all evil speakings, 2:2 as newborn babes, desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: 2:3 if so be ye
have tasted that the lord is gracious.

2:4 to whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men,
but chosen of god, and precious, 2:5 ye also, as lively stones, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to god by jesus christ.

2:6 wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, behold, i lay in
sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on
him shall not be confounded.

2:7 unto you therefore which believe he is precious: but unto them
which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the
same is made the head of the corner, 2:8 and a stone of stumbling, and
a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at the word, being
disobedient: whereunto also they were appointed.

2:9 but ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of
him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light;
2:10 which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of
god: which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

2:11 dearly beloved, i beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; 2:12 having your
conversation honest among the gentiles: that, whereas they speak
against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they
shall behold, glorify god in the day of visitation.

2:13 submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the lord's sake:
whether it be to the king, as supreme; 2:14 or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the
praise of them that do well.

2:15 for so is the will of god, that with well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men: 2:16 as free, and not using your
liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of god.

2:17 honour all men. love the brotherhood. fear god. honour the king.

2:18 servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward.

2:19 for this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward god
endure grief, suffering wrongfully.

2:20 for what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with god.

2:21 for even hereunto were ye called: because christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: 2:22
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: 2:23 who, when
he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously: 2:24 who
his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being
dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were
healed.

2:25 for ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the
shepherd and bishop of your souls.

3:1 likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that,
if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the
conversation of the wives; 3:2 while they behold your chaste
conversation coupled with fear.

3:3 whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel; 3:4 but let
it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of
god of great price.

3:5 for after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who
trusted in god, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own
husbands: 3:6 even as sara obeyed abraham, calling him lord: whose
daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any
amazement.

3:7 likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge,
giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being
heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not
hindered.

3:8 finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: 3:9 not rendering evil for
evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that
ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.

3:10 for he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: 3:11 let
him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.

3:12 for the eyes of the lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the lord is against them that
do evil.

3:13 and who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good?  3:14 but and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake,
happy are ye: and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;
3:15 but sanctify the lord god in your hearts: and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that
is in you with meekness and fear: 3:16 having a good conscience; that,
whereas they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed
that falsely accuse your good conversation in christ.

3:17 for it is better, if the will of god be so, that ye suffer for
well doing, than for evil doing.

3:18 for christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to god, being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the spirit: 3:19 by which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison; 3:20 which sometime were
disobedient, when once the longsuffering of god waited in the days of
noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls
were saved by water.

3:21 the like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward god,) by the resurrection of jesus christ: 3:22 who
is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of god; angels and
authorities and powers being made subject unto him.

4:1 forasmuch then as christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm
yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in
the flesh hath ceased from sin; 4:2 that he no longer should live the
rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of
god.

4:3 for the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the
will of the gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess
of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries: 4:4
wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of you: 4:5 who shall give account to
him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.

4:6 for for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are
dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but
live according to god in the spirit.

4:7 but the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer.

4:8 and above all things have fervent charity among yourselves: for
charity shall cover the multitude of sins.

4:9 use hospitality one to another without grudging.

4:10 as every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same
one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of god.

4:11 if any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of god; if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which god giveth: that god
in all things may be glorified through jesus christ, to whom be praise
and dominion for ever and ever. amen.

4:12 beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is
to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: 4:13 but
rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of christ's sufferings; that,
when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding
joy.

4:14 if ye be reproached for the name of christ, happy are ye; for the
spirit of glory and of god resteth upon you: on their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.

4:15 but let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evildoer, or as a busybody in other men's matters.

4:16 yet if any man suffer as a christian, let him not be ashamed; but
let him glorify god on this behalf.

4:17 for the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
god: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that
obey not the gospel of god?  4:18 and if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?  4:19 wherefore
let them that suffer according to the will of god commit the keeping
of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator.

5:1 the elders which are among you i exhort, who am also an elder, and
a witness of the sufferings of christ, and also a partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed: 5:2 feed the flock of god which is among
you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; 5:3 neither as being lords
over god's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

5:4 and when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown
of glory that fadeth not away.

5:5 likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. yea, all
of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for
god resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.

5:6 humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of god, that he
may exalt you in due time: 5:7 casting all your care upon him; for he
careth for you.

5:8 be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: 5:9 whom
resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.

5:10 but the god of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal
glory by christ jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.

5:11 to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. amen.

5:12 by silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as i suppose, i have
written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace
of god wherein ye stand.

5:13 the church that is at babylon, elected together with you,
saluteth you; and so doth marcus my son.

5:14 greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. peace be with you
all that are in christ jesus. amen.




the second general epistle of peter


1:1 simon peter, a servant and an apostle of jesus christ, to them
that have obtained like precious faith with us through the
righteousness of god and our saviour jesus christ: 1:2 grace and peace
be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of god, and of jesus our
lord, 1:3 according as his divine power hath given unto us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him
that hath called us to glory and virtue: 1:4 whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is
in the world through lust.

1:5 and beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue;
and to virtue knowledge; 1:6 and to knowledge temperance; and to
temperance patience; and to patience godliness; 1:7 and to godliness
brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.

1:8 for if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our lord
jesus christ.

1:9 but he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar
off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

1:10 wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall: 1:11 for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting kingdom of our lord and saviour jesus christ.

1:12 wherefore i will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established
in the present truth.

1:13 yea, i think it meet, as long as i am in this tabernacle, to stir
you up by putting you in remembrance; 1:14 knowing that shortly i must
put off this my tabernacle, even as our lord jesus christ hath shewed
me.

1:15 moreover i will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to
have these things always in remembrance.

1:16 for we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made
known unto you the power and coming of our lord jesus christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his majesty.

1:17 for he received from god the father honour and glory, when there
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, this is my beloved
son, in whom i am well pleased.

1:18 and this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with
him in the holy mount.

1:19 we have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until
the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: 1:20 knowing this
first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private
interpretation.

1:21 for the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but
holy men of god spake as they were moved by the holy ghost.

2:1 but there were false prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction.

2:2 and many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

2:3 and through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not,
and their damnation slumbereth not.

2:4 for if god spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down
to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved
unto judgment; 2:5 and spared not the old world, but saved noah the
eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon
the world of the ungodly; 2:6 and turning the cities of sodom and
gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an
ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; 2:7 and delivered
just lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked: 2:8 (for
that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed
his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;) 2:9 the
lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished: 2:10 but
chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and
despise government. presumptuous are they, selfwilled, they are not
afraid to speak evil of dignities.

2:11 whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing accusation against them before the lord.

2:12 but these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and
shall utterly perish in their own corruption; 2:13 and shall receive
the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot
in the day time. spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves
with their own deceivings while they feast with you; 2:14 having eyes
full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable
souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed
children: 2:15 which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray,
following the way of balaam the son of bosor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness; 2:16 but was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb ass
speaking with man's voice forbad the madness of the prophet.

2:17 these are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

2:18 for when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that
were clean escaped from them who live in error.

2:19 while they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants
of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage.

2:20 for if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of the lord and saviour jesus christ, they are
again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with
them than the beginning.

2:21 for it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them.

2:22 but it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, the
dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to
her wallowing in the mire.

3:1 this second epistle, beloved, i now write unto you; in both which
i stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance: 3:2 that ye may be
mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets,
and of the commandment of us the apostles of the lord and saviour: 3:3
knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts, 3:4 and saying, where is the promise of
his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as
they were from the beginning of the creation.

3:5 for this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of god
the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and
in the water: 3:6 whereby the world that then was, being overflowed
with water, perished: 3:7 but the heavens and the earth, which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against
the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.

3:8 but, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is
with the lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.

3:9 the lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

3:10 but the day of the lord will come as a thief in the night; in the
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burned up.

3:11 seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, 3:12
looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of god, wherein the
heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat?  3:13 nevertheless we, according to his promise,
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.

3:14 wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and
blameless.

3:15 and account that the longsuffering of our lord is salvation; even
as our beloved brother paul also according to the wisdom given unto
him hath written unto you; 3:16 as also in all his epistles, speaking
in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they
do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction.

3:17 ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own stedfastness.

3:18 but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our lord and saviour
jesus christ. to him be glory both now and for ever. amen.




the first epistle general of john


1:1 that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled, of the word of life; 1:2 (for the life was manifested, and we
have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life,
which was with the father, and was manifested unto us;) 1:3 that which
we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the father, and
with his son jesus christ.

1:4 and these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.

1:5 this then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that god is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

1:6 if we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, and do not the truth: 1:7 but if we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
jesus christ his son cleanseth us from all sin.

1:8 if we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
is not in us.

1:9 if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

1:10 if we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us.

2:1 my little children, these things write i unto you, that ye sin
not.

and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, jesus christ
the righteous: 2:2 and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not
for our's only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

2:3 and hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments.

2:4 he that saith, i know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him.

2:5 but whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of god
perfected: hereby know we that we are in him.

2:6 he that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk,
even as he walked.

2:7 brethren, i write no new commandment unto you, but an old
commandment which ye had from the beginning. the old commandment is
the word which ye have heard from the beginning.

2:8 again, a new commandment i write unto you, which thing is true in
him and in you: because the darkness is past, and the true light now
shineth.

2:9 he that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in
darkness even until now.

2:10 he that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is
none occasion of stumbling in him.

2:11 but he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in
darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath
blinded his eyes.

2:12 i write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven
you for his name's sake.

2:13 i write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from
the beginning. i write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome
the wicked one. i write unto you, little children, because ye have
known the father.

2:14 i have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that
is from the beginning. i have written unto you, young men, because ye
are strong, and the word of god abideth in you, and ye have overcome
the wicked one.

2:15 love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. if
any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him.

2:16 for all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but is of
the world.

2:17 and the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that
doeth the will of god abideth for ever.

2:18 little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that
antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we
know that it is the last time.

2:19 they went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went
out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.

2:20 but ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things.

2:21 i have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but
because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

2:22 who is a liar but he that denieth that jesus is the christ? he is
antichrist, that denieth the father and the son.

2:23 whosoever denieth the son, the same hath not the father: he that
acknowledgeth the son hath the father also.

2:24 let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the
beginning. if that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain
in you, ye also shall continue in the son, and in the father.

2:25 and this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal
life.

2:26 these things have i written unto you concerning them that seduce
you.

2:27 but the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you,
and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing
teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as
it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.

2:28 and now, little children, abide in him; that, when he shall
appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his
coming.

2:29 if ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that
doeth righteousness is born of him.

3:1 behold, what manner of love the father hath bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the sons of god: therefore the world knoweth us
not, because it knew him not.

3:2 beloved, now are we the sons of god, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is.

3:3 and every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even
as he is pure.

3:4 whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is
the transgression of the law.

3:5 and ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in
him is no sin.

3:6 whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not
seen him, neither known him.

3:7 little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.

3:8 he that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from
the beginning. for this purpose the son of god was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the devil.

3:9 whosoever is born of god doth not commit sin; for his seed
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of god.

3:10 in this the children of god are manifest, and the children of the
devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of god, neither he
that loveth not his brother.

3:11 for this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another.

3:12 not as cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother.
and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his
brother's righteous.

3:13 marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.

3:14 we know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love
the brethren. he that loveth not his brother abideth in death.

3:15 whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no
murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.

3:16 hereby perceive we the love of god, because he laid down his life
for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

3:17 but whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have
need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth
the love of god in him?  3:18 my little children, let us not love in
word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth.

3:19 and hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him.

3:20 for if our heart condemn us, god is greater than our heart, and
knoweth all things.

3:21 beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward god.

3:22 and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

3:23 and this is his commandment, that we should believe on the name
of his son jesus christ, and love one another, as he gave us
commandment.

3:24 and he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in
him.

and hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the spirit which he hath
given us.

4:1 beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of god: because many false prophets are gone out into the
world.

4:2 hereby know ye the spirit of god: every spirit that confesseth
that jesus christ is come in the flesh is of god: 4:3 and every spirit
that confesseth not that jesus christ is come in the flesh is not of
god: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that
it should come; and even now already is it in the world.

4:4 ye are of god, little children, and have overcome them: because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

4:5 they are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the
world heareth them.

4:6 we are of god: he that knoweth god heareth us; he that is not of
god heareth not us. hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit
of error.

4:7 beloved, let us love one another: for love is of god; and every
one that loveth is born of god, and knoweth god.

4:8 he that loveth not knoweth not god; for god is love.

4:9 in this was manifested the love of god toward us, because that god
sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live through
him.

4:10 herein is love, not that we loved god, but that he loved us, and
sent his son to be the propitiation for our sins.

4:11 beloved, if god so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

4:12 no man hath seen god at any time. if we love one another, god
dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.

4:13 hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
hath given us of his spirit.

4:14 and we have seen and do testify that the father sent the son to
be the saviour of the world.

4:15 whosoever shall confess that jesus is the son of god, god
dwelleth in him, and he in god.

4:16 and we have known and believed the love that god hath to us. god
is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in god, and god in him.

4:17 herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the
day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world.

4:18 there is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear:
because fear hath torment. he that feareth is not made perfect in
love.

4:19 we love him, because he first loved us.

4:20 if a man say, i love god, and hateth his brother, he is a liar:
for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love
god whom he hath not seen?  4:21 and this commandment have we from
him, that he who loveth god love his brother also.

5:1 whosoever believeth that jesus is the christ is born of god: and
every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten
of him.

5:2 by this we know that we love the children of god, when we love
god, and keep his commandments.

5:3 for this is the love of god, that we keep his commandments: and
his commandments are not grievous.

5:4 for whatsoever is born of god overcometh the world: and this is
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.

5:5 who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that
jesus is the son of god?  5:6 this is he that came by water and blood,
even jesus christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. and it
is the spirit that beareth witness, because the spirit is truth.

5:7 for there are three that bear record in heaven, the father, the
word, and the holy ghost: and these three are one.

5:8 and there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and
the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one.

5:9 if we receive the witness of men, the witness of god is greater:
for this is the witness of god which he hath testified of his son.

5:10 he that believeth on the son of god hath the witness in himself:
he that believeth not god hath made him a liar; because he believeth
not the record that god gave of his son.

5:11 and this is the record, that god hath given to us eternal life,
and this life is in his son.

5:12 he that hath the son hath life; and he that hath not the son of
god hath not life.

5:13 these things have i written unto you that believe on the name of
the son of god; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that
ye may believe on the name of the son of god.

5:14 and this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask
any thing according to his will, he heareth us: 5:15 and if we know
that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions
that we desired of him.

5:16 if any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he
shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death. there is a sin unto death: i do not say that he shall pray for
it.

5:17 all unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death.

5:18 we know that whosoever is born of god sinneth not; but he that is
begotten of god keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not.

5:19 and we know that we are of god, and the whole world lieth in
wickedness.

5:20 and we know that the son of god is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him
that is true, even in his son jesus christ. this is the true god, and
eternal life.

5:21 little children, keep yourselves from idols. amen.




the second epistle general of john


1:1 the elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom i love in
the truth; and not i only, but also all they that have known the
truth; 1:2 for the truth's sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be
with us for ever.

1:3 grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from god the father, and from
the lord jesus christ, the son of the father, in truth and love.

1:4 i rejoiced greatly that i found of thy children walking in truth,
as we have received a commandment from the father.

1:5 and now i beseech thee, lady, not as though i wrote a new
commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that
we love one another.

1:6 and this is love, that we walk after his commandments. this is the
commandment, that, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk
in it.

1:7 for many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not
that jesus christ is come in the flesh. this is a deceiver and an
antichrist.

1:8 look to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full reward.

1:9 whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of
christ, hath not god. he that abideth in the doctrine of christ, he
hath both the father and the son.

1:10 if there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him god speed: 1:11 for he that
biddeth him god speed is partaker of his evil deeds.

1:12 having many things to write unto you, i would not write with
paper and ink: but i trust to come unto you, and speak face to face,
that our joy may be full.

1:13 the children of thy elect sister greet thee. amen.




the third epistle general of john


1:1 the elder unto the wellbeloved gaius, whom i love in the truth.

1:2 beloved, i wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be
in health, even as thy soul prospereth.

1:3 for i rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of
the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.

1:4 i have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.

1:5 beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the
brethren, and to strangers; 1:6 which have borne witness of thy
charity before the church: whom if thou bring forward on their journey
after a godly sort, thou shalt do well: 1:7 because that for his
name's sake they went forth, taking nothing of the gentiles.

1:8 we therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellowhelpers
to the truth.

1:9 i wrote unto the church: but diotrephes, who loveth to have the
preeminence among them, receiveth us not.

1:10 wherefore, if i come, i will remember his deeds which he doeth,
prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith,
neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that
would, and casteth them out of the church.

1:11 beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good.
he that doeth good is of god: but he that doeth evil hath not seen
god.

1:12 demetrius hath good report of all men, and of the truth itself:
yea, and we also bear record; and ye know that our record is true.

1:13 i had many things to write, but i will not with ink and pen write
unto thee: 1:14 but i trust i shall shortly see thee, and we shall
speak face to face. peace be to thee. our friends salute thee. greet
the friends by name.




the general epistle of jude


1:1 jude, the servant of jesus christ, and brother of james, to them
that are sanctified by god the father, and preserved in jesus christ,
and called: 1:2 mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied.

1:3 beloved, when i gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you
that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once
delivered unto the saints.

1:4 for there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of
our god into lasciviousness, and denying the only lord god, and our
lord jesus christ.

1:5 i will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this,
how that the lord, having saved the people out of the land of egypt,
afterward destroyed them that believed not.

1:6 and the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the judgment of the great day.

1:7 even as sodom and gomorrha, and the cities about them in like
manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange
flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire.

1:8 likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

1:9 yet michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he
disputed about the body of moses, durst not bring against him a
railing accusation, but said, the lord rebuke thee.

1:10 but these speak evil of those things which they know not: but
what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they
corrupt themselves.

1:11 woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of cain, and ran
greedily after the error of balaam for reward, and perished in the
gainsaying of core.

1:12 these are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with
you, feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water,
carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots; 1:13 raging waves of the sea,
foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever.

1:14 and enoch also, the seventh from adam, prophesied of these,
saying, behold, the lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, 1:15
to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him.

1:16 these are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts;
and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage.

1:17 but, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of
the apostles of our lord jesus christ; 1:18 how that they told you
there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their
own ungodly lusts.

1:19 these be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
spirit.

1:20 but ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith,
praying in the holy ghost, 1:21 keep yourselves in the love of god,
looking for the mercy of our lord jesus christ unto eternal life.

1:22 and of some have compassion, making a difference: 1:23 and others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment
spotted by the flesh.

1:24 now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy, 1:25 to the only wise god our saviour, be glory and majesty,
dominion and power, both now and ever. amen.




the revelation of saint john the devine


1:1 the revelation of jesus christ, which god gave unto him, to shew
unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent
and signified it by his angel unto his servant john: 1:2 who bare
record of the word of god, and of the testimony of jesus christ, and
of all things that he saw.

1:3 blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the
time is at hand.

1:4 john to the seven churches which are in asia: grace be unto you,
and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and
from the seven spirits which are before his throne; 1:5 and from jesus
christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the
dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth. unto him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, 1:6 and hath made us
kings and priests unto god and his father; to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. amen.

1:7 behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and
they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail
because of him. even so, amen.

1:8 i am alpha and omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the
lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the almighty.

1:9 i john, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation,
and in the kingdom and patience of jesus christ, was in the isle that
is called patmos, for the word of god, and for the testimony of jesus
christ.

1:10 i was in the spirit on the lord's day, and heard behind me a
great voice, as of a trumpet, 1:11 saying, i am alpha and omega, the
first and the last: and, what thou seest, write in a book, and send it
unto the seven churches which are in asia; unto ephesus, and unto
smyrna, and unto pergamos, and unto thyatira, and unto sardis, and
unto philadelphia, and unto laodicea.

1:12 and i turned to see the voice that spake with me. and being
turned, i saw seven golden candlesticks; 1:13 and in the midst of the
seven candlesticks one like unto the son of man, clothed with a
garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden
girdle.

1:14 his head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow;
and his eyes were as a flame of fire; 1:15 and his feet like unto fine
brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of
many waters.

1:16 and he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth
went a sharp twoedged sword: and his countenance was as the sun
shineth in his strength.

1:17 and when i saw him, i fell at his feet as dead. and he laid his
right hand upon me, saying unto me, fear not; i am the first and the
last: 1:18 i am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, i am alive
for evermore, amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.

1:19 write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are,
and the things which shall be hereafter; 1:20 the mystery of the seven
stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden
candlesticks. the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches:
and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches.

2:1 unto the angel of the church of ephesus write; these things saith
he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the
midst of the seven golden candlesticks; 2:2 i know thy works, and thy
labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are
evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are
not, and hast found them liars: 2:3 and hast borne, and hast patience,
and for my name's sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted.

2:4 nevertheless i have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left
thy first love.

2:5 remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works; or else i will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

2:6 but this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the
nicolaitanes, which i also hate.

2:7 he that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches; to him that overcometh will i give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the paradise of god.

2:8 and unto the angel of the church in smyrna write; these things
saith the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive; 2:9 i know
thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and i
know the blasphemy of them which say they are jews, and are not, but
are the synagogue of satan.

2:10 fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the
devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye
shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and i
will give thee a crown of life.

2:11 he that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches; he that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.

2:12 and to the angel of the church in pergamos write; these things
saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges; 2:13 i know thy
works, and where thou dwellest, even where satan's seat is: and thou
holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days
wherein antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where
satan dwelleth.

2:14 but i have a few things against thee, because thou hast there
them that hold the doctrine of balaam, who taught balac to cast a
stumblingblock before the children of israel, to eat things sacrificed
unto idols, and to commit fornication.

2:15 so hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the
nicolaitanes, which thing i hate.

2:16 repent; or else i will come unto thee quickly, and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth.

2:17 he that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches; to him that overcometh will i give to eat of the hidden
manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.

2:18 and unto the angel of the church in thyatira write; these things
saith the son of god, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and
his feet are like fine brass; 2:19 i know thy works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to
be more than the first.

2:20 notwithstanding i have a few things against thee, because thou
sufferest that woman jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to
teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed unto idols.

2:21 and i gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she
repented not.

2:22 behold, i will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery
with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

2:23 and i will kill her children with death; and all the churches
shall know that i am he which searcheth the reins and hearts: and i
will give unto every one of you according to your works.

2:24 but unto you i say, and unto the rest in thyatira, as many as
have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of satan,
as they speak; i will put upon you none other burden.

2:25 but that which ye have already hold fast till i come.

2:26 and he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him
will i give power over the nations: 2:27 and he shall rule them with a
rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to
shivers: even as i received of my father.

2:28 and i will give him the morning star.

2:29 he that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:1 and unto the angel of the church in sardis write; these things
saith he that hath the seven spirits of god, and the seven stars; i
know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.

3:2 be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are
ready to die: for i have not found thy works perfect before god.

3:3 remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold
fast, and repent. if therefore thou shalt not watch, i will come on
thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour i will come upon
thee.

3:4 thou hast a few names even in sardis which have not defiled their
garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.

3:5 he that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment;
and i will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but i will
confess his name before my father, and before his angels.

3:6 he that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:7 and to the angel of the church in philadelphia write; these things
saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of david,
he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man
openeth; 3:8 i know thy works: behold, i have set before thee an open
door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and
hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.

3:9 behold, i will make them of the synagogue of satan, which say they
are jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, i will make them to come
and worship before thy feet, and to know that i have loved thee.

3:10 because thou hast kept the word of my patience, i also will keep
thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world,
to try them that dwell upon the earth.

3:11 behold, i come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no
man take thy crown.

3:12 him that overcometh will i make a pillar in the temple of my god,
and he shall go no more out: and i will write upon him the name of my
god, and the name of the city of my god, which is new jerusalem, which
cometh down out of heaven from my god: and i will write upon him my
new name.

3:13 he that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:14 and unto the angel of the church of the laodiceans write; these
things saith the amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of
the creation of god; 3:15 i know thy works, that thou art neither cold
nor hot: i would thou wert cold or hot.

3:16 so then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, i
will spue thee out of my mouth.

3:17 because thou sayest, i am rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: 3:18 i counsel thee to buy
of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white
raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that
thou mayest see.

3:19 as many as i love, i rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore,
and repent.

3:20 behold, i stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, i will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
he with me.

3:21 to him that overcometh will i grant to sit with me in my throne,
even as i also overcame, and am set down with my father in his throne.

3:22 he that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

4:1 after this i looked, and, behold, a door was opened in heaven: and
the first voice which i heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with
me; which said, come up hither, and i will shew thee things which must
be hereafter.

4:2 and immediately i was in the spirit: and, behold, a throne was set
in heaven, and one sat on the throne.

4:3 and he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine
stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like
unto an emerald.

4:4 and round about the throne were four and twenty seats: and upon
the seats i saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white
raiment; and they had on their heads crowns of gold.

4:5 and out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and
voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne,
which are the seven spirits of god.

4:6 and before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal:
and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four
beasts full of eyes before and behind.

4:7 and the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a
calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast
was like a flying eagle.

4:8 and the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they
were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying,
holy, holy, holy, lord god almighty, which was, and is, and is to
come.

4:9 and when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to him that
sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever, 4:10 the four and
twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne, and worship
him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the
throne, saying, 4:11 thou art worthy, o lord, to receive glory and
honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are and were created.

5:1 and i saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.

5:2 and i saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, who is
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?  5:3 and no
man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open
the book, neither to look thereon.

5:4 and i wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to
read the book, neither to look thereon.

5:5 and one of the elders saith unto me, weep not: behold, the lion of
the tribe of juda, the root of david, hath prevailed to open the book,
and to loose the seven seals thereof.

5:6 and i beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a lamb as it had been
slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits
of god sent forth into all the earth.

5:7 and he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that
sat upon the throne.

5:8 and when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four and
twenty elders fell down before the lamb, having every one of them
harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of
saints.

5:9 and they sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us to god by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation; 5:10 and hast made us unto our god kings and
priests: and we shall reign on the earth.

5:11 and i beheld, and i heard the voice of many angels round about
the throne and the beasts and the elders: and the number of them was
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; 5:12
saying with a loud voice, worthy is the lamb that was slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory,
and blessing.

5:13 and every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them,
heard i saying, blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto
him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever.

5:14 and the four beasts said, amen. and the four and twenty elders
fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.

6:1 and i saw when the lamb opened one of the seals, and i heard, as
it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, come and
see.

6:2 and i saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a
bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and
to conquer.

6:3 and when he had opened the second seal, i heard the second beast
say, come and see.

6:4 and there went out another horse that was red: and power was given
to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they
should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword.

6:5 and when he had opened the third seal, i heard the third beast
say, come and see. and i beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat
on him had a pair of balances in his hand.

6:6 and i heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, a measure
of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and
see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.

6:7 and when he had opened the fourth seal, i heard the voice of the
fourth beast say, come and see.

6:8 and i looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on
him was death, and hell followed with him. and power was given unto
them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with
hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

6:9 and when he had opened the fifth seal, i saw under the altar the
souls of them that were slain for the word of god, and for the
testimony which they held: 6:10 and they cried with a loud voice,
saying, how long, o lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?  6:11 and white
robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them,
that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they
were, should be fulfilled.

6:12 and i beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there
was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair,
and the moon became as blood; 6:13 and the stars of heaven fell unto
the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is
shaken of a mighty wind.

6:14 and the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together;
and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.

6:15 and the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men,
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and
every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the
mountains; 6:16 and said to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the
wrath of the lamb: 6:17 for the great day of his wrath is come; and
who shall be able to stand?  7:1 and after these things i saw four
angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four
winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on
the sea, nor on any tree.

7:2 and i saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal
of the living god: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels,
to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, 7:3 saying, hurt
not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our god in their foreheads.

7:4 and i heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were
sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the
children of israel.

7:5 of the tribe of juda were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of
reuben were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of gad were sealed
twelve thousand.

7:6 of the tribe of aser were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of
nephthalim were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of manasses were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:7 of the tribe of simeon were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe
of levi were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of issachar were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:8 of the tribe of zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe
of joseph were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of benjamin were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:9 after this i beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues,
stood before the throne, and before the lamb, clothed with white
robes, and palms in their hands; 7:10 and cried with a loud voice,
saying, salvation to our god which sitteth upon the throne, and unto
the lamb.

7:11 and all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the
elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces,
and worshipped god, 7:12 saying, amen: blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto
our god for ever and ever. amen.

7:13 and one of the elders answered, saying unto me, what are these
which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?  7:14 and i
said unto him, sir, thou knowest. and he said to me, these are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and
made them white in the blood of the lamb.

7:15 therefore are they before the throne of god, and serve him day
and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell
among them.

7:16 they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall
the sun light on them, nor any heat.

7:17 for the lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them,
and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and god shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes.

8:1 and when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven about the space of half an hour.

8:2 and i saw the seven angels which stood before god; and to them
were given seven trumpets.

8:3 and another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden
censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should
offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which
was before the throne.

8:4 and the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the
saints, ascended up before god out of the angel's hand.

8:5 and the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the
altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and
thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.

8:6 and the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound.

8:7 the first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled
with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of
trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

8:8 and the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea
became blood; 8:9 and the third part of the creatures which were in
the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were
destroyed.

8:10 and the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of
the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; 8:11 and the name of the
star is called wormwood: and the third part of the waters became
wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made
bitter.

8:12 and the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the
stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone
not for a third part of it, and the night likewise.

8:13 and i beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of
heaven, saying with a loud voice, woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of
the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three
angels, which are yet to sound!  9:1 and the fifth angel sounded, and
i saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the
key of the bottomless pit.

9:2 and he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out of
the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were
darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.

9:3 and there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto
them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.

9:4 and it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of
the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those
men which have not the seal of god in their foreheads.

9:5 and to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that
they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the
torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.

9:6 and in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and
shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

9:7 and the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto
battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their
faces were as the faces of men.

9:8 and they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as
the teeth of lions.

9:9 and they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and
the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses
running to battle.

9:10 and they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in
their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.

9:11 and they had a king over them, which is the angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in the hebrew tongue is abaddon, but in the
greek tongue hath his name apollyon.

9:12 one woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter.

9:13 and the sixth angel sounded, and i heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden altar which is before god, 9:14 saying to the
sixth angel which had the trumpet, loose the four angels which are
bound in the great river euphrates.

9:15 and the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour,
and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

9:16 and the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred
thousand thousand: and i heard the number of them.

9:17 and thus i saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on
them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and
the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their
mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone.

9:18 by these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and
by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.

9:19 for their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their
tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do
hurt.

9:20 and the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues
yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone,
and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: 9:21 neither
repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their
fornication, nor of their thefts.

10:1 and i saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed
with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it
were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire: 10:2 and he had in his
hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and
his left foot on the earth, 10:3 and cried with a loud voice, as when
a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their
voices.

10:4 and when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, i was about
to write: and i heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, seal up
those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

10:5 and the angel which i saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth
lifted up his hand to heaven, 10:6 and sware by him that liveth for
ever and ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are,
and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the
things which are therein, that there should be time no longer: 10:7
but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin
to sound, the mystery of god should be finished, as he hath declared
to his servants the prophets.

10:8 and the voice which i heard from heaven spake unto me again, and
said, go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the
angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.

10:9 and i went unto the angel, and said unto him, give me the little
book. and he said unto me, take it, and eat it up; and it shall make
thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.

10:10 and i took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it
up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as i had eaten
it, my belly was bitter.

10:11 and he said unto me, thou must prophesy again before many
peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.

11:1 and there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel
stood, saying, rise, and measure the temple of god, and the altar, and
them that worship therein.

11:2 but the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure
it not; for it is given unto the gentiles: and the holy city shall
they tread under foot forty and two months.

11:3 and i will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in
sackcloth.

11:4 these are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing
before the god of the earth.

11:5 and if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he
must in this manner be killed.

11:6 these have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and
to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

11:7 and when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and
shall overcome them, and kill them.

11:8 and their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city,
which spiritually is called sodom and egypt, where also our lord was
crucified.

11:9 and they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall
see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer
their dead bodies to be put in graves.

11:10 and they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and
make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two
prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

11:11 and after three days and an half the spirit of life from god
entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell
upon them which saw them.

11:12 and they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, come
up hither. and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their
enemies beheld them.

11:13 and the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven
thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the god
of heaven.

11:14 the second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh
quickly.

11:15 and the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in
heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
our lord, and of his christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

11:16 and the four and twenty elders, which sat before god on their
seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped god, 11:17 saying, we
give thee thanks, o lord god almighty, which art, and wast, and art to
come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast
reigned.

11:18 and the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time
of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give
reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them
that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which
destroy the earth.

11:19 and the temple of god was opened in heaven, and there was seen
in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and
voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.

12:1 and there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with
the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelve stars: 12:2 and she being with child cried, travailing in
birth, and pained to be delivered.

12:3 and there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great
red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon
his heads.

12:4 and his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did
cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which
was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was
born.

12:5 and she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations
with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto god, and to his
throne.

12:6 and the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place
prepared of god, that they should feed her there a thousand two
hundred and threescore days.

12:7 and there was war in heaven: michael and his angels fought
against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, 12:8 and
prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

12:9 and the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the
devil, and satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out
into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.

12:10 and i heard a loud voice saying in heaven, now is come
salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our god, and the power of
his christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which
accused them before our god day and night.

12:11 and they overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word
of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.

12:12 therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. woe to
the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down
unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a
short time.

12:13 and when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child.

12:14 and to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she
might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished
for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.

12:15 and the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the
woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

12:16 and the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.

12:17 and the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war
with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of god, and
have the testimony of jesus christ.

13:1 and i stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out
of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten
crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.

13:2 and the beast which i saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet
were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and
the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority.

13:3 and i saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his
deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.

13:4 and they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast:
and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is like unto the beast? who
is able to make war with him?  13:5 and there was given unto him a
mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto
him to continue forty and two months.

13:6 and he opened his mouth in blasphemy against god, to blaspheme
his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

13:7 and it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to
overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues,
and nations.

13:8 and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names
are not written in the book of life of the lamb slain from the
foundation of the world.

13:9 if any man have an ear, let him hear.

13:10 he that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity: he that
killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword. here is the
patience and the faith of the saints.

13:11 and i beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he
had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.

13:12 and he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him,
and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the
first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.

13:13 and he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down
from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, 13:14 and deceiveth them
that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had
power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on
the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the
wound by a sword, and did live.

13:15 and he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that
the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as
would not worship the image of the beast should be killed.

13:16 and he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free
and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads: 13:17 and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had
the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.

13:18 here is wisdom. let him that hath understanding count the number
of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is six
hundred threescore and six.

14:1 and i looked, and, lo, a lamb stood on the mount sion, and with
him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his father's name
written in their foreheads.

14:2 and i heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and
as the voice of a great thunder: and i heard the voice of harpers
harping with their harps: 14:3 and they sung as it were a new song
before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no
man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand,
which were redeemed from the earth.

14:4 these are they which were not defiled with women; for they are
virgins. these are they which follow the lamb whithersoever he goeth.
these were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto god and
to the lamb.

14:5 and in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault
before the throne of god.

14:6 and i saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to
every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, 14:7 saying with a
loud voice, fear god, and give glory to him; for the hour of his
judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the
sea, and the fountains of waters.

14:8 and there followed another angel, saying, babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the
wine of the wrath of her fornication.

14:9 and the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, if
any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or in his hand, 14:10 the same shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of god, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of
his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in
the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the lamb:
14:11 and the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever:
and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his
image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name.

14:12 here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of god, and the faith of jesus.

14:13 and i heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, write, blessed
are the dead which die in the lord from henceforth: yea, saith the
spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do
follow them.

14:14 and i looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one
sat like unto the son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and
in his hand a sharp sickle.

14:15 and another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud, thrust in thy sickle, and reap:
for the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is
ripe.

14:16 and he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth;
and the earth was reaped.

14:17 and another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he
also having a sharp sickle.

14:18 and another angel came out from the altar, which had power over
fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle,
saying, thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the
vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.

14:19 and the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered
the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the
wrath of god.

14:20 and the winepress was trodden without the city, and blood came
out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a
thousand and six hundred furlongs.

15:1 and i saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven
angels having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up the
wrath of god.

15:2 and i saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire: and them
that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and
over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of
glass, having the harps of god.

15:3 and they sing the song of moses the servant of god, and the song
of the lamb, saying, great and marvellous are thy works, lord god
almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou king of saints.

15:4 who shall not fear thee, o lord, and glorify thy name? for thou
only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for
thy judgments are made manifest.

15:5 and after that i looked, and, behold, the temple of the
tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened: 15:6 and the seven
angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in
pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden
girdles.

15:7 and one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven
golden vials full of the wrath of god, who liveth for ever and ever.

15:8 and the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of god, and
from his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the
seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.

16:1 and i heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven
angels, go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of god upon
the earth.

16:2 and the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and
there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark
of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.

16:3 and the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea; and it
became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the
sea.

16:4 and the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and
fountains of waters; and they became blood.

16:5 and i heard the angel of the waters say, thou art righteous, o
lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged
thus.

16:6 for they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou
hast given them blood to drink; for they are worthy.

16:7 and i heard another out of the altar say, even so, lord god
almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

16:8 and the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun; and power
was given unto him to scorch men with fire.

16:9 and men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of
god, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to
give him glory.

16:10 and the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the
beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their
tongues for pain, 16:11 and blasphemed the god of heaven because of
their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.

16:12 and the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the
kings of the east might be prepared.

16:13 and i saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth
of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth
of the false prophet.

16:14 for they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go
forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather
them to the battle of that great day of god almighty.

16:15 behold, i come as a thief. blessed is he that watcheth, and
keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

16:16 and he gathered them together into a place called in the hebrew
tongue armageddon.

16:17 and the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and
there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne,
saying, it is done.

16:18 and there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there
was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth,
so mighty an earthquake, and so great.

16:19 and the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities
of the nations fell: and great babylon came in remembrance before god,
to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

16:20 and every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

16:21 and there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed god because of the
plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

17:1 and there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials,
and talked with me, saying unto me, come hither; i will shew unto thee
the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters: 17:2
with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the
inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication.

17:3 so he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and i
saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.

17:4 and the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and
decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup
in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication:
17:5 and upon her forehead was a name written, mystery, babylon the
great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth.

17:6 and i saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and
with the blood of the martyrs of jesus: and when i saw her, i wondered
with great admiration.

17:7 and the angel said unto me, wherefore didst thou marvel? i will
tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth
her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns.

17:8 the beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out
of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on
the earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the book of
life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that
was, and is not, and yet is.

17:9 and here is the mind which hath wisdom. the seven heads are seven
mountains, on which the woman sitteth.

17:10 and there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the
other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a short
space.

17:11 and the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and
is of the seven, and goeth into perdition.

17:12 and the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have
received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with
the beast.

17:13 these have one mind, and shall give their power and strength
unto the beast.

17:14 these shall make war with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome
them: for he is lord of lords, and king of kings: and they that are
with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.

17:15 and he saith unto me, the waters which thou sawest, where the
whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

17:16 and the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall
hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire.

17:17 for god hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to
agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of god
shall be fulfilled.

17:18 and the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which
reigneth over the kings of the earth.

18:1 and after these things i saw another angel come down from heaven,
having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory.

18:2 and he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils,
and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird.

18:3 for all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication
with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the
abundance of her delicacies.

18:4 and i heard another voice from heaven, saying, come out of her,
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues.

18:5 for her sins have reached unto heaven, and god hath remembered
her iniquities.

18:6 reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double
according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her
double.

18:7 how much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so
much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, i sit a
queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.

18:8 therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning,
and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is
the lord god who judgeth her.

18:9 and the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and
lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when
they shall see the smoke of her burning, 18:10 standing afar off for
the fear of her torment, saying, alas, alas that great city babylon,
that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.

18:11 and the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her;
for no man buyeth their merchandise any more: 18:12 the merchandise of
gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen,
and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner
vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of
brass, and iron, and marble, 18:13 and cinnamon, and odours, and
ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and
wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves,
and souls of men.

18:14 and the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from
thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed from
thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.

18:15 the merchants of these things, which were made rich by her,
shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,
18:16 and saying, alas, alas that great city, that was clothed in fine
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious
stones, and pearls!  18:17 for in one hour so great riches is come to
nought. and every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and
sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off, 18:18 and cried
when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, what city is like unto
this great city!  18:19 and they cast dust on their heads, and cried,
weeping and wailing, saying, alas, alas that great city, wherein were
made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness!
for in one hour is she made desolate.

18:20 rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and
prophets; for god hath avenged you on her.

18:21 and a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
cast it into the sea, saying, thus with violence shall that great city
babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

18:22 and the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman,
of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the
sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; 18:23 and
the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the
voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all
in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy
sorceries were all nations deceived.

18:24 and in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and
of all that were slain upon the earth.

19:1 and after these things i heard a great voice of much people in
heaven, saying, alleluia; salvation, and glory, and honour, and power,
unto the lord our god: 19:2 for true and righteous are his judgments:
for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with
her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her
hand.

19:3 and again they said, alleluia and her smoke rose up for ever and
ever.

19:4 and the four and twenty elders and the four beasts fell down and
worshipped god that sat on the throne, saying, amen; alleluia.

19:5 and a voice came out of the throne, saying, praise our god, all
ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.

19:6 and i heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying,
alleluia: for the lord god omnipotent reigneth.

19:7 let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the
marriage of the lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready.

19:8 and to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

19:9 and he saith unto me, write, blessed are they which are called
unto the marriage supper of the lamb. and he saith unto me, these are
the true sayings of god.

19:10 and i fell at his feet to worship him. and he said unto me, see
thou do it not: i am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that have
the testimony of jesus: worship god: for the testimony of jesus is the
spirit of prophecy.

19:11 and i saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that
sat upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he
doth judge and make war.

19:12 his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many
crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself.

19:13 and he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name
is called the word of god.

19:14 and the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

19:15 and out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should
smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he
treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of almighty god.

19:16 and he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, king
of kings, and lord of lords.

19:17 and i saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, come
and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great god; 19:18
that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on
them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and
great.

19:19 and i saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their
armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the
horse, and against his army.

19:20 and the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had
received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his image.
these both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

19:21 and the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon
the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls
were filled with their flesh.

20:1 and i saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

20:2 and he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the
devil, and satan, and bound him a thousand years, 20:3 and cast him
into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years
should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season.

20:4 and i saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
unto them: and i saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness of jesus, and for the word of god, and which had not
worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark
upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned
with christ a thousand years.

20:5 but the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years
were finished. this is the first resurrection.

20:6 blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection:
on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of
god and of christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

20:7 and when the thousand years are expired, satan shall be loosed
out of his prison, 20:8 and shall go out to deceive the nations which
are in the four quarters of the earth, gog, and magog, to gather them
together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.

20:9 and they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the
camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down
from god out of heaven, and devoured them.

20:10 and the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night for ever and ever.

20:11 and i saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from
whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no
place for them.

20:12 and i saw the dead, small and great, stand before god; and the
books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of
life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works.

20:13 and the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and
hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged
every man according to their works.

20:14 and death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. this is the
second death.

20:15 and whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast
into the lake of fire.

21:1 and i saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and
the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.

21:2 and i john saw the holy city, new jerusalem, coming down from god
out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

21:3 and i heard a great voice out of heaven saying, behold, the
tabernacle of god is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and god himself shall be with them, and be their
god.

21:4 and god shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.

21:5 and he that sat upon the throne said, behold, i make all things
new.

and he said unto me, write: for these words are true and faithful.

21:6 and he said unto me, it is done. i am alpha and omega, the
beginning and the end. i will give unto him that is athirst of the
fountain of the water of life freely.

21:7 he that overcometh shall inherit all things; and i will be his
god, and he shall be my son.

21:8 but the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all
liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death.

21:9 and there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the
seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me,
saying, come hither, i will shew thee the bride, the lamb's wife.

21:10 and he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high
mountain, and shewed me that great city, the holy jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from god, 21:11 having the glory of god: and
her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper
stone, clear as crystal; 21:12 and had a wall great and high, and had
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written
thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of
israel: 21:13 on the east three gates; on the north three gates; on
the south three gates; and on the west three gates.

21:14 and the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the
names of the twelve apostles of the lamb.

21:15 and he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the
city, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

21:16 and the city lieth foursquare, and the length is as large as the
breadth: and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand
furlongs.

the length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.

21:17 and he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four
cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel.

21:18 and the building of the wall of it was of jasper: and the city
was pure gold, like unto clear glass.

21:19 and the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with
all manner of precious stones. the first foundation was jasper; the
second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, an emerald;
21:20 the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh,
chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a
chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.

21:21 and the twelve gates were twelve pearls: every several gate was
of one pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were
transparent glass.

21:22 and i saw no temple therein: for the lord god almighty and the
lamb are the temple of it.

21:23 and the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to
shine in it: for the glory of god did lighten it, and the lamb is the
light thereof.

21:24 and the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light
of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into
it.

21:25 and the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there
shall be no night there.

21:26 and they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into
it.

21:27 and there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but
they which are written in the lamb's book of life.

22:1 and he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of god and of the lamb.

22:2 in the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the
river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits,
and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for
the healing of the nations.

22:3 and there shall be no more curse: but the throne of god and of
the lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him: 22:4 and
they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads.

22:5 and there shall be no night there; and they need no candle,
neither light of the sun; for the lord god giveth them light: and they
shall reign for ever and ever.

22:6 and he said unto me, these sayings are faithful and true: and the
lord god of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants
the things which must shortly be done.

22:7 behold, i come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of
the prophecy of this book.

22:8 and i john saw these things, and heard them. and when i had heard
and seen, i fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which
shewed me these things.

22:9 then saith he unto me, see thou do it not: for i am thy
fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which
keep the sayings of this book: worship god.

22:10 and he saith unto me, seal not the sayings of the prophecy of
this book: for the time is at hand.

22:11 he that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

22:12 and, behold, i come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give
every man according as his work shall be.

22:13 i am alpha and omega, the beginning and the end, the first and
the last.

22:14 blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the
city.

22:15 for without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.

22:16 i jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in
the churches. i am the root and the offspring of david, and the bright
and morning star.

22:17 and the spirit and the bride say, come. and let him that heareth
say, come. and let him that is athirst come. and whosoever will, let
him take the water of life freely.

22:18 for i testify unto every man that heareth the words of the
prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, god
shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: 22:19
and if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, god shall take away his part out of the book of life, and
out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.

22:20 he which testifieth these things saith, surely i come quickly.
amen.

even so, come, lord jesus.

22:21 the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all. amen.

