measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistres
 
 ___________________________
 
ht 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



scene:
vienna


act i. scene i.
the duke's palace

enter duke, escalus, lords, and attendants

  duke. escalus!
  escalus. my lord.
  duke. of government the properties to unfold
    would seem in me t' affect speech and discourse,
    since i am put to know that your own science
    exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
    my strength can give you; then no more remains
    but that to your sufficiency- as your worth is able-
    and let them work. the nature of our people,
    our city's institutions, and the terms
    for common justice, y'are a
 
 ___________________________
 
 in
    as art and practice hath enriched any
    that we remember. there is our commission,
    from which we would not have you warp. call hither,
    i say, bid come before us, angelo.         exit an attendant
    what figure of us think you he will bear?
    for you must know we have with special soul
    elected him our absence to supply;
    lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
    and given his deputation all the organs
    of our own power. what think you of it?
  escalus. if any in vienna be of worth
    to undergo such ample grace and honour,
    it is lord angelo.

                          enter angelo

  duke. look where he comes.
  angelo. always obedient to your grace's will,
    i come to know your pleasure.
  duke. angelo,
    there is a kind of character in thy life
    that to th' observer doth thy history
    fully unfold. thyself and thy belongings
    are not thine own so proper as to waste
    thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
 
 ___________________________
 
'twere all alike
    as if we had them not. spirits are not finely touch'd
    but to fine issues; nor nature never lends
    the smallest scruple of her excellence
    but, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
    herself the glory of a creditor,
    both thanks and use. but i do bend my speech
    to one that can my part in him advertise.
    hold, therefore, angelo-
    in our remove be thou at full ourself;
    mortality and mercy in vienna
    live in thy tongue and heart. old escalus,
    though first in question, is thy secondary.
    take thy commission.
  angelo. now, good my lord,
    let there be some more test made of my metal,
    before so noble and so great a figure
    be stamp'd upon it.
  duke. no more evasion!
    we have with a leaven'd and prepared choice
    proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
    our haste from hence is of so quick condition
    that it prefers itself, and leaves unquestion'd
    matters of needful value. we shall wri
 
 ___________________________
 
mine honour, have to do
    with any scruple: your scope is as mine own,
    so to enforce or qualify the laws
    as to your soul seems good. give me your hand;
    i'll privily away. i love the people,
    but do not like to stage me to their eyes;
    though it do well, i do not relish well
    their loud applause and aves vehement;
    nor do i think the man of safe discretion
    that does affect it. once more, fare you well.
  angelo. the heavens give safety to your purposes!
  escalus. lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
  duke. i thank you. fare you well.                         exit
  escalus. i shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
    to have free speech with you; and it concerns me
    to look into the bottom of my place:
    a pow'r i have, but of what strength and nature
    i am not yet instructed.
  angelo. 'tis so with me. let us withdraw together,
    and we may soon our satisfaction have
    touching that point.
  escalus. i'll wait upon your 
 
 ___________________________
 
is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
a hall in angelo's house

enter angelo, escalus, a justice, provost, officers, and other
attendants

  angelo. we must not make a scarecrow of the law,
    setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
    and let it keep one shape till custom make it
    their perch, and not their terror.
  escalus. ay, but yet
    let us be keen, and rather cut a little
    than fall and bruise to death. alas! this gentleman,
    whom i would save, had a most noble father.
    let but your honour know,
    whom i believe to be most strait in virtue,
 
 ___________________________
 

    that, in the working of your own affections,
    had time coher'd with place, or place with wishing,
    or that the resolute acting of our blood
    could have attain'd th' effect of your own purpose
    whether you had not sometime in your life
    err'd in this point which now you censure him,
    and pull'd the law upon you.
  angelo. 'tis one thing to be tempted, escalus,
    another thing to fall. i not deny
    the jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
    may in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
    guiltier than him they try. what's open made to justice,
    that justice seizes. what knows the laws
    that thieves do pass on thieves? 'tis very pregnant,
    the jewel that we find, we stoop and take't,
    because we see it; but what we do not see
    we tread upon, and never think of it.
    you may not so extenuate his offence
    for i have
 
 ___________________________
 
 had such faults; but rather tell me,
    when i, that censure him, do so offend,
    let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
    and nothing come in partial. sir, he must die.
  escalus. be it as your wisdom will.
  angelo. where is the provost?
  provost. here, if it like your honour.
  angelo. see that claudio
    be executed by nine to-morrow morning;
    bring him his confessor; let him be prepar'd;
    for that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.        exit provost
  escalus. [aside] well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    and some condemned for a fault alone.

         enter elbow and officers with froth and pompey

  elbow. come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common
houses,
    i know no law; bring them away.
  angelo. how now, sir! what's your name, and what's the matter?
  e
 
 ___________________________
 
lbow. if it please your honour, i am the poor duke's
constable,
    and my name is elbow; i do lean upon justice, sir, and do
bring
    in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
  angelo. benefactors! well- what benefactors are they? are they
not
    malefactors?
  elbow. if it please your honour, i know not well what they are;
but
    precise villains they are, that i am sure of, and void of all
    profanation in the world that good christians ought to have.
  escalus. this comes off well; here's a wise officer.
  angelo. go to; what quality are they of? elbow is your name?
why
    dost thou not speak, elbow?
  pompey. he cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.
  angelo. what are you, sir?
  elbow. he, sir? a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a
bad
    woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, pluck'd down in
the
    suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which, i think,
is a
    very ill house too.
  escalus. how know you that?
  elbow.
 
 ___________________________
 
 my wife, sir, whom i detest before heaven and your
honour-
  escalus. how! thy wife!
  elbow. ay, sir; whom i thank heaven, is an honest woman-
  escalus. dost thou detest her therefore?
  elbow. i say, sir, i will detest myself also, as well as she,
that
    this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her
life,
    for it is a naughty house.
  escalus. how dost thou know that, constable?
  elbow. marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
    cardinally given, might have been accus'd in fornication,
    adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
  escalus. by the woman's means?
  elbow. ay, sir, by mistress overdone's means; but as she spit
in
    his face, so she defied him.
  pompey. sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
  elbow. prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man,
    prove it.
  escalus. do 
 
 ___________________________
 
you hear how he misplaces?
  pompey. sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving
your
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes. sir, we had but two in
the
    house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in
a
    fruit dish, a dish of some three pence; your honours have
seen
    such dishes; they are not china dishes, but very good dishes.
  escalus. go to, go to; no matter for the dish, sir.
  pompey. no, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the
    right; but to the point. as i say, this mistress elbow,
being, as
    i say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as i
    said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as i said,
    master froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as i
    said, and, as i say, paying for them very honestly; for, as
you
    know, master froth, i could not give you th
 
 ___________________________
 
ree pence again-
  froth. no, indeed.
  pompey. very well; you being then, if you be rememb'red,
cracking
    the stones of the foresaid prunes-
  froth. ay, so i did indeed.
  pompey. why, very well; i telling you then, if you be
rememb'red,
    that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing
you
    wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as i told you-
  froth. all this is true.
  pompey. why, very well then-
  escalus. come, you are a tedious fool. to the purpose: what was
    done to elbow's wife that he hath cause to complain of? come
me
    to what was done to her.
  pompey. sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
  escalus. no, sir, nor i mean it not.
  pompey. sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave.
and,
    i beseech you, look into master froth here, sir, a man of
    fourscore pound a year; whose father died at hallowmas- was't
not
    at hallowmas, master froth?
  froth. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 here be truths. he, sir,
sitting, as
    i say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the bunch of grapes,
    where, indeed, you have a delight to sit, have you not?
  froth. i have so; because it is an open room, and good for
winter.
  pompey. why, very well then; i hope here be truths.
  angelo. this will last out a night in russia,
    when nights are longest there; i'll take my leave,
    and leave you to the hearing of the cause,
    hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
  escalus. i think no less. good morrow to your lordship.
    [exit angelo] now, sir, come on; what was done to elbow's
wife,
    once more?
  pompey. once?- sir. there was nothing done to her once.
  elbow. i beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my
wife.
  pompey. i beseech your honour, ask me.
  escalus. well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?
  pompey. i beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face. good
    master froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a good purpose.
doth

 
 ___________________________
 
    your honour mark his face?
  escalus. ay, sir, very well.
  pompey. nay, i beseech you, mark it well.
  escalus. well, i do so.
  pompey. doth your honour see any harm in his face?
  escalus. why, no.
  pompey. i'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst
thing
    about him. good then; if his face be the worst thing about
him,
    how could master froth do the constable's wife any harm? i
would
    know that of your honour.
  escalus. he's in the right, constable; what say you to it?
  elbow. first, an it like you, the house is a respected house;
next,
    this is a respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected
    woman.
  pompey. by this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person
than
    any of us all.
  elbow. varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicket varlet; the time
is
    yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or
    child.
  pompey. sir, she was respected with him before he married
 
 ___________________________
 
 with
her.
  escalus. which is the wiser here, justice or iniquity? is this
    true?
  elbow. o thou caitiff! o thou varlet! o thou wicked hannibal! i
    respected with her before i was married to her! if ever i was
    respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship
think me
    the poor duke's officer. prove this, thou wicked hannibal, or
    i'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee.
  escalus. if he took you a box o' th' ear, you might have your
    action of slander too.
  elbow. marry, i thank your good worship for it. what is't your
    worship's pleasure i shall do with this wicked caitiff?
  escalus. truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him
that
    thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in
his
    courses till thou know'st what they are.
  elbow. marry, i thank your worship for it. thou seest, thou
wicked
    varlet, now, what's come upo
 
 ___________________________
 
n thee: thou art to continue now,
    thou varlet; thou art to continue.
  escalus. where were you born, friend?
  froth. here in vienna, sir.
  escalus. are you of fourscore pounds a year?
  froth. yes, an't please you, sir.
  escalus. so. what trade are you of, sir?
  pompey. a tapster, a poor widow's tapster.
  escalus. your mistress' name?
  pompey. mistress overdone.
  escalus. hath she had any more than one husband?
  pompey. nine, sir; overdone by the last.
  escalus. nine! come hither to me, master froth. master froth, i
    would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw
you,
    master froth, and you will hang them. get you gone, and let
me
    hear no more of you.
  froth. i thank your worship. for mine own part, i never come
into
    any room in a taphouse but i am drawn in.
  escalus. well, no more of it, master froth; farewell. [exit
froth]
    come you hither to me, master tapster; what's your name,
master
    tapster?
  po
 
 ___________________________
 
mpey. pompey.
  escalus. what else?
  pompey. bum, sir.
  escalus. troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you;
so
    that, in the beastliest sense, you are pompey the great.
pompey,
    you are partly a bawd, pompey, howsoever you colour it in
being a
    tapster. are you not? come, tell me true; it shall be the
better
    for you.
  pompey. truly, sir, i am a poor fellow that would live.
  escalus. how would you live, pompey- by being a bawd? what do
you
    think of the trade, pompey? is it a lawful trade?
  pompey. if the law would allow it, sir.
  escalus. but the law will not allow it, pompey; nor it shall
not be
    allowed in vienna.
  pompey. does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth
of
    the city?
  escalus. no, pompey.
  pompey. truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then. if
    your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves,
you

 
 ___________________________
 
    need not to fear the bawds.
  escalus. there is pretty orders beginning, i can tell you: but
it
    is but heading and hanging.
  pompey. if you head and hang all that offend that way but for
ten
    year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for
more
    heads; if this law hold in vienna ten year, i'll rent the
fairest
    house in it, after threepence a bay. if you live to see this
come
    to pass, say pompey told you so.
  escalus. thank you, good pompey; and, in requital of your
prophecy,
    hark you: i advise you, let me not find you before me again
upon
    any complaint whatsoever- no, not for dwelling where you do;
if i
    do, pompey, i shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
    caesar to you; in plain dealing, pompey, i shall have you
whipt.
    so for this time, pompey, fare you well.
  pompey. i thank your worship for your good counsel; [aside] but
i
    shall follow it as the flesh and for
 
 ___________________________
 
tune shall better
determine.
    whip me? no, no; let carman whip his jade;
    the valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade.         exit
  escalus. come hither to me, master elbow; come hither, master
    constable. how long have you been in this place of constable?
  elbow. seven year and a half, sir.
  escalus. i thought, by the readiness in the office, you had
    continued in it some time. you say seven years together?
  elbow. and a half, sir.
  escalus. alas, it hath been great pains to you! they do you
wrong
    to put you so oft upon't. are there not men in your ward
    sufficient to serve it?
  elbow. faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters; as they are
    chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; i do it for some
    piece of money, and go through with all.
  escalus. look you, bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the
    most sufficient of your parish.
  elbow. to your worship's house, sir?
  escalus. to my hous
 
 ___________________________
 
e. fare you well.              [exit elbow]
    what's o'clock, think you?
  justice. eleven, sir.
  escalus. i pray you home to dinner with me.
  justice. i humbly thank you.
  escalus. it grieves me for the death of claudio;
    but there's no remedy.
  justice. lord angelo is severe.
  escalus. it is but needful:
    mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
    but yet, poor claudio! there is no remedy.
    come, sir.                                            exeunt




scene ii.
another room in angelo's house

enter provost and a servant

  servant. he's hearing of a cause; he will come straight.
    i'll tell him of you.
  provost. pray you do. [exit servant] i'll know
    his pleasure; may be he will relent. alas,
    h
 
 ___________________________
 
 say to thee again, would eat mutton on fridays. he's
not
    past it yet; and, i say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. say that i said so.
    farewell.                                               exit
  duke. no might nor greatness in mortality
    can censure scape; back-wounding calumny
    the whitest virtue strikes. what king so strong
    can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
    but who comes here?

             enter escalus, provost, and officers with
                           mistress overdone

  escalus. go, away with her to prison.
  mrs. overdone. good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  escalus. double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! this would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
  provost. a bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your
    honour.
  mrs. overdone. my lord, this is one lucio's information ag
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst
me.
    mistress kate keepdown was with child by him in the duke's
time;
    he promis'd her marriage. his child is a year and a quarter
old
    come philip and jacob; i have kept it myself; and see how he
goes
    about to abuse me.
  escalus. that fellow is a fellow of much license. let him be
call'd
    before us. away with her to prison. go to; no more words.
[exeunt
    officers with mistress overdone]  provost, my brother angelo
will
    not be alter'd: claudio must die to-morrow. let him be
furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. if my
brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  provost. so please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advis'd
    him for th' entertain
 
 ___________________________
 
ment of death.
  escalus. good even, good father.
  duke. bliss and goodness on you!
  escalus. of whence are you?
  duke. not of this country, though my chance is now
    to use it for my time. i am a brother
    of gracious order, late come from the see
    in special business from his holiness.
  escalus. what news abroad i' th' world?
  duke. none, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that
the
    dissolution of it must cure it. novelty is only in request;
and,
    as it is, as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it
is
    virtuous to be constant in any undertakeing. there is scarce
    truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security
enough
    to make fellowships accurst. much upon this riddle runs the
    wisdom of the world. this news is old enough, 
 
 ___________________________
 
yet it is every
    day's news. i pray you, sir, of what disposition was the
duke?
  escalus. one that, above all other strifes, contended
especially to
    know himself.
  duke. what pleasure was he given to?
  escalus. rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    anything which profess'd to make him rejoice; a gentleman of
all
    temperance. but leave we him to his events, with a prayer
they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    claudio prepar'd. i am made to understand that you have lent
him
    visitation.
  duke. he professes to have received no sinister measure from
his
    judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the
determination of
    justic
 
 ___________________________
 
e. yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of
his
    frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which i, by my good
    leisure, have discredited to him, and now he is resolv'd to
die.
  escalus. you have paid the heavens your function, and the
prisoner
    the very debt of your calling. i have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my
brother
    justice have i found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell
him
    he is indeed justice.
  duke. if his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding,
it
    shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath
    sentenc'd himself.
  escalus. i am going to visit the prisoner. 
 
 ___________________________
 
fare you well.
  duke. peace be with you!            exeunt escalus and provost

         he who the sword of heaven will bear
         should be as holy as severe;
         pattern in himself to know,
         grace to stand, and virtue go;
         more nor less to others paying
         than by self-offences weighing.
         shame to him whose cruel striking
         kills for faults of his own liking!
         twice treble shame on angelo,
         to weed my vice and let his grow!
         o, what may man within him hide,
         though ang
 
 ___________________________
 
es!
  duke. you shall not be admitted to his sight.
  isabella. unhappy claudio! wretched isabel!
    injurious world! most damned angelo!
  duke. this nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
    forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
    mark what i say, which you shall find
    by every syllable a faithful verity.
    the duke comes home to-morrow. nay, dry your eyes.
    one of our covent, and his confessor,
    gives me this instance. already he hath carried
    notice to escalus and angelo,
    who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    there to give up their pow'r. if you can, pace your wisdom
    in that good path that i would wish it go,
    and you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
    grace of the duke, revenges to your heart,
    and general honour.
  isabella. i am directed by you.
  duke. this letter, then, to friar peter give;
    'tis that he sent me of the duke's return.
    say, by this token, i desire his company
    at mariana's house to-
 
 ___________________________
 
 a wench with child.
  duke. did you such a thing?
  lucio. yes, marry, did i; but i was fain to forswear it: they
would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  duke. sir, your company is fairer than honest. rest you well.
  lucio. by my troth, i'll go with thee to the lane's end. if
bawdy
    talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. nay, friar, i
am a
    kind of burr; i shall stick.                          exeunt




scene iv.
angelo's house

enter angelo and escalus

  escalus. every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other.
  angelo. in most uneven and distracted manner. his actions show
much
    like to madness; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! and
why
    meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?
  escalus. i guess not.
  angelo. and why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
    ent'ring that, if any crave redress of injustice, they should
    exhibit their petitions in the street?
  escalus. he shows his reaso
 
 ___________________________
 
n for that: to have a dispatch of
     complaints; and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which
    shall then have no power to stand against us.
  angelo. well, i beseech you, let it be proclaim'd;
    betimes i' th' morn i'll call you at your house;
    give notice to such men of sort and suit
    as are to meet him.
  escalus. i shall, sir; fare you well.
  angelo. good night.                               exit escalus
    this deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
    and dull to all proceedings. a deflow'red maid!
    and by an eminent body that enforc'd
    the law against it! but that her tender shame
    will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
    how might she tongue me! yet reason dares her no;
    for my authority bears a so credent bulk
    that no particular scandal once can touch
    but it confounds the breather. he should have liv'd,
    save that his riotous youth, with danger
 
 ___________________________
 
orld library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
the city gate

enter at several doors duke, varrius, lords; angelo, escalus,
lucio,
provost, officers, and citizens

  duke. my very worthy cousin, fairly met!
    our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
  angelo, escalus. happy return be to your royal grace!
  duke. many and hearty thankings to you both.
    we have made inquiry of you, and we hear
    such goodness of your justice that our soul
    cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
    forerunning more requital.
  angelo. you make my bonds still greater.
  duke. o, your desert spe
 
 ___________________________
 
aks loud; and i should wrong it
    to lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
    when it deserves, with characters of brass,
    a forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
    and razure of oblivion. give me your hand.
    and let the subject see, to make them know
    that outward courtesies would fain proclaim
    favours that keep within. come, escalus,
    you must walk by us on our other hand,
    and good supporters are you.

                 enter friar peter and isabella

  peter. now is your time; speak loud, and kneel before him.
  isabella. justice, o royal duke! vail your regard
    upon a wrong'd- i would fain have said a maid!
    o worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
    by throwing it on any other object
    till you have heard me in my true complaint,
    and given me justice, justice, justice, justice.
  duke. re
 
 ___________________________
 
formal women are no more
    but instruments of some more mightier member
    that sets them on. let me have way, my lord,
    to find this practice out.
  duke. ay, with my heart;
    and punish them to your height of pleasure.
    thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
    compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
    though they would swear down each particular saint,
    were testimonies against his worth and credit,
    that's seal'd in approbation? you, lord escalus,
    sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
    to find out this abuse, whence 'tis deriv'd.
    there is another friar that set them on;
    let him be sent for.
  peter. would lie were here, my lord! for he indeed
    hath set the women on to this complaint.
    your provost knows the place where he abides,
    and he may fetch him.
  duke. go, do it instantly.                        exit provost
    and you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
    whom it concerns to hear th
 
 ___________________________
 
is matter forth,
    do with your injuries as seems you best
    in any chastisement. i for a while will leave you;
    but stir not you till you have well determin'd
    upon these slanderers.
  escalus. my lord, we'll do it throughly.             exit duke
    signior lucio, did not you say you knew that friar lodowick
to be
    a dishonest person?
  lucio. 'cucullus non facit monachum': honest in nothing but in
his
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of
the
    duke.
  escalus. we shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
    enforce them against him. we shall find this friar a notable
    fellow.
  lucio. as any in vienna, on my word.
  escalus.
 
 ___________________________
 
 call that same isabel here once again; i would speak
with
    her. [exit an attendant] pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how i'll handle her.
  lucio. not better than he, by her own report.
  escalus. say you?
  lucio. marry, sir, i think, if you handled her privately, she
would
    sooner confess; perchance, publicly, she'll be asham'd.

       re-enter officers with isabella; and provost with the
                    duke in his friar's habit

  escalus. i will go darkly to work with her.
  lucio. that's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  escalus. come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all
that
    you have said.
  lucio. my lord, here comes the rascal i spoke of, here with the

    provost.
  escalus. in very good time. speak not you to him till we call
upon
    you.
  lucio. mum.
  escalus. come, sir; did you set these women on to slander lord
    angelo? they have confess'd you did.
  duke. 'tis false.
  esca
 
 ___________________________
 
lus. how! know you where you are?
  duke. respect to your great place! and let the devil
    be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
    where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.
  escalus. the duke's in us; and we will hear you speak;
    look you speak justly.
  duke. boldly, at least. but, o, poor souls,
    come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
    good night to your redress! is the duke gone?
    then is your cause gone too. the duke's unjust
    thus to retort your manifest appeal,
    and put your trial in the villain's mouth
    which here you come to accuse.
  lucio. this is the rascal; this is he i spoke of.
  escalus. why, thou unreverend and unhallowed 
 
 ___________________________
 
is purpose.
    what, 'unjust'!
  duke. be not so hot; the duke
    dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
    dare rack his own; his subject am i not,
    nor here provincial. my business in this state
    made me a looker-on here in vienna,
    where i have seen corruption boil and bubble
    till it o'errun the stew: laws for all faults,
    but faults so countenanc'd that the strong statutes
    stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
    as much in mock as mark.
  escalus. slander to th' state! away with him to prison!
  angelo. what can you vouch against him, signior lucio?
    is this the man that you did tell us of?
  lucio. 'tis he, my lord. come hither, good-man bald-pate.
    do you know me?
  duke. i remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. i met
you at
    the prison, in the absence of the duke.
  lucio. o did you so? and do you remember what you said of the
duke?
  duke. most notedly, sir.
  lucio. do you so, sir? and was the duke a fle
 
 ___________________________
 
shmonger, a fool,
and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  duke. you must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that
my
    report; you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much
worse.
  lucio. o thou damnable fellow! did not i pluck thee by the nose
for
    thy speeches?
  duke. i protest i love the duke as i love myself.
  angelo. hark how the villain would close now, after his
treasonable
    abuses!
  escalus. such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal. away with
him to
    prison! where is the provost? away with him to prison! lay
bolts
    enough upon him; let him speak no more. away with those
giglets
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
                            [the provost lays bands on the duke]
  duke. stay, sir; stay awhile.
  angelo. what, resists he? help him, lucio.
  lucio. come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! why, you
    bald-pated lying rascal, you must
 
 ___________________________
 
 be hooded, must you? show
your
    knave's visage, with a pox to you! show your sheep-biting
face,
    and be hang'd an hour! will't not off?
             [pulls off the friar's bood and discovers the duke]
  duke. thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.
    first, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
    [to lucio] sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    must have a word anon. lay hold on him.
  lucio. this may prove worse than hanging.
  duke. [to escalus] what you have spoke i pardon; sit you down.
    we'll borrow place of him. [to angelo] sir, by your leave.
    hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
    that yet can do thee office? if thou hast,
    rely upon it till my tale be heard,
    and hold no longer out.
  angelo. o my dread lord,
    i should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
    to think i can be undiscernible,
    when i perceive your grace, like pow'r divine,
    hath look'd upon my passes. then, good prince,
    no lo
 
 ___________________________
 
nger session hold upon my shame,
    but let my trial be mine own confession;
    immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    is all the grace i beg.
  duke. come hither, mariana.
    say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
  angelo. i was, my lord.
  duke. go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
    do you the office, friar; which consummate,
    return him here again. go with him, provost.
                exeunt angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost
  escalus. my lord, i am more amaz'd at his dishonour
    than at the strangeness of it.
  duke. come hither, isabel.
    your friar is now your prince. as i was then
    advertising and holy to your business,
    not changing heart with habit, i am still
    attorney'd at your service.
  isabella. o, give me pardon,
    that i, your vassal have employ'd and pain'd
    your unknown sovereignty.
  duke. you are pardon'd, isabel.
    and now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
    your brother's 
 
 ___________________________
 
 duke. for which i do discharge you of your office;
    give up your keys.
  provost. pardon me, noble lord;
    i thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    yet did repent me, after more advice;
    for testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    that should by private order else have died,
    i have reserv'd alive.
  duke. what's he?
  provost. his name is barnardine.
  duke. i would thou hadst done so by claudio.
    go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      exit provost
  escalus. i am sorry one so learned and so wise
    as you, lord angelo, have still appear'd,
    should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    and lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
  angelo. i am sorry that such sorrow i procure;
    and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    that i crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'tis my deserving, and i do entreat it.

       re-enter provost, with barnardine, claudio (muffled)
                            and juliet

  duke. whic
 
 ___________________________
 
 slanders i forgive; and therewithal
    remit thy other forfeits. take him to prison;
    and see our pleasure herein executed.
  lucio. marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping,
    and hanging.
  duke. slandering a prince deserves it.
                                      exeunt officers with lucio
    she, claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo;
    i have confess'd her, and i know her virtue.
    thanks, good friend escalus, for thy much goodness;
    there's more behind that is more gratulate.
    thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    we shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    forgive him, angelo, that brought you home
    the head of ragozine for claudio's:
    th' offence pardons itself. dear isabel,
    i have a motion much imports your good;
    whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
    what's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
    so, bring us to our palace, where we'll show
