measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lords, officers, citizens, boy, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 you well.                         exit
  escalus. i shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
    to have free speech with you; and it concerns me
    to look into the bottom of my place:
    a pow'r i have, but of what strength and nature
    i am not yet instructed.
  angelo. 'tis so with me. let us withdraw together,
    and we may soon our satisfaction have
    touching that point.
  escalus. i'll wait upon your honour.                    exeunt




scene ii.
a street

enter lucio and two other gentlemen

  lucio. if the duke, with the other dukes, come not to
composition
    with the king of hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon
the
    king.
  first gentleman. heaven grant us its peace, but not the king of
    hungary's!
  second gentleman. amen.
  lucio. thou conclud'st like the sanctimonious pirate that went
to
    sea with the ten commandments, but scrap'd one out of the
table.
  second gentleman. 'thou shalt not steal'?
  lucio. ay, that he raz'd
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  first gentleman. why, 'twas a commandment to command the
captain
    and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to
steal.
    there's not a soldier of us all that, in the thanksgiving
before
    meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.
  second gentleman. i never heard any soldier dislike it.
  lucio. i believe thee; for i think thou never wast where grace
was
    said.
  second gentleman. no? a dozen times at least.
  first gentleman. what, in metre?
  lucio. in any proportion or in any language.
  first gentleman. i think, or in any religion.
  lucio. ay, why not? grace is grace, despite of all controversy;
as,
    for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of
all
    grace.
  first gentleman. well, there went but a pair of shears between
us.
  lucio. i grant; a
 
 ___________________________
 
s there may between the lists and the velvet.
    thou art the list.
  first gentleman. and thou the velvet; thou art good velvet;
thou'rt
    a three-pil'd piece, i warrant thee. i had as lief be a list
of
    an english kersey as be pil'd, as thou art pil'd, for a
french
    velvet. do i speak feelingly now?
  lucio. i think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful
feeling of
    thy speech. i will, out of thine own confession, learn to
begin
    thy health; but, whilst i live, forget to drink after thee.
  first gentleman. i think i have done myself wrong, have i not?
  second gentleman. yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted
or
    free.

                        enter mistress overdone

  lucio. behold, behold, where madam mitigation comes! i have
    purchas'd as many diseases under
 
 ___________________________
 
 her roof as come to-
  second gentleman. to what, i pray?
  first gentleman. judge.
  second gentleman. to three thousand dolours a year.
  first gentleman. ay, and more.
  lucio. a french crown more.
  first gentleman. thou art always figuring diseases in me, but
thou
    art full of error; i am sound.
  lucio. nay, not, as one would say, healthy; but so sound as
things
    that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a
feast
    of thee.
  first gentleman. how now! which of your hips has the most
profound
    sciatica?
  mrs. overdone. well, well! there's one yonder arrested and
carried
    to prison was worth five thousand of you all.
  first gentleman. who's that, i pray thee?
  mrs. overdone. marry, sir, that's claudio, signior claudio.
  first gentleman. claudio to prison
 
 ___________________________
 
? 'tis not so.
  mrs. overdone. nay, but i know 'tis so: i saw him arrested; saw
him
    carried away; and, which is more, within these three days his
    head to be chopp'd off.
  lucio. but, after all this fooling, i would not have it so. art
    thou sure of this?
  mrs. overdone. i am too sure of it; and it is for getting madam
    julietta with child.
  lucio. believe me, this may be; he promis'd to meet me two
hours
    since, and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.
  second gentleman. besides, you know, it draws something near to
the
    speech we had to such a purpose.
  first gentleman. but most of all agreeing with the
proclamation.
  lucio. away; let's go learn the truth of it.
                                      exeunt lucio and gentlemen
  mrs. overdone. thus, what with the war, what with the sweat,
what
    with the gallow
 
 ___________________________
 
ace you need not change your trade;
i'll
    be your tapster still. courage, there will be pity taken on
you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
will
    be considered.
  mrs. overdone. what's to do here, thomas tapster? let's
withdraw.
  pompey. here comes signior claudio, led by the provost to
prison;
    and there's madam juliet.                             exeunt

            enter provost, claudio, juliet, and officers;
                            lucio following

  claudio. fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th' world?
    bear me to prison, where i am committed.
  provost. i do it not in evil disposition,
    but from lord angelo by special charge.
  claudio. thus can the demigod authority
    make us pay down for our offence by weight
    the words of heaven: on whom it will, it will;
    on whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.
  lucio. why, how now, claudio, whence comes this restraint?
  claudio. from too much liberty,
 
 ___________________________
 
 my lucio, liberty;
    as surfeit is the father of much fast,
    so every scope by the immoderate use
    turns to restraint. our natures do pursue,
    like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
    a thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
  lucio. if i could speak so wisely under an arrest, i would send
for
    certain of my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, i had as
lief
    have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.
    what's thy offence, claudio?
  claudio. what but to speak of would offend again.
  lucio. what, is't murder?
  claudio. no.
  lucio. lechery?
  claudio. call it so.
  provost. away, sir; you must go.
  claudio. one word, good friend. lucio, a word with you.
  lucio. a hundred, if they
 
 ___________________________
 
ands it with me: upon a true contract
    i got possession of julietta's bed.
    you know the lady; she is fast my wife,
    save that we do the denunciation lack
    of outward order; this we came not to,
    only for propagation of a dow'r
    remaining in the coffer of her friends.
    from whom we thought it meet to hide our love
    till time had made them for us. but it chances
    the stealth of our most mutual entertainment,
    with character too gross, is writ on juliet.
  lucio. with child, perhaps?
  claudio. unhappily, even so.
    and the new deputy now for the duke-
    whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
    or whether that the body public be
    a horse whereon the governor doth ride,
    who, newly in the seat, that it may know
    he can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
    whether the tyranny be in his place,
    or in his eminence that fills it up,
    i stagger in. but this new governor
    awakes me all the enrolled penalties
 
 ___________________________
 

    which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by th' wall
    so long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
    and none of them been worn; and, for a name,
    now puts the drowsy and neglected act
    freshly on me. 'tis surely for a name.
  lucio. i warrant it is; and thy head stands so tickle on thy
    shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it
off.
    send after the duke, and appeal to him.
  claudio. i have done so, but he's not to be found.
    i prithee, lucio, do me this kind service:
    this day my sister should the cloister enter,
    and there receive her approbation;
    acquaint her with the danger of my state;
    implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
    to the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
    i have great hope in that; for in her youth
    there is a prone and speechless dialect
    such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
    when she will play with reason and discourse,
    and well she can persuade.
 
 ___________________________
 

  lucio. i pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the
like,
    which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the
    enjoying of thy life, who i would be sorry should be thus
    foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. i'll to her.
  claudio. i thank you, good friend lucio.
  lucio. within two hours.
  claudio. come, officer, away.                           exeunt




scene iii.
a monastery

enter duke and friar thomas

  duke. no, holy father; throw away that thought;
    believe not that the dribbling dart of love
    can pierce a complete bosom. why i desire thee
    to give me secret harbour hath a purpose
    more grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
    of burning youth.
  friar. may your grace speak of it?
  duke. my holy sir, none better kno
 
 ___________________________
 
confesses
    that his blood flows, or that his appetite
    is more to bread than stone. hence shall we see,
    if power change purpose, what our seemers be.         exeunt




scene iv.
a nunnery

enter isabella and francisca

  isabella. and have you nuns no farther privileges?
  francisca. are not these large enough?
  isabella. yes, truly; i speak not as desiring more,
    but rather wishing a more strict restraint
    upon the sisterhood, the votarists of saint clare.
  lucio. [ within] ho! peace be in this place!
  isabella. who's that which calls?
  francisca. it is a man's voice. gentle isabella,
    turn you the key, and know his business of him:
    you may, i may not; you are yet unsworn;
    when you have vow'd, you must not speak with men
    but in the presence of the prioress;
    then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
    or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
    he calls again; i pray you answer him.        exit francisca
  i
 
 ___________________________
 
sabella. peace and prosperity! who is't that calls?

                           enter lucio

  lucio. hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
    proclaim you are no less. can you so stead me
    as bring me to the sight of isabella,
    a novice of this place, and the fair sister
    to her unhappy brother claudio?
  isabella. why her 'unhappy brother'? let me ask
    the rather, for i now must make you know
    i am that isabella, and his sister.
  lucio. gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
    not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
  isabella. woe me! for what?
  lucio. for that which, if myself might be his judge,
    he should receive his punishment in thanks:
    he hath got his friend with child.
  isabella. sir, make me not your story.
  lucio. it is true.
    i would not- though 'tis my familiar sin
    with maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,
    tongue far from heart- play with all virgins so:
    i hold 
 
 ___________________________
 
you as a thing enskied and sainted,
    by your renouncement an immortal spirit,
    and to be talk'd with in sincerity,
    as with a saint.
  isabella. you do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
  lucio. do not believe it. fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
    your brother and his lover have embrac'd.
    as those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
    that from the seedness the bare fallow brings
    to teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
    expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
  isabella. some one with child by him? my cousin juliet?
  lucio. is she your cousin?
  isabella. adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
    by vain though apt affection.
  lucio. she it 
 
 ___________________________
 
is.
  isabella. o, let him marry her!
  lucio. this is the point.
    the duke is very strangely gone from hence;
    bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
    in hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
    by those that know the very nerves of state,
    his givings-out were of an infinite distance
    from his true-meant design. upon his place,
    and with full line of his authority,
    governs lord angelo, a man whose blood
    is very snow-broth, one who never feels
    the wanton stings and motions of the sense,
    b
 
 ___________________________
 
e fear to use and liberty,
    which have for long run by the hideous law,
    as mice by lions- hath pick'd out an act
    under whose heavy sense your brother's life
    falls into forfeit; he arrests him on it,
    and follows close the rigour of the statute
    to make him an example. all hope is gone,
    unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
    to soften angelo. and that's my pith of business
    'twixt you and your poor brother.
  isabella. doth he so seek his life?
  lucio. has censur'd him
    already, and, as i hear, the provost hath
    a warrant for his execution.
  isabella. alas! what poor ability's in me
    to do him good?
  lucio. assay the pow'r you have.
  isabella. my power, alas, i doubt!
  lucio. our doubts are traitors,
    and make us lose the good we oft might win
    by fearing to attempt. go to lord angelo,
    and let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
    men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
    all their petitions 
 
 ___________________________
 
are as freely theirs
    as they themselves would owe them.
  isabella. i'll see what i can do.
  lucio. but speedily.
  isabella. i will about it straight;
    no longer staying but to give the mother
    notice of my affair. i humbly thank you.
    commend me to my brother; soon at night
    i'll send him certain word of my success.
  lucio. i take my leave of you.
  isabella. good sir, adieu.                              exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohib
 
 ___________________________
 
peed.

                           re-enter servant

  servant. here is the sister of the man condemn'd
    desires access to you.
  angelo. hath he a sister?
  provost. ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
    and to be shortly of a sisterhood,
    if not already.
  angelo. well, let her be admitted.                exit servant
    see you the fornicatress be remov'd;
    let her have needful but not lavish means;
    there shall be order for't.

                         enter lucio and isabella

  provost. [going] save your honour!
  angelo. stay a little while. [to isabella] y'are welcome;
what's
    your will?
  isabella. i am a woeful suitor to your honour,
    please but your honour hear me.
  angelo. well; what's your suit?
  isabella. there is a vice that most i do abhor,
    and most desire should meet the blow of justice;
    for which i would not plead, but that i must;
    for which i must not plead, but that i am
    at war 'twixt will and will not
 
 ___________________________
 
r?
  isabella. i have a brother is condemn'd to die;
    i do beseech you, let it be his fault,
    and not my brother.
  provost. [aside] heaven give thee moving graces.
  angelo. condemn the fault and not the actor of it!
    why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done;
    mine were the very cipher of a function,
    to fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
    and let go by the actor.
  isabella. o just but severe law!
    i had a brother, then. heaven keep your honour!
  lucio. [to isabella] give't not o'er so; to him again, entreat
him,
    kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
    you are too cold: if you should need a pin,
    you could not with more tame a tongue desire it.
    to him, i say.
  isabella. must he needs die?
  angelo. maiden, no remedy.
  isabella. yes; i do think that you might pardon him.
    and neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
  angelo. i will not do't.
  isabella. but can you, if you would?
  angelo. look, what i wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ll not, that i cannot do.
  isabella. but might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
    if so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
    as mine is to him?
  angelo. he's sentenc'd; 'tis too late.
  lucio. [to isabella] you are too cold.
  isabella. too late? why, no; i, that do speak a word,
    may call it back again. well, believe this:
    no ceremony that to great ones longs,
    not the king's crown nor the deputed sword,
    the marshal's truncheon nor the judge's robe,
    become them with one half so good a grace
    as mercy does.
    if he had been as you, and you as he,
    you would have slipp'd like him; but he, like you,
    would not have been so stern.
  angelo. pray 
 
 ___________________________
 
you be gone.
  isabella. i would to heaven i had your potency,
    and you were isabel! should it then be thus?
    no; i would tell what 'twere to be a judge
    and what a prisoner.
  lucio. [to isabella] ay, touch him; there's the vein.
  angelo. your brother is a forfeit of the law,
    and you but waste your words.
  isabella. alas! alas!
    why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
    and he that might the vantage best have took
    found out the remedy. how would you be
    if he, which is the top of judgment, should
    but judge you as you are? o, think on that;
    and mercy then will breathe within your lips,
    like man new made.
  angelo. be you cont
 
 ___________________________
 
 law, not i condemn your brother.
    were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
    it should be thus with him. he must die to-morrow.
  isabella. to-morrow! o, that's sudden! spare him, spare him.
    he's not prepar'd for death. even for our kitchens
    we kill the fowl of season; shall we serve heaven
    with less respect than we do minister
    to our gross selves? good, good my lord, bethink you.
    who is it that hath died for this offence?
    there's many have committed it.
  lucio. [aside] ay, well said.
  angelo. the law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.
    those many had not dar'd to do that evil
    if the first that did th' edict infringe
    had answer'd for his deed. now 'tis awake,
    takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet,
    looks in a glass that shows what future evils-
    either now or by remissness new conceiv'd,
    and so in progress to be hatch'd and born-
    are now to have no successive degrees,
    but here they live to e
 
 ___________________________
 
show some pity.
  angelo. i show it most of all when i show justice;
    for then i pity those i do not know,
    which a dismiss'd offence would after gall,
    and do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
    lives not to act another. be satisfied;
    your brother dies to-morrow; be content.
  isabella. so you must be the first that gives this sentence,
    and he that suffers. o, it is excellent
    to have a giant's strength! but it is tyrannous
    to use it like a giant.
  lucio. [to isabella] that's well said.
  isabella. could great men thunder
    as jove himself does, jove would never be quiet,
    for every pelting petty officer
    would use his heaven for thunder,
    nothing but thunder. merciful heaven,
    thou rather, with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt,
    splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
    than the soft myrtle. but man, proud man,
    dress'd in a little brief authority,
    most ignorant of what he's most assur'd,
    his glassy essence
 
 ___________________________
 
, like an angry ape,
    plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
    as makes the angels weep; who, with our speens,
    would all themselves laugh mortal.
  lucio. [to isabella] o, to him, to him, wench! he will relent;
    he's coming; i perceive 't.
  provost. [aside] pray heaven she win him.
  isabella. we cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
    great men may jest with saints: 'tis wit in them;
    but in the less foul profanation.
  lucio. [to isabella] thou'rt i' th' right, girl; more o' that.
  isabella. that in the captain's but a choleric word
    which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
  lucio. [to isabella] art avis'd o' that? more on't.
  angelo. why do you put these sayings upon me?
  isabella. because authority, though it err like others,
    hath yet a kind of medicine in itself
    that skins the vice o' th' top. go to your bosom,
    knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
    that's like my brothe
 
 ___________________________
 
's fault. if it confess
    a natural guiltiness such as is his,
    let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
    against my brother's life.
  angelo. [aside] she speaks, and 'tis
    such sense that my sense breeds with it.- fare you well.
  isabella. gentle my lord, turn back.
  angelo. i will bethink me. come again to-morrow.
  isabella. hark how i'll bribe you; good my lord, turn back.
  angelo. how, bribe me?
  isabella. ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
  lucio. [to isabella) you had marr'd all else.
  isabella. not with fond sicles of the tested gold,
    or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor
    as fancy values them; but with true prayers
    that shall be up at heaven and enter there
    ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
    from fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
    to nothing temporal.
  angelo. well; come to me to-morrow.
  lucio. [to isabella] go to; 'tis well; away.
  isabella. heaven keep your honour safe!
 
 
 ___________________________
 
ficer;
    correction and instruction must both work
    ere this rude beast will profit.
  elbow. he must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning.
    the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a
whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his
errand.
  duke. that we were all, as some would seem to be,
    from our faults, as his faults from seeming, free.
  elbow. his neck will come to your waist- a cord, sir.

                          enter lucio

  pompey. i spy comfort; i cry bail. here's a gentleman, and a
friend
    of mine.
  lucio. how now, noble pompey! what, at the wheels of caesar?
art
    thou led in triumph? what, is there none of pygmalion's
images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    pocket and extracting it clutch'd? what reply, ha? what
say'st
    thou to this tune, matter, and method? is't not drown'd i'
th'
    last rain, ha? what say'st thou, trot? is the world as it
was,
 
 ___________________________
 

    man? which is the way? is it sad, and few words? or how? the
    trick of it?
  duke. still thus, and thus; still worse!
  lucio. how doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? procures she
still,
    ha?
  pompey. troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  lucio. why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so;
ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd
    consequence; it must be so. art going to prison, pompey?
  pompey. yes, faith, sir.
  lucio. why, 'tis not amiss, pompey. farewell; go, say i sent
thee
    thither. for debt, pompey- or how?
  elbow. for being a bawd, for being a bawd.
  lucio. well, then, imprison him. if imprisonment be the due of
a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right. bawd is he doubtless, and of
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  antiquity, too; bawd-born. farewell, good pompey. commend me
to
    the prison, pompey. you will turn good husband now, pompey;
you
    will keep the house.
  pompey. i hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  lucio. no, indeed, will i not, pompey; it is not the wear. i
will
    pray, pompey, to increase your bondage. if you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. adieu trusty pompey.
    bless you, friar.
  duke. and you.
  lucio. does bridget paint still, pompey, ha?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  pompey. you will not bail me then, sir?
  lucio. then, pompey, nor now. what news abroad, friar? what
news?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  lucio. go to kennel, pompey, go.

                               exeunt elbow, pompey and officers

    what news, friar, of the duke?
  duke. i know none. can you tell me of any?
  lucio. some say he is with the emperor of russia; other some,
he is
    in rome;
 
 ___________________________
 
 but where is he, think you?
  duke. i know not where; but wheresoever, i wish him well.
  lucio. it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. lord angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  duke. he does well in't.
  lucio. a little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.
  duke. it is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
  lucio. yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it
is
    well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar,
till
    eating and drinking be put down. they say this angelo was not

    made by man and woman after this downright way of creation.
is it
    true, think you?
  duke. how should he be made, then?
  lucio. some report a sea-maid spawn'd him; some, that he was
begot
    between two stock-fishes. but it is certain that when he
makes
    water his urine is co
 
 ___________________________
 
ngeal'd ice; that i know to be true. and
he
    is a motion generative; that's infallible.
  duke. you are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
  lucio. why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the
rebellion
    of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! would the duke
that
    is absent have done this? ere he would have hang'd a man for
the
    getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the
nursing a
    thousand. he had some feeling of the sport; he knew the
service,
    and that instructed him to mercy.
  duke. i never heard the absent duke much detected for women; he
was
    not inclin'd that way.
  lucio. o,
 
 ___________________________
 
 sir, you are deceiv'd.
  duke. 'tis not possible.
  lucio. who- not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and his
use
    was to put a ducat in her clack-dish. the duke had crotchets
in
    him. he would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
  duke. you do him wrong, surely.
  lucio. sir, i was an inward of his. a shy fellow was the duke;
and
    i believe i know the cause of his withdrawing.
  duke. what, i prithee, might be the cause?
  lucio. no, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the
teeth
    and the lips; but this i can let you understand: the greater
file
    of the subject held the duke to be wise.
  duke. wise? why, no question but he was.
  lucio. a very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
  duke. either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking; the very
    stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must,
upon a
    warranted need, give him a better proclamation. let him be
but
    testi
 
 ___________________________
 
monied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear
to
    the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. therefore
you
    speak unskilfully; or, if your knowledge be more, it is much
    dark'ned in your malice.
  lucio. sir, i know him, and i love him.
  duke. love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with
dearer
    love.
  lucio. come, sir, i know what i know.
  duke. i can hardly believe that, since you know not what you
speak.
    but, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let
me
    desire you to make your answer before him. if it be honest
you
    have spoke, you have courage to maintain it; i am bound to
call
    upon you; and i pray you your name?
  lucio. sir, my name is lucio, well known to the duke.
  duke. he shall know you better, sir, if i may live to report
you.
  lucio. i fear y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou not.
  duke. o, you hope the duke will return no more; or you imagine
me
    too unhurtful an opposite. but, indeed, i can do you little
harm:
    you'll forswear this again.
  lucio. i'll be hang'd first. thou art deceiv'd in me, friar.
but no
    more of this. canst thou tell if claudio die to-morrow or no?
  duke. why should he die, sir?
  lucio. why? for filling a bottle with a tun-dish. i would the
duke
    we talk of were return'd again. this ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not
build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. the duke yet
would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to

    light. would he were return'd! marry, this claudio is
condemned
    for untrussing. farewell, good friar; i prithee pray for me.
the
    duke, i say to t
 
 ___________________________
 
         enter escalus, provost, and officers with
                           mistress overdone

  escalus. go, away with her to prison.
  mrs. overdone. good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  escalus. double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! this would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
  provost. a bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your
    honour.
  mrs. overdone. my lord, this is one lucio's information against
me.
    mistress kate keepdown was with child by him in the duke's
time;
    he promis'd her marriage. his child is a year and a quarter
old
    come philip and jacob; i have kept it myself; and see how he
goes
    about to abuse me.
  escalus. that fellow is a fellow of much license. let him be
call'd
    before us. away with her to prison. go to; no more words.
[exeunt
    officers with mistress overdone]  provost, my brother angelo
will
    not be alter'd
 
 ___________________________
 
token, i desire his company
    at mariana's house to-night. her cause and yours
    i'll perfect him withal; and he shall bring you
    before the duke; and to the head of angelo
    accuse him home and home. for my poor self,
    i am combined by a sacred vow,
    and shall be absent. wend you with this letter.
    command these fretting waters from your eyes
    with a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    if i pervert your course. who's here?

                           enter lucio

  lucio. good even. friar, where's the provost?
  duke. not within, sir.
  lucio. o pretty isabella, i am pale at mine heart to see thine
eyes
    so red. thou must be patient. i am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; i dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't. but they say the duke will
be
    here to-morrow. by my troth, isabel, i lov'd thy brother. if
the
    old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home, he had

    lived. 
 
 ___________________________
 
                                        exit isabella
  duke. sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your
reports;
    but the best is, he lives not in them.
  lucio. friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as i do; he's a
    better woodman than thou tak'st him for.
  duke. well, you'll answer this one day. fare ye well.
  lucio. nay, tarry; i'll go along with thee; i can tell thee
pretty
    tales of the duke.
  duke. you have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be
    true; if not true, none were enough.
  lucio. i was once before him for getting a wench with child.
  duke. did you such a thing?
  lucio. yes, marry, did i; but i was fain to forswear it: they
would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  duke. sir, your company is fairer than honest. rest you well.
  lucio. by my troth, i
 
 ___________________________
 
ry, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
the city gate

enter at several doors duke, varrius, lords; angelo, escalus,
lucio,
provost, officers, and citizens

  duke. my very worthy cousin, fairly met!
    our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
  angelo, escalus. happy return be to your royal grace!
  duke. many and hearty thankings to you both.
    we have made inquiry of you, and we hear
    such goodness of your justice that our soul
    cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
    forerunning more requital.
  angelo. you make my bonds still greater.
  duke. o, your desert speaks loud
 
 ___________________________
 
bella. o gracious duke,
    harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
    for inequality; but let your reason serve
    to make the truth appear where it seems hid,
    and hide the false seems true.
  duke. many that are not mad
    have, sure, more lack of reason. what would you say?
  isabella. i am the sister of one claudio,
    condemn'd upon the act of fornication
    to lose his head; condemn'd by angelo.
    i, in probation of a sisterhood,
    was sent to by my brother; one lucio
    as then the messenger-
  lucio. that's i, an't like your grace.
    i came to her from claudio, and desir'd her
    to try her gracious fortune with lord angelo
    for her poor brother's pardon.
  isabella. that's he, indeed.
  duke. you were not bid to speak.
  lucio. no, my good lord;
    nor wish'd to hold my peace.
  duke. i wish you now, then;
    pray you take note of it; and when you have
    a business for yourself, pray heaven you then
    be perfect.
  lucio. i warr
 
 ___________________________
 
ant your honour.
  duke. the warrant's for yourself; take heed to't.
  isabella. this gentleman told somewhat of my tale.
  lucio. right.
  duke. it may be right; but you are i' the wrong
    to speak before your time. proceed.
  isabella. i went
    to this pernicious caitiff deputy.
  duke. that's somewhat madly spoken.
  isabella. pardon it;
    the phrase is to the matter.
  duke. mended again. the matter- proceed.
  isabella. in brief- to set the needless process by,
    how i persuaded, how i pray'd, and kneel'd,
    how he refell'd me, and how i replied,
    for this was of much length- the vile conclus
 
 ___________________________
 
 the evil which is here wrapt up
    in countenance! heaven shield your grace from woe,
    as i, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!
  duke. i know you'd fain be gone. an officer!
    to prison with her! shall we thus permit
    a blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
    on him so near us? this needs must be a practice.
    who knew of your intent and coming hither?
  isabella. one that i would were here, friar lodowick.
  duke. a ghostly father, belike. who knows that lodowick?
  lucio. my lord, i know him; 'tis a meddling friar.
    i do not like the man; had he been lay, my lord,
    for certain words he spake against your grace
    in your retirement, i had swing'd him soundly.
  duke. words against me? this's a good friar, belike!
    and to set on this wretched woman here
    against our substitute! let this friar be found.
  lucio. but yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
    i saw them at the prison; a saucy friar,
    a very scurvy fellow.
  peter. bles
 
 ___________________________
 
d i have heard
    your royal ear abus'd. first, hath this woman
    most wrongfully accus'd your substitute;
    who is as free from touch or soil with her
    as she from one ungot.
  duke. we did believe no less.
    know you that friar lodowick that she speaks of?
  peter. i know him for a man divine and holy;
    not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
    as he's reported by this gentleman;
    and, on my trust, a man that never yet
    did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.
  lucio. my lord, most villainously; believe it.
  peter. well, he in time may come to clear himself;
    but at this instant he is sick, my lord,
    of a strange fever. upon his mere request-
    being come to knowledge that there was complaint
    intended 'gainst lord angelo- came i hither
    to speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
    is true and false; and what he, with his oath
    and all probation, will make up full clear,
    whensoever he's convented. first, for this woman-
 
 ___________________________
 
 i'll be impartial; be you judge
    of your own cause.

                     enter mariana veiled

    is this the witness, friar?
  first let her show her face, and after speak.
  mariana. pardon, my lord; i will not show my face
    until my husband bid me.
  duke. what, are you married?
  mariana. no, my lord.
  duke. are you a maid?
  mariana. no, my lord.
  duke. a widow, then?
  mariana. neither, my lord.
  duke. why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife.
  lucio. my lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither
    maid, widow, nor wife.
  duke. silence that fellow. i would he had some cause
    to prattle for himself.
  lucio. well, my lord.
  mariana. my lord, i do confess i ne'er was married,
    and i confess, besides, i am no maid.
    i have known my husband; yet my husband
    knows not that ever he knew me.
  lucio. he was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  duke. for the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 lucio. well, my lord.
  duke. this is no witness for lord angelo.
  mariana. now i come to't, my lord:
    she that accuses him of fornication,
    in self-same manner doth accuse my husband;
    and charges him, my lord, with such a time
    when i'll depose i had him in mine arms,
    with all th' effect of love.
  angelo. charges she moe than me?
  mariana. not that i know.
  duke. no? you say your husband.
  mariana. why, just, my lord, and that is angelo,
    who thinks he knows that
 
 ___________________________
 
range abuse. let's see thy face.
  mariana. my husband bids me; now i will unmask.
                                                     [unveiling]
    this is that face, thou cruel angelo,
    which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
    this is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
    was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
    that took away the match from isabel,
    and did supply thee at thy garden-house
    in her imagin'd person.
  duke. know you this woman?
  lucio. carnally, she says.
  duke. sirrah, no more.
  lucio. enough, my lord.
  angelo. my lord, i must confess i know this woman;
    and five years since there was some speech of marriage
    betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
    partly for that her promised proportions
    came short of composition; but in chief
    for that her reputation was disvalued
    in levity. since which time of five years
    i never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
    upon my faith and
 
 ___________________________
 
  your provost knows the place where he abides,
    and he may fetch him.
  duke. go, do it instantly.                        exit provost
    and you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
    whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
    do with your injuries as seems you best
    in any chastisement. i for a while will leave you;
    but stir not you till you have well determin'd
    upon these slanderers.
  escalus. my lord, we'll do it throughly.             exit duke
    signior lucio, did not you say you knew that friar lodowick
to be
    a dishonest person?
  lucio. 'cucullus non facit monachum': honest in nothing but in
his
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of
the
    duke.
  escalus. we shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
    enforce them against him. we shall find this friar a notable
    fellow.
  lucio. as any in vienna, on my word.
  escalus. call that same isabel here once again; i would speak
with
    her. [exi
 
 ___________________________
 
t an attendant] pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how i'll handle her.
  lucio. not better than he, by her own report.
  escalus. say you?
  lucio. marry, sir, i think, if you handled her privately, she
would
    sooner confess; perchance, publicly, she'll be asham'd.

       re-enter officers with isabella; and provost with the
                    duke in his friar's habit

  escalus. i will go darkly to work with her.
  lucio. that's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  escalus. come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all
that
    you have said.
  lucio. my lord, here comes the rascal i spoke of, here with the

    provost.
  escalus. in very good time. speak not you to him till we call
upon
    you.
  lucio. mum.
  escalus. come, sir; did you set these women on to slander lord
    angelo? they have confess'd you did.
  duke. 'tis false.
  escalus. how! know you where you are?
  duke. re
 
 ___________________________
 
 honour'd for his burning throne!
    where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.
  escalus. the duke's in us; and we will hear you speak;
    look you speak justly.
  duke. boldly, at least. but, o, poor souls,
    come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
    good night to your redress! is the duke gone?
    then is your cause gone too. the duke's unjust
    thus to retort your manifest appeal,
    and put your trial in the villain's mouth
    which here you come to accuse.
  lucio. this is the rascal; this is he i spoke of.
  escalus. why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
    is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
    to accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth,
    and in the witness of his proper ear,
    to call him villain; and then to glance from him
    to th' duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
    take him hence; to th' rack with him! we'll touze you
    joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
    what, 'unjust'!
  duke. be not
 
 ___________________________
 
mine than he
    dare rack his own; his subject am i not,
    nor here provincial. my business in this state
    made me a looker-on here in vienna,
    where i have seen corruption boil and bubble
    till it o'errun the stew: laws for all faults,
    but faults so countenanc'd that the strong statutes
    stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
    as much in mock as mark.
  escalus. slander to th' state! away with him to prison!
  angelo. what can you vouch against him, signior lucio?
    is this the man that you did tell us of?
  lucio. 'tis he, my lord. come hither, good-man bald-pate.
    do you know me?
  duke. i remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. i met
you at
    the prison, in the absence of the duke.
  lucio. o did you so? and do you remember what you said of the
duke?
  duke. most notedly, sir.
  lucio. do you so, sir? and was the duke a fleshmonger, a fool,
and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  duke. you must, sir, change pers
 
 ___________________________
 
ons with me ere you make that
my
    report; you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much
worse.
  lucio. o thou damnable fellow! did not i pluck thee by the nose
for
    thy speeches?
  duke. i protest i love the duke as i love myself.
  angelo. hark how the villain would close now, after his
treasonable
    abuses!
  escalus. such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal. away with
him to
    prison! where is the provost? away with him to prison! lay
bolts
    enough upon him; let him speak no more. away with those
giglets
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
             
 
 ___________________________
 
               [the provost lays bands on the duke]
  duke. stay, sir; stay awhile.
  angelo. what, resists he? help him, lucio.
  lucio. come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! why, you
    bald-pated lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? show
your
    knave's visage, with a pox to you! show your sheep-biting
face,
    and be hang'd an hour! will't not off?
             [pulls off the friar's bood and discovers the duke]
  duke. thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.
    first, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
    [to lucio] sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    must have a word an
 
 ___________________________
 
on. lay hold on him.
  lucio. this may prove worse than hanging.
  duke. [to escalus] what you have spoke i pardon; sit you down.
    we'll borrow place of him. [to angelo] sir, by your leave.
    hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
    that yet can do thee office? if thou hast,
    rely upon it till my tale be heard,
    and hold no longer out.
  angelo. o my dread lord,
    i should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
    to think i can be undiscernible,
    when i perceive your grace, like pow'r divine,
    
 
 ___________________________
 
it; else imputation,
    for that he knew you, might reproach your life,
    and choke your good to come. for his possessions,
    although by confiscation they are ours,
    we do instate and widow you withal
    to buy you a better husband.
  mariana. o my dear lord,
    i crave no other, nor no better man.
  duke. never crave him; we are definitive.
  mariana. gentle my liege-                           [kneeling]
  duke. you do but lose your labour.
    away with him to death! [to lucio] now, sir, to you.
  mariana. o my good lord! sweet isabel, take my part;
    lend me your knees, and all my life to come
    i'll lend you all my life to do you service.
  duke. against all sense you do importune her.
    should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
    her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    and take her hence in horror.
  mariana. isabel,
    sweet isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
    hold up your hands, say nothing; i'll speak all.
    they say best men
 
 ___________________________
 
ke. [to isabella] if he be like your brother, for his sake
    is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    he is my brother too. but fitter time for that.
    by this lord angelo perceives he's safe;
    methinks i see a quick'ning in his eye.
    well, angelo, your evil quits you well.
    look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.
    i find an apt remission in myself;
    and yet here's one in place i cannot pardon.
    to lucio] you, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
    one all of luxury, an ass, a madman!
    wherein have i so deserv'd of you
    that you extol me thus?
  lucio. faith, my lord, i spoke it but according to the trick.
    if you will hang me for it, you may; but i had rather it
would
    please you i might be whipt.
  duke. whipt first, sir, and hang'd after.
    proclaim it, provost, round about the city,
    if any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow-
    as i have heard him swear 
 
 ___________________________
 
himself there's one
    whom he begot with child, let her appear,
    and he shall marry her. the nuptial finish'd,
    let him be whipt and hang'd.
  lucio. i beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.
your
    highness said even now i made you a duke; good my lord, do
not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
  duke. upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
    thy slanders i forgive; and therewithal
    remit thy other forfeits. take him to prison;
    and see our pleasure herein executed.
  lucio. marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping,
    and hanging.
  duke. slandering a prince deserves it.
         
 
 ___________________________
 
                             exeunt officers with lucio
    she, claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo;
    i have confess'd her, and i know her virtue.
    thanks, good friend escalus, for thy much goodness;
    there's more behind that is more gratulate.
    thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    we shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    forgive him, angelo, that brought you home
    the head of ragozine for claudio's:
    th' offence pardons itself. dear isabel,
    i have a 