measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lord
 
 ___________________________
 
s in me, but
thou
    art full of error; i am sound.
  lucio. nay, not, as one would say, healthy; but so sound as
things
    that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a
feast
    of thee.
  first gentleman. how now! which of your hips has the most
profound
    sciatica?
  mrs. overdone. well, well! there's one yonder arrested and
carried
    to prison was worth five thousand of you all.
  first gentleman. who's that, i pray thee?
  mrs. overdone. marry, sir, that's claudio, signior claudio.
  first gentleman. claudio to prison? 'tis not so.
  mrs. overdone. nay, but i know 'tis so: i saw him arrested; saw
him
    carried away; and, which is more, within these three days his
    head to be chopp'd off.
  lucio. but, after all this fooling, i would not have it so. art
    thou sure of this?
  mrs. overdone. i am too sure of it; and it is for getting madam
    julietta with child.
  lucio. believe me, this may be; he promis'd to meet me two
hours
    sin
 
 ___________________________
 
ss.
  mrs. overdone. why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
    what shall become of me?
  pompey. come, fear not you: good counsellors lack no clients.
    though you change your place you need not change your trade;
i'll
    be your tapster still. courage, there will be pity taken on
you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
will
    be considered.
  mrs. overdone. what's to do here, thomas tapster? let's
withdraw.
  pompey. here comes signior claudio, led by the provost to
prison;
    and there's madam juliet.                             exeunt

            enter provost, claudio, juliet, and officers;
                            lucio following

  claudio. fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th' world?
    bear me to prison, where i am committed.
  provost. i do it not in evil disposition,
    but from lord angelo by special charge.
  claudio. thus can the demigod authority
    make us pay down for our offence by weight
    
 
 ___________________________
 
the words of heaven: on whom it will, it will;
    on whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.
  lucio. why, how now, claudio, whence comes this restraint?
  claudio. from too much liberty, my lucio, liberty;
    as surfeit is the father of much fast,
    so every scope by the immoderate use
    turns to restraint. our natures do pursue,
    like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
    a thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
  lucio. if i could speak so wisely under an arrest, i would send
for
    certain of my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, i had as
lief
    have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.
    what's thy
 
 ___________________________
 
 offence, claudio?
  claudio. what but to speak of would offend again.
  lucio. what, is't murder?
  claudio. no.
  lucio. lechery?
  claudio. call it so.
  provost. away, sir; you must go.
  claudio. one word, good friend. lucio, a word with you.
  lucio. a hundred, if they'll do you any good. is lechery so
look'd
    after?
  claudio. thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
    i got possession of julietta's bed.
    you know the lady; she is fast my wife,
    save that we do the denunciation lack
    of outward order; this we came not to,
    only for propagation of a dow'r
    remaining in the coffer of her friends.
    from whom we thought it meet to hide our love
    till time had made them for us. but it chances
    the stealth of our most mutual entertainment,
    with character too gross, is writ on ju
 
 ___________________________
 
liet.
  lucio. with child, perhaps?
  claudio. unhappily, even so.
    and the new deputy now for the duke-
    whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
    or whether that the body public be
    a horse whereon the governor doth ride,
    who, newly in the seat, that it may know
    he can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
    whether the tyranny be in his place,
    or in his eminence that fills it up,
    i stagger in. but this new governor
    awakes me all the enrolled penalties
    which have, like unscour'd 
 
 ___________________________
 
armour, hung by th' wall
    so long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
    and none of them been worn; and, for a name,
    now puts the drowsy and neglected act
    freshly on me. 'tis surely for a name.
  lucio. i warrant it is; and thy head stands so tickle on thy
    shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it
off.
    send after the duke, and appeal to him.
  claudio. i have done so, but he's not to be found.
    i prithee, lucio, do me this kind service:
    this day my sister should the cloister enter,
    and there receive her approbation;
    acquaint her with the danger of my state;
    implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
    to the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
    i have great hope in that; for in her youth
    there is a prone and speechless dialect
    such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
    when she will
 
 ___________________________
 
 play with reason and discourse,
    and well she can persuade.
  lucio. i pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the
like,
    which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the
    enjoying of thy life, who i would be sorry should be thus
    foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. i'll to her.
  claudio. i thank you, good friend lucio.
  lucio. within two hours.
  claudio. come, officer, away.                           exeunt




scene iii.
a monastery

enter duke and friar thomas

  duke. no, holy father; throw away that thought;
    believe not that the dribbling dart of love
    can pierce a complete bosom. why i desire thee
    to give me secret harbour hath a purpose
    more grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
    of burning youth.
  friar. may your grace speak of it?
  duke. my holy sir, none better knows than you
    how i have ev
 
 ___________________________
 

    then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
    or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
    he calls again; i pray you answer him.        exit francisca
  isabella. peace and prosperity! who is't that calls?

                           enter lucio

  lucio. hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
    proclaim you are no less. can you so stead me
    as bring me to the sight of isabella,
    a novice of this place, and the fair sister
    to her unhappy brother claudio?
  isabella. why her 'unhappy brother'? let me ask
    the rather, for i now must make you know
    i am that isabella, and his sister.
  lucio. gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
    not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
  isabella. woe me! for what?
  lucio. for that which, if myself might be his judge,
    he should receive his punishment in thanks:
    he hath got his friend with child.
  isabella. sir, make me not your story.
  lucio. it is true.
    i would n
 
 ___________________________
 
that we find, we stoop and take't,
    because we see it; but what we do not see
    we tread upon, and never think of it.
    you may not so extenuate his offence
    for i have had such faults; but rather tell me,
    when i, that censure him, do so offend,
    let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
    and nothing come in partial. sir, he must die.
  escalus. be it as your wisdom will.
  angelo. where is the provost?
  provost. here, if it like your honour.
  angelo. see that claudio
    be executed by nine to-morrow morning;
    bring him his confessor; let him be prepar'd;
    for that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.        exit provost
  escalus. [aside] well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    and some condemned for a fault alone.

         enter elbow and officers with froth and pompey

  elbow. come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    co
 
 ___________________________
 
hosen, they are glad to choose me for them; i do it for some
    piece of money, and go through with all.
  escalus. look you, bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the
    most sufficient of your parish.
  elbow. to your worship's house, sir?
  escalus. to my house. fare you well.              [exit elbow]
    what's o'clock, think you?
  justice. eleven, sir.
  escalus. i pray you home to dinner with me.
  justice. i humbly thank you.
  escalus. it grieves me for the death of claudio;
    but there's no remedy.
  justice. lord angelo is severe.
  escalus. it is but needful:
    mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
    but yet, poor claudio! there is no remedy.
    come, sir.                                            exeunt




scene ii.
another room in angelo's house

enter provost and a servant

  servant. he's hearing of a cause; he will come straight.
    i'll tell him of you.
  provost. pray you do. [exi
 
 ___________________________
 
t servant] i'll know
    his pleasure; may be he will relent. alas,
    he hath but as offended in a dream!
    all sects, all ages, smack of this vice; and he
    to die for 't!

                            enter angelo

  angelo. now, what's the matter, provost?
  provost. is it your will claudio shall die to-morrow?
  angelo. did not i tell thee yea? hadst thou not order?
    why dost thou ask again?
  provost. lest i might be too rash;
    under your good correction, i have seen
    when, after execution, judgment hath
    repented o'er his doom.
  angelo. go to; let that be mine.
    do you your office, or give up your place,
    and you shall well be spar'd.
  provost. i crave your honour's pardon.
    what shall be done, sir, with the groaning juliet?
    she's very nea
 
 ___________________________
 
yright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
the prison

enter duke, disguised as before, claudio, and provost

  duke. so, then you hope of pardon from lord angelo?
  claudio. the miserable have no other medicine
    but only hope:
    i have hope to eve, and am prepar'd to die.
  duke. be absolute for death; either death or life
    shall thereby be the sweeter. reason thus with life.
    if i do lose thee, i do lose a thing
    that none but fools would keep. a breath thou art,
    servile to all the skyey influences,
    that dost this habitation where thou keep'st
    hourl
 
 ___________________________
 
ending thee no sooner. thou hast nor youth nor age,
    but, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
    dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
    becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
    of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
    thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
    to make thy riches pleasant. what's yet in this
    that bears the name of life? yet in this life
    lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
    that makes these odds all even.
  claudio. i humbly thank you.
    to sue to live, i find i seek to die;
    and, seeking death, find life. let it come on.
  isabella. [within] what, ho! peace here; grace and good
company!
  provost. who's there? come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  duke. dear sir, ere long i'll visit you again.
  claudio. most holy sir, i thank you.

                        enter isabella

  isabella. my business is a word or two with claudio.
  provost. and very welcome. look, signior, here's your sist
 
 ___________________________
 
er.
  duke. provost, a word with you.
  provost. as many as you please.
  duke. bring me to hear them speak, where i may be conceal'd.
                                         exeunt duke and provost
  claudio. now, sister, what's the comfort?
  isabella. why,
    as all comforts are; most good, most good, indeed.
    lord angelo, having affairs to heaven,
    intends you for his swift ambassador,
    where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
    therefore, your best appointment make with speed;
    to-morrow you set on.
  claudio. is there no remedy?
  isabella. none, but such remedy as, to save a head,
    to cleave a heart in twain.
  claudio. but is there any?
  isabella. yes, brother
 
 ___________________________
 
, you may live:
    there is a devilish mercy in the judge,
    if you'll implore it, that will free your life,
    but fetter you till death.
  claudio. perpetual durance?
  isabella. ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
    though all the world's vastidity you had,
    to a determin'd scope.
  claudio. but in what nature?
  isabella. in such a one as, you consenting to't,
    would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
    and leave you naked.
  claudio. let me know the point.
  isabella. o, i do fear thee, claudio; and i quake,
    lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
    and six or seven winters more respect
    than a perpetual honour. dar'st thou die?
    the sense of death is most in apprehension;
    and the poor beetle that we tread upon
    in corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
    as when a giant dies.
  claudio. why give you me this shame?
    think you i can a resolution fetch
    from flow'ry tenderness? 
 
 ___________________________
 
i will encounter darkness as a bride
    and hug it in mine arms.
  isabella. there spake my brother; there my father's grave
    did utter forth a voice. yes, thou must die:
    thou art too noble to conserve a life
    in base appliances. this outward-sainted deputy,
    whose settled visage and deliberate word
    nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth enew
    as falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil;
    his filth within being cast, he would appear
    a pond as deep as hell.
  claudio. the precise angelo!
  isabella. o, 'tis the cunning livery of hell
    the damned'st body to invest and cover
    in precise guards! dost thou think, claudio,
    if i would yield him my virginity
    thou mightst be freed?
  claudio. o heavens! it cannot be.
  isabella. yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
    so to offend him still. this night's the time
    that i should do what i abhor to name,
    or else thou diest to-morrow.
  claudio. thou shalt not do't.
  is
 
 ___________________________
 
abella. o, were it but my life!
    i'd throw it down for your deliverance
    as frankly as a pin.
  claudio. thanks, dear isabel.
  isabella. be ready, claudio, for your death to-morrow.
  claudio. yes. has he affections in him
    that thus can make him bite the law by th' nose
    when he would force it? sure it is no sin;
    or of the deadly seven it is the least.
  isabella. which is the least?
  claudio. if it were damnable, he being so wise,
    why would he for the momentary trick
    be perdurably fin'd?- o isabel!
  isabella. what says my brother?
  claudio. death is a fearful thing.
  isabella. and shamed life a hateful.
  claudio. ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
    to lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
    this sensible warm motion to become
    a kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
    to bathe in fiery floods or to reside
    in thrilling region of thick-ribb
 
 ___________________________
 
ed ice;
    to be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
    and blown with restless violence round about
    the pendent world; or to be worse than worst
    of those that lawless and incertain thought
    imagine howling- 'tis too horrible.
    the weariest and most loathed worldly life
    that age, ache, penury, and imprisonment,
    can lay on nature is a paradise
    to what we fear of death.
  isabella. alas, alas!
  claudio. sweet sister, let me live.
    what sin you do to save a brother's life,
    nature dispenses with the deed so far
    that it becomes a virtue.
  isabella. o you beast!
    o faithless coward! o dishonest wretch!
    wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
    is't not a kind of incest to take life
    from thine own sister's shame? what should i think?
    heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
    for such a warped slip of wilderness
    ne'er issu'd from his blood. take 
 
 ___________________________
 
my defiance;
    die; perish. might but my bending down
    reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
    i'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
    no word to save thee.
  claudio. nay, hear me, isabel.
  isabella. o fie, fie, fie!
    thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
    mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd;
    'tis best that thou diest quickly.
  claudio. o, hear me, isabella.

                            re-enter duke

  duke. vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
  isabella. what is your will?
  duke. might you dispense with your leisure, i would by and by
have
    some speech with you; the satisfaction i would require is
    likewise your own benefit.
  isabella. i have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen
out
    of other affairs; but i will attend you awhile.
                                                  
 
 ___________________________
 
lo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only he
hath
    made an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the
    disposition of natures. she, having the truth of honour in
her,
    hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to
    receive. i am confessor to angelo, and i know this to be
true;
    therefore prepare yourself to death. do not satisfy your
    resolution with hopes that are fallible; to-morrow you must
die;
    go to your knees and make ready.
  claudio. let me ask my sister pardon. i am so out of love with
life
    that i will sue to be rid of it.
  duke. hold you there. farewell. [exit claudio] provost, a word
with
    you.

                          re-enter provost

  provost. what's your will, father?
  duke. that, now you are come, you will be gone. leave me a
while
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall
touch
    her by my company.
  provost. in good time.                            exit provost

 
 ___________________________
 
 i am bound to
call
    upon you; and i pray you your name?
  lucio. sir, my name is lucio, well known to the duke.
  duke. he shall know you better, sir, if i may live to report
you.
  lucio. i fear you not.
  duke. o, you hope the duke will return no more; or you imagine
me
    too unhurtful an opposite. but, indeed, i can do you little
harm:
    you'll forswear this again.
  lucio. i'll be hang'd first. thou art deceiv'd in me, friar.
but no
    more of this. canst thou tell if claudio die to-morrow or no?
  duke. why should he die, sir?
  lucio. why? for filling a bottle with a tun-dish. i would the
duke
    we talk of were return'd again. this ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not
build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. the duke yet
would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to

    light. would he were return'd! marry, this claudio is
condemned
    for untrussing. farewell
 
 ___________________________
 
 information against
me.
    mistress kate keepdown was with child by him in the duke's
time;
    he promis'd her marriage. his child is a year and a quarter
old
    come philip and jacob; i have kept it myself; and see how he
goes
    about to abuse me.
  escalus. that fellow is a fellow of much license. let him be
call'd
    before us. away with her to prison. go to; no more words.
[exeunt
    officers with mistress overdone]  provost, my brother angelo
will
    not be alter'd: claudio must die to-morrow. let him be
furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. if my
brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  provost. so please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  escalus. good even, good father.
  duke. bliss and goodness on you!
  escalus. of whence are you?
  duke. not of this country, though my chance is now
    to use it for my time. i am a brother
    of gracious or
 
 ___________________________
 
 enough, yet it is every
    day's news. i pray you, sir, of what disposition was the
duke?
  escalus. one that, above all other strifes, contended
especially to
    know himself.
  duke. what pleasure was he given to?
  escalus. rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    anything which profess'd to make him rejoice; a gentleman of
all
    temperance. but leave we him to his events, with a prayer
they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    claudio prepar'd. i am made to understand that you have lent
him
    visitation.
  duke. he professes to have received no sinister measure from
his
    judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the
determination of
    justice. yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of
his
    frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which i, by my good
    leisure, have discredited to him, and now he is resolv'd to
die.
  escalus. you have paid the heavens your function, and the
prisoner
  
 
 ___________________________
 
im
    doth flourish the deceit. come, let us go;
    our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       exeunt




scene ii.
the prison

enter provost and pompey

  provost. come hither, sirrah. can you cut off a man's head?
  pompey. if the man be a bachelor, sir, i can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and i can never cut of a
    woman's head.
  provost. come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a
direct
    answer. to-morrow morning are to die claudio and barnardine.
here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office
lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall
redeem
    you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping,
for
    you have been a notorious bawd.
  pompey. sir, i have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but
yet
    i will be content to be a lawful hangman. i would be glad to
    receive some in
 
 ___________________________
 
m; for i do find your hangman is a
more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask
forgiveness.
  provost. you, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
  abhorson. come on, bawd; i will instruct thee in my trade;
follow.
  pompey. i do desire to learn, sir; and i hope, if you have
occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for
truly,
    sir, for your kindness i owe you a good turn.
  provost. call hither barnardine and claudio.
                                      exeunt abhorson and pompey
    th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    being a murderer, though he were my brother.

                           enter claudio

    look, here's the warrant, claudio, for thy death;
    'tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    thou must be made immortal. where's barnardine?
  claudio. as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
    when it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
    he will not w
 
 ___________________________
 
ake.
  provost. who can do good on him?
    well, go, prepare yourself. [knocking within] but hark, what
      noise?
    heaven give your spirits comfort!               exit claudio
    [knocking continues] by and by.
    i hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    for the most gentle claudio.

                 enter duke, disguised as before

    welcome, father.
  duke. the best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
    envelop you, good provost! who call'd here of late?
  provost. none, since the curfew rung.
  duke. not isabel?
  provost. no.
  duke. they will then, ere't be long.
  provost. what comfort is for claudio?
  duke. there's some in hope.
  provost. it is a bitter deputy.
  duke. not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
    even with the stroke and line of
 
 ___________________________
 
 [knocking within] now are they
      come.                                         exit provost
    this is a gentle provost; seldom when
    the steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [knocking within]
    how now, what noise! that spirit's possess'd with haste
    that wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.

                        re-enter provost

  provost. there he must stay until the officer
    arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  duke. have you no countermand for claudio yet
    but he must die to-morrow?
  provost. none, sir, none.
  duke. as near the dawning, provost, as it is,
    you shall hear more ere morning.
  provost. happily
    you something know; yet i believe there comes
    no countermand; no such example have we.
    besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    lord angelo hath to the public ear
    profess'd the contrary.

                         enter a messenger
    this is his lordship's man.
  duke. and here comes claudio's pa
 
 ___________________________
 
   hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    when it is borne in high authority.
    when vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
    that for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
    now, sir, what news?
  provost. i told you: lord angelo, belike thinking me remiss in
mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  duke. pray you, let's hear.
  provost. [reads] 'whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the
afternoon,
    barnardine. for my better satisfaction, let me have claudio's
    head sent me by five. let this be duly performed, with a
thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. thus fail
not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
    what say you to this, sir?
  duke. what is that barnardine who is to be executed in th'
    afternoon?
  provost. a bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
y of
the
    prison; give him leave to escape hence, he would not; drunk
many
    times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. we have very
oft
    awak'd him, as if to carry him to execution, and show'd him a
    seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.
  duke. more of him anon. there is written in your brow, provost,
    honesty and constancy. if i read it not truly, my ancient
skill
    beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning i will lay
myself
    in hazard. claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is
no
    greater forfeit to the law than angelo who hath sentenc'd
him. to
    make you understand this in a manifested effect, i crave but
four
    days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present
and
    a dangerous courtesy.
  provost. pray, sir, in what?
  duke. in the delaying death.
  provost. alack! how may i do it, having the hour limited, and
an
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the
view
    of
 
 ___________________________
 
 angelo? i may make my case as claudio's, to cross this in
the
    smallest.
  duke. by the vow of mine order, i warrant you, if my
instructions
    may be your guide. let this barnardine be this morning
executed,
    and his head borne to angelo.
  provost. angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the
favour.
  duke. o, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it.
shave
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death. you know the course
is
    c
 
 ___________________________
 
ive or die. o gravel heart!
    after him, fellows; bring him to the block.
                                      exeunt abhorson and pompey

                            enter provost

  provost. now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  duke. a creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    and to transport him in the mind he is
    were damnable.
  provost. here in the prison, father,
    there died this morning of a cruel fever
    one ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
    a man of claudio's years; his beard and head
    just of his colour. what if we do omit
    this reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    and satisfy the deputy with the visage
    of ragozine, more like to claudio?
  duke. o, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
    dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
    prefix'd by angelo. see this be done,
    and sent according to command; whiles i
    persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
  provost. this shall be done, good father, presently.
    
 
 ___________________________
 
but barnardine must die this afternoon;
    and how shall we continue claudio,
    to save me from the danger that might come
    if he were known alive?
  duke. let this be done:
    put them in secret holds, both barnardine and claudio.
    ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
    to the under generation, you shall find
    your safety manifested.
  provost. i am your free dependant.
  duke. quick, dispatch, and send the head to angelo.
                                                    exit provost
    now will i write letters to angelo-
    the provost, he shall bear them- whose contents
    shall witness to him i am near at home,
    and that, by great injunctions, i am bound
    to enter publicly. 
 
 ___________________________
 

  duke. good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
  isabella. the better, given me by so holy a man.
    hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
  duke. he hath releas'd him, isabel, from the world.
    his head is off and sent to angelo.
  isabella. nay, but it is not so.
  duke. it is no other.
    show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience,
  isabella. o, i will to him and pluck out his eyes!
  duke. you shall not be admitted to his sight.
  isabella. unhappy claudio! wretched isabel!
    injurious world! most damned angelo!
  duke. this nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
    forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
    mark what i say, which you shall find
    by every syllable a faithful verity.
    the duke comes home to-morrow. nay, dry your eyes.
    one of our covent, and his confessor,
    gives me this instance. already he hath carried
    notice to escalus and angelo,
    who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    there to g
 
 ___________________________
 
  if she be mad, as i believe no other,
    her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
    such a dependency of thing on thing,
    as e'er i heard in madness.
  isabella. o gracious duke,
    harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
    for inequality; but let your reason serve
    to make the truth appear where it seems hid,
    and hide the false seems true.
  duke. many that are not mad
    have, sure, more lack of reason. what would you say?
  isabella. i am the sister of one claudio,
    condemn'd upon the act of fornication
    to lose his head; condemn'd by angelo.
    i, in probation of a sisterhood,
    was sent to by my brother; one lucio
    as then the messenger-
  lucio. that's i, an't like your grace.
    i came to her from claudio, and desir'd her
    to try her gracious fortune with lord angelo
    for her poor brother's pardon.
  isabella. that's he, indeed.
  duke. you were not bid to speak.
  lucio. no, my good lord;
    nor wish'd to hold my pea
 
 ___________________________
 
e-enter angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost

  duke. for this new-married man approaching here,
    whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
    your well-defended honour, you must pardon
    for mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    being criminal in double violation
    of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
    thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    the very mercy of the law cries out
    most audible, even from his proper tongue,
    'an angelo for claudio, death for death!'
    haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
    like doth quit like, and measure still for measure.
    then, angelo, thy fault's thus manifested,
    which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
    we do condemn thee to the very block
    where claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
    away with him!
  mariana. o my most gracious lord,
    i hope you will not mock me with a husband.
  duke. it is your husband mock'd you with a husban
 
 ___________________________
 
ainst all sense you do importune her.
    should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
    her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    and take her hence in horror.
  mariana. isabel,
    sweet isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
    hold up your hands, say nothing; i'll speak all.
    they say best men moulded out of faults;
    and, for the most, become much more the better
    for being a little bad; so may my husband.
    o isabel, will you not lend a knee?
  duke. he dies for claudio's death.
  isabella. [kneeling] most bounteous sir,
    look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
    as if my brother liv'd. i partly think
    a due sincerity govern'd his deeds
    till he did look on me; since it is so,
    let him not die. my brother had but justice,
    in that he did the thing for which he died;
    for angelo,
    his act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
    and must be buried but as an intent
    that perish'd by the way. thoughts are no subjects;
    
 
 ___________________________
 
intents but merely thoughts.
  mariana. merely, my lord.
  duke. your suit's unprofitable; stand up, i say.
    i have bethought me of another fault.
    provost, how came it claudio was beheaded
    at an unusual hour?
  provost. it was commanded so.
  duke. had you a special warrant for the deed?
  provost. no, my good lord; it was by private message.
  duke. for which i do discharge you of your office;
    give up your keys.
  provost. pardon me, noble lord;
    i thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    yet did repent me, after more advice;
    for testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    that should by private order else have died,
    i have reserv'd 
 
 ___________________________
 
alive.
  duke. what's he?
  provost. his name is barnardine.
  duke. i would thou hadst done so by claudio.
    go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      exit provost
  escalus. i am sorry one so learned and so wise
    as you, lord angelo, have still appear'd,
    should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    and lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
  angelo. i am sorry that such sorrow i procure;
    and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    that i crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'tis my deserving, and i do entreat it.

       re-enter provost, with barnard
 
 ___________________________
 
ine, claudio (muffled)
                            and juliet

  duke. which is that barnardine?
  provost. this, my lord.
  duke. there was a friar told me of this man.
    sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul,
    that apprehends no further than this world,
    and squar'st thy life according. thou'rt condemn'd;
    but, for those earthly faults, i quit them all,
    and pray thee take this mercy to provide
    for better times to come. friar, advise him;
    i leave him to your hand.
 
 ___________________________
 
 what muffl'd fellow's that?
  provost. this is another prisoner that i sav'd,
    who should have died when claudio lost his head;
    as like almost to claudio as himself.    [unmuffles claudio]
  duke. [to isabella] if he be like your brother, for his sake
    is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    he is my brother too. but fitter time for that.
    by this lord angelo perceives he's safe;
    methinks i see a quick'ning in his eye.
    well, angelo, your evil quits you well.
    look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.
    i find an apt remission in myself;
    and yet here's one in place i cannot pardon.

 
 ___________________________
 
highness said even now i made you a duke; good my lord, do
not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
  duke. upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
    thy slanders i forgive; and therewithal
    remit thy other forfeits. take him to prison;
    and see our pleasure herein executed.
  lucio. marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping,
    and hanging.
  duke. slandering a prince deserves it.
                                      exeunt officers with lucio
    she, claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo;
    i have confess'd her, and i know her virtue.
    thanks, good friend escalus, for thy much goodness;
    there's more behind that is more gratulate.
    thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    we shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    forgive him, angelo, that brought you home
    the head of ragozine for claudio's:
    th' offence pardons itself. dear isabel,
    i have a motion much import