measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lords, officers, citizens, boy, and attendants




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon univer
 
 ___________________________
 
er precise in promise-keeping.
  second gentleman. besides, you know, it draws something near to
the
    speech we had to such a purpose.
  first gentleman. but most of all agreeing with the
proclamation.
  lucio. away; let's go learn the truth of it.
                                      exeunt lucio and gentlemen
  mrs. overdone. thus, what with the war, what with the sweat,
what
    with the gallows, and what with poverty, i am custom-shrunk.

                               enter pompey

    how now! what's the news with you?
  pompey. yonder man is carried to prison.
  mrs. overdone. well, what has he done?
  pompey. a woman.
  mrs. overdone. but what's his offence?
  pompey. groping for trouts in a peculiar river.
  mrs. overdone. what! is there a maid with child by him?
  pompey. no; but there's a woman with maid by him. you have not
   heard of the proclamation, have you?
  mrs. overdone. what proclamation, man?
  pompey. all houses in the suburbs of vienna mus
 
 ___________________________
 
t be pluck'd
down.
  mrs. overdone. and what shall become of those in the city?
  pompey. they shall stand for seed; they had gone down too, but
that
    a wise burgher put in for them.
  mrs. overdone. but shall all our houses of resort in the
suburbs be
    pull'd down?
  pompey. to the ground, mistress.
  mrs. overdone. why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
    what shall become of me?
  pompey. come, fear not you: good counsellors lack no clients.
    though you change your place you need not change your trade;
i'll
    be your tapster still. courage, there will be pity taken on
you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
will
    be considered.
  mrs. overdone. what's to do here, thomas tapster? let's
withdraw.
  pompey. here comes signior claudio, led by the provost to
prison;
    and there's madam juliet.                             exeunt

 
 
 ___________________________
 
provost?
  provost. here, if it like your honour.
  angelo. see that claudio
    be executed by nine to-morrow morning;
    bring him his confessor; let him be prepar'd;
    for that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.        exit provost
  escalus. [aside] well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    and some condemned for a fault alone.

         enter elbow and officers with froth and pompey

  elbow. come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common
houses,
    i know no law; bring them away.
  angelo. how now, sir! what's your name, and what's the matter?
  elbow. if it please your honour, i am the poor duke's
constable,
    and my name is elbow; i do lean upon justice, sir, and do
bring
    in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
  angelo. benefactors! well- what benefactors are they? 
 
 ___________________________
 
are they
not
    malefactors?
  elbow. if it please your honour, i know not well what they are;
but
    precise villains they are, that i am sure of, and void of all
    profanation in the world that good christians ought to have.
  escalus. this comes off well; here's a wise officer.
  angelo. go to; what quality are they of? elbow is your name?
why
    dost thou not speak, elbow?
  pompey. he cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.
  angelo. what are you, sir?
  elbow. he, sir? a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a
bad
    woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, pluck'd down in
the
    suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which, i think,
is a
    very ill house too.
  escalus. how know you that?
  elbow. my wife, sir, whom i detest before heaven and your
honour-
  escalus. how! thy wife!
  elbow. ay, sir; whom i thank heaven, is an honest woman-
  escalu
 
 ___________________________
 
est myself also, as well as she,
that
    this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her
life,
    for it is a naughty house.
  escalus. how dost thou know that, constable?
  elbow. marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
    cardinally given, might have been accus'd in fornication,
    adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
  escalus. by the woman's means?
  elbow. ay, sir, by mistress overdone's means; but as she spit
in
    his face, so she defied him.
  pompey. sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
  elbow. prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man,
    prove it.
  escalus. do you hear how he misplaces?
  pompey. sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving
your
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes. sir, we had but two in
the
    house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in
a
    fruit dish, a dish of some three pence; your honours have
seen
    such dishes; they are not china dishes, 
 
 ___________________________
 
but very good dishes.
  escalus. go to, go to; no matter for the dish, sir.
  pompey. no, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the
    right; but to the point. as i say, this mistress elbow,
being, as
    i say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as i
    said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as i said,
    master froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as i
    said, and, as i say, paying for them very honestly; for, as
you
    know, master froth, i could not give you three pence again-
  froth. no, indeed.
  pompey. very
 
 ___________________________
 
 well; you being then, if you be rememb'red,
cracking
    the stones of the foresaid prunes-
  froth. ay, so i did indeed.
  pompey. why, very well; i telling you then, if you be
rememb'red,
    that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing
you
    wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as i told you-
  froth. all this is true.
  pompey. why, very well then-
  escalus. come, you are a tedious fool. to the purpose: what was
    done to elbow's wife that he hath cause to complain of? come
me
    to what was done to her.
  pompey. sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
  escalus. no, sir, nor i mean it not.
  pompey. sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave.
and,
    i beseech you, look into master froth here, sir, a man of
    fourscore pound a year; whose father died at hallowmas- was't
not
    at ha
 
 ___________________________
 
llowmas, master froth?
  froth. all-hallond eve.
  pompey. why, very well; i hope here be truths. he, sir,
sitting, as
    i say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the bunch of grapes,
    where, indeed, you have a delight to sit, have you not?
  froth. i have so; because it is an open room, and good for
winter.
  pompey. why, very well then; i hope here be truths.
  angelo. this will last out a night in russia,
    when nights are longest there; i'll take my leave,
    and leave you to the hearing of the cause,
    hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
  escalus. i think no less. good morrow to your lordship.
    [exit angelo] now, sir, come on; what was done to elbow's
wife,
    once more?
  pompey. once?- sir. there was nothing done to her once.
  elbow. i beseech you, sir, ask him what t
 
 ___________________________
 
his man did to my
wife.
  pompey. i beseech your honour, ask me.
  escalus. well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?
  pompey. i beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face. good
    master froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a good purpose.
doth
    your honour mark his face?
  escalus. ay, sir, very well.
  pompey. nay, i beseech you, mark it well.
  escalus. well, i do so.
  pompey. doth your honour see any harm in his face?
  escalus. why, no.
  pompey. i'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst
thing
    about him. good then; if his face be the worst thing about
him,
    how could master froth do the constable's wife any harm? i
would
    know that of your honour.
  escalus. he's in the right, constable; what say you to it?
  elbow. first, an it like you, the house is a respected house;
next,
    this is a respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected
    woman.
  pompey. by this hand, sir, his wife is a more respecte
 
 ___________________________
 
d person
than
    any of us all.
  elbow. varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicket varlet; the time
is
    yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or
    child.
  pompey. sir, she was respected with him before he married with
her.
  escalus. which is the wiser here, justice or iniquity? is this
    true?
  elbow. o thou caitiff! o thou varlet! o thou wicked hannibal! i
    respected with her before i was married to her! if ever i was
    respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship
think me
    the poor duke's officer. prove this, thou wicked hannibal, or
    i'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee.
  escalus. if he took you a box o' th' 
 
 ___________________________
 
at
    thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in
his
    courses till thou know'st what they are.
  elbow. marry, i thank your worship for it. thou seest, thou
wicked
    varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now,
    thou varlet; thou art to continue.
  escalus. where were you born, friend?
  froth. here in vienna, sir.
  escalus. are you of fourscore pounds a year?
  froth. yes, an't please you, sir.
  escalus. so. what trade are you of, sir?
  pompey. a tapster, a poor widow's tapster.
  escalus. your mistress' name?
  pompey. mistress overdone.
  escalus. hath she had any more than one husband?
  pompey. nine, sir; overdone by the last.
  escalus. nine! come hither to me, master froth. master froth, i
    would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw
you,
    master froth, and you will hang them. get you gone, and let
me
    hear no more of you.
  froth. i thank your worship. for mine own part, i never come
into

 
 ___________________________
 
    any room in a taphouse but i am drawn in.
  escalus. well, no more of it, master froth; farewell. [exit
froth]
    come you hither to me, master tapster; what's your name,
master
    tapster?
  pompey. pompey.
  escalus. what else?
  pompey. bum, sir.
  escalus. troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you;
so
    that, in the beastliest sense, you are pompey the great.
pompey,
    you are partly a bawd, pompey, howsoever you colour it in
being a
    tapster. are you not? come, tell me true; it shall be the
better
    for you.
  pompey. truly, sir, i am a poor fellow that would live.
  escalus. how would you live, pompey- by being a bawd? what do
you
    think of the trade, pompey? is it a lawful trade?
  pompey. if the law would allow it, sir.
  escalus. but the law will not allow it, pompey; nor it shall
not be
    allowed in vienna.
  pompey. does your worship mean to geld and splay al
 
 ___________________________
 
l the youth
of
    the city?
  escalus. no, pompey.
  pompey. truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then. if
    your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves,
you
    need not to fear the bawds.
  escalus. there is pretty orders beginning, i can tell you: but
it
    is but heading and hanging.
  pompey. if you head and hang all that offend that way but for
ten
    year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for
more
    heads; if this law hold in vienna ten year, i'll rent the
fairest
    house in it, after threepence a bay. if you live to see this
come
    to pass, say pompey told you so.
  escalus. thank you, good pompey; and, in requital of your
prophecy,
    hark you: i advise you, let me not find you before me again
upon
    any complaint whatsoever- no, not for d
 
 ___________________________
 
welling where you do;
if i
    do, pompey, i shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
    caesar to you; in plain dealing, pompey, i shall have you
whipt.
    so for this time, pompey, fare you well.
  pompey. i thank your worship for your good counsel; [aside] but
i
    shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better
determine.
    whip me? no, no; let carman whip his jade;
    the valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade.         exit
  escalus. come hither to me, master elbow; come hither, master
    constable. how long have you been in this place of constable?
  elbow. seven year and a half, sir.
  escalus. i thought, by the readiness in the office, you had
    continued in it 
 
 ___________________________
 
 him
    promise of satisfaction. i will presently to saint luke's;
there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected mariana. at that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with angelo, that it may be
    quickly.
  isabella. i thank you for this comfort. fare you well, good
father.
                                                exeunt severally




scene ii.
the street before the prison

enter, on one side, duke disguised as before; on the other,
elbow,
and officers with pompey

  elbow. nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
    world drink brown and white bastard.
  duke. o heavens! what stuff is here?
  pompey. 'twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too,
to
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for
th
 
 ___________________________
 
ound upon him, sir, a
    strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
  duke. fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!
    the evil that thou causest to be done,
    that is thy means to live. do thou but think
    what 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    from such a filthy vice; say to thyself
    'from their abominable and beastly touches
    i drink, i eat, array myself, and live.'
    canst thou believe thy living is a life,
    so stinkingly depending? go mend, go mend.
  pompey. indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    i would prove-
  duke. nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
    thou wilt prove his. take him to prison, officer;
    correction and instruction must both work
    ere this rude beast will profit.
  elbow. he must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning.
    the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a
whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his
errand.
  duke. that we 
 
 ___________________________
 
were all, as some would seem to be,
    from our faults, as his faults from seeming, free.
  elbow. his neck will come to your waist- a cord, sir.

                          enter lucio

  pompey. i spy comfort; i cry bail. here's a gentleman, and a
friend
    of mine.
  lucio. how now, noble pompey! what, at the wheels of caesar?
art
    thou led in triumph? what, is there none of pygmalion's
images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    pocket and extracting it clutch'd? what reply, ha? what
say'st
    thou to this tune, matter, and method? is't not drown'd i'
th'
    last rain, ha? what say'st thou, trot? is the world as it
was,
    man? which is the way? is it sad, and few words? or how? the
    trick of it?
  duke. still thus, and thus; still
 
 ___________________________
 
 worse!
  lucio. how doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? procures she
still,
    ha?
  pompey. troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  lucio. why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so;
ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd
    consequence; it must be so. art going to prison, pompey?
  pompey. yes, faith, sir.
  lucio. why, 'tis not amiss, pompey. farewell; go, say i sent
thee
    thither. for debt, pompey- or how?
  elbow. for being a bawd, for being a bawd.
  lucio. well, then, imprison him. if imprisonment be the due of
a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right. bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born. farewell, good pompey. commend me
to
    the prison, pompey. you will turn good husband now, pompey;
you
    will keep the house.
  pompey. i hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  lucio. no, indeed, will i not, pompey; it is not the wear. i
will
    pray, pompey, 
 
 ___________________________
 
to increase your bondage. if you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. adieu trusty pompey.
    bless you, friar.
  duke. and you.
  lucio. does bridget paint still, pompey, ha?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  pompey. you will not bail me then, sir?
  lucio. then, pompey, nor now. what news abroad, friar? what
news?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  lucio. go to kennel, pompey, go.

                               exeunt elbow, pompey and officers

    what news, friar, of the duke?
  duke. i know none. can you tell me of any?
  lucio. some say he is with the emperor of russia; other some,
he is
    in rome; but where is he, think you?
  duke. i know not where; but wheresoever, i wish him well.
  lucio. it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. lord angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  duke. he does well in't.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  isabella. little have you to say,
    when you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'remember now my brother.'
  mariana. fear me not.
  duke. nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
    he is your husband on a pre-contract.
    to bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    sith that the justice of your title to him
    doth flourish the deceit. come, let us go;
    our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       exeunt




scene ii.
the prison

enter provost and pompey

  provost. come hither, sirrah. can you cut off a man's head?
  pompey. if the man be a bachelor, sir, i can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and i can never cut of a
    woman's head.
  provost. come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a
direct
    answer. to-morrow morning are to die claudio and barnardine.
here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office
lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall
redeem
 
 
 ___________________________
 
   you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping,
for
    you have been a notorious bawd.
  pompey. sir, i have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but
yet
    i will be content to be a lawful hangman. i would be glad to
    receive some instructions from my fellow partner.
  provost. what ho, abhorson! where's abhorson there?

                          enter abhorson

  abhorson. do you call, sir?
  provost. sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in
your
    execution. if you think it meet, compound with him by the
year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not,
 
 ___________________________
 
 use him for the
present,
    and dismiss him. he cannot plead his estimation with you; he
hath
    been a bawd.
  abhorson. a bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our
mystery.
  provost. go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the
    scale.                                                  exit
  pompey. pray, sir, by your good favour- for surely, sir, a good
    favour you have but that you have a hanging look- do you
call,
    sir, your occupation a mystery?
  abhorson. ay, sir; a mystery.
  pompey. painting, sir, i have heard say, is a mystery; and your
    whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting,
do
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should
be
    in hanging, if i should be hang'd, i cannot imagine.
  abhorson. sir, it is a mystery.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
pompey. proof?
  abhorson. every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be
too
    little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if
it
    be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little
enough; so
    every true man's apparel fits your thief.

                          re-enter provost

  provost. are you agreed?
  pompey. sir, i will serve him; for i do find your hangman is a
more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask
forgiveness.
  provost. you, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
  abhorson. come on, bawd; i will instruct thee in my trade;
follow.
  pompey. i do desire to learn, sir; and i hope, if you have
occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for
truly,
    sir, for your kindness i owe you a good turn.
  provost. call 
 
 ___________________________
 
hither barnardine and claudio.
                                      exeunt abhorson and pompey
    th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    being a murderer, though he were my brother.

                           enter claudio

    look, here's the warrant, claudio, for thy death;
    'tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    thou must be made immortal. where's barnardine?
  claudio. as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
    when it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
    he will not wake.
  provost. who can do good on him?
    well, go, prepare you
 
 ___________________________
 
folding star calls up the shepherd. put not yourself into
    amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are
but
    easy when they are known. call your executioner, and off with
    barnardine's head. i will give him a present shrift, and
advise
    him for a better place. yet you are amaz'd, but this shall
    absolutely resolve you. come away; it is almost clear dawn.
                                                          exeunt




scene iii.
the prison

enter pompey

  pompey. i am as well acquainted here as i was in our house of
    profession; one would think it were mistress overdone's own
    house, for here be many of her old customers. first, here's
young
    master rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
    ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made
five
    marks ready money. marry, then ginger was not much in
request,
    for the old women were all dead. then is there here one
master
    caper, at the suit
 
 ___________________________
 
here young dizy, and young master deepvow, and
    master copperspur, and master starvelackey, the rapier and
dagger
    man, and young dropheir that kill'd lusty pudding, and master
    forthlight the tilter, and brave master shootie the great
    traveller, and wild halfcan that stabb'd pots, and, i think,
    forty more- all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for
the
    lord's sake.'

                            enter abhorson

  abhorson. sirrah, bring barnardine hither.
  pompey. master barnardine! you must rise and be hang'd, master
    barnardine!
  abhorson. what ho, barnardine!
  barnardine. [within] a pox o' your throats! who makes that
noise
    there? what are you?
  pompey. your friends, sir; the hangman. you must be so good,
sir,
    to rise and be put to death.
  barnardine. [ within ] away, you rogue, away; i am sleepy.
  abhorson. tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
  pompey. pray, master barnardine, awake till you are executed,
and
 
 
 ___________________________
 
   sleep afterwards.
  abhorson. go in to him, and fetch him out.
  pompey. he is coming, sir, he is coming; i hear his straw
rustle.

                             enter barnardine

  abhorson. is the axe upon the block, sirrah?
  pompey. very ready, sir.
  barnardine. how now, abhorson, what's the news with you?
  abhorson. truly, sir, i would desire you to clap into your
prayers;
    for, look you, the warrant's come.
  barnardine. you rogue, i have been drinking all night; i am not
    fitted for't.
  pompey. o, the better, sir! for he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the
next
    day.

                  enter duke, disguised as before

  abhorson. look yo
 
 ___________________________
 
  certain.
  duke. o, sir, you must; and therefore i beseech you
    look forward on the journey you shall go.
  barnardine. i swear i will not die to-day for any man's
persuasion.
  duke. but hear you-
  barnardine. not a word; if you have anything to say to me, come
to
    my ward; for thence will not i to-day.                  exit
  duke. unfit to live or die. o gravel heart!
    after him, fellows; bring him to the block.
                                      exeunt abhorson and pompey

                            enter provost

  provost. now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  duke. a creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    and to transport him in the mind he is
    were damnable.
  provost. here in the prison, father,
    there died this morning of a cruel fever
    one ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
    a man of claudio's years; his beard and head
    just of his colour. what if we do omit
    this reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    and satis