measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lords, officers, citizens, boy, and attendants




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
p
 
 ___________________________
 
dom will.
  angelo. where is the provost?
  provost. here, if it like your honour.
  angelo. see that claudio
    be executed by nine to-morrow morning;
    bring him his confessor; let him be prepar'd;
    for that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.        exit provost
  escalus. [aside] well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    and some condemned for a fault alone.

         enter elbow and officers with froth and pompey

  elbow. come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common
houses,
    i know no law; bring them away.
  angelo. how now, sir! what's your name, and what's the matter?
  elbow. if it please your honour, i am the poor duke's
constable,
    and my name is elbow; i do lean upon justice, sir, and do
bring
    in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
  angelo. benefactors
 
 ___________________________
 
! well- what benefactors are they? are they
not
    malefactors?
  elbow. if it please your honour, i know not well what they are;
but
    precise villains they are, that i am sure of, and void of all
    profanation in the world that good christians ought to have.
  escalus. this comes off well; here's a wise officer.
  angelo. go to; what quality are they of? elbow is your name?
why
    dost thou not speak, elbow?
  pompey. he cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.
  angelo. what are you, sir?
  elbow. he, sir? a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a
bad
    woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, pluck'd down in
the
    suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which, i think,
is a
    very ill house too.
  escalus. how know you that?
  elbow. my wife, sir, whom i detest before heaven and your
honour-
  escalus. how! thy wife!
  elbow. ay, sir; whom i thank heaven, is an honest woman-
  escalus. dost thou detest her therefore?
 
 ___________________________
 

  elbow. i say, sir, i will detest myself also, as well as she,
that
    this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her
life,
    for it is a naughty house.
  escalus. how dost thou know that, constable?
  elbow. marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
    cardinally given, might have been accus'd in fornication,
    adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
  escalus. by the woman's means?
  elbow. ay, sir, by mistress overdone's means; but as she spit
in
    his face, so she defied him.
  pompey. sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
  elbow. prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man,
    prove it.
  escalus. do you hear how he misplaces?
  pompey. sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving
your
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes. sir, we had but two in
the
    house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in
a
    fruit
 
 ___________________________
 
 dish, a dish of some three pence; your honours have
seen
    such dishes; they are not china dishes, but very good dishes.
  escalus. go to, go to; no matter for the dish, sir.
  pompey. no, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the
    right; but to the point. as i say, this mistress elbow,
being, as
    i say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as i
    said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as i said,
    master froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as i
    said, and, as i say, paying for them very honestly; for, as
you
    know, master froth, i could not give you three pence again-
  froth. no, indeed.
  pompey. very well; you being then, if you be rememb'red,
cracking
    the stones of the foresaid prunes-
  froth. ay, so i d
 
 ___________________________
 
id indeed.
  pompey. why, very well; i telling you then, if you be
rememb'red,
    that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing
you
    wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as i told you-
  froth. all this is true.
  pompey. why, very well then-
  escalus. come, you are a tedious fool. to the purpose: what was
    done to elbow's wife that he hath cause to complain of? come
me
    to what was done to her.
  pompey. sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
  escalus. no, sir, nor i mean it not.
  pompey. sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave.
and,
    i beseech you, look into master froth here, sir, a man of
    fourscore pound a year; whose father died at hallowmas- was't
not
    at hallowmas, master froth?
  froth. all-hallond eve.
  pompey. why, very well; i hope here be truths. he, sir,
 
 ___________________________
 
ere, indeed, you have a delight to sit, have you not?
  froth. i have so; because it is an open room, and good for
winter.
  pompey. why, very well then; i hope here be truths.
  angelo. this will last out a night in russia,
    when nights are longest there; i'll take my leave,
    and leave you to the hearing of the cause,
    hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
  escalus. i think no less. good morrow to your lordship.
    [exit angelo] now, sir, come on; what was done to elbow's
wife,
    once more?
  pompey. once?- sir. there was nothing done to her once.
  elbow. i beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my
wife.
  pompey. i beseech your honour, ask me.
  escalus. well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?
  pompey. i beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face. good
    master froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a good purpose.
doth
    your honour mark his face?
  escalus. ay, sir, very well.
  pompey. nay, i beseech you, mark it well.

 
 ___________________________
 
  escalus. well, i do so.
  pompey. doth your honour see any harm in his face?
  escalus. why, no.
  pompey. i'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst
thing
    about him. good then; if his face be the worst thing about
him,
    how could master froth do the constable's wife any harm? i
would
    know that of your honour.
  escalus. he's in the right, constable; what say you to it?
  elbow. first, an it like you, the house is a respected house;
next,
    this is a respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected
    woman.
  pompey. by this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person
than
    any of us all.
  elbow. varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicket varlet; the time
is
    yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or
    child.
  pompey. sir, she was respected with him before he married with
her.
  escalus. which is the wiser here, justice or 
 
 ___________________________
 
iniquity? is this
    true?
  elbow. o thou caitiff! o thou varlet! o thou wicked hannibal! i
    respected with her before i was married to her! if ever i was
    respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship
think me
    the poor duke's officer. prove this, thou wicked hannibal, or
    i'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee.
  escalus. if he took you a box o' th' ear, you might have your
    action of slander too.
  elbow. marry, i thank your good worship for it. what is't your
    worship's pleasure i shall do with this wicked caitiff?
  escalus. truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him
that
    thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in
his
    courses till thou know'st what they are.
  elbow. marry, i thank your worship for it. thou seest, thou
wicked
    varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now,
    thou varlet; thou art to continue.
  escalus. where
 
 ___________________________
 
ng where you do;
if i
    do, pompey, i shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
    caesar to you; in plain dealing, pompey, i shall have you
whipt.
    so for this time, pompey, fare you well.
  pompey. i thank your worship for your good counsel; [aside] but
i
    shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better
determine.
    whip me? no, no; let carman whip his jade;
    the valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade.         exit
  escalus. come hither to me, master elbow; come hither, master
    constable. how long have you been in this place of constable?
  elbow. seven year and a half, sir.
  escalus. i thought, by the readiness in the office, you had
    continued in it some time. you say seven years together?
  elbow. and a half, sir.
  escalus. alas, it hath been great pains to you! they do you
wrong
    to put you so oft upon't. are there not men in your ward
    sufficient to serve it?
  elbow. faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters; as the
 
 ___________________________
 
y are
    chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; i do it for some
    piece of money, and go through with all.
  escalus. look you, bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the
    most sufficient of your parish.
  elbow. to your worship's house, sir?
  escalus. to my house. fare you well.              [exit elbow]
    what's o'clock, think you?
  justice. eleven, sir.
  escalus. i pray you home to dinner with me.
  justice. i humbly thank you.
  escalus. it grieves me for the death of claudio;
    but there's no remedy.
  justice. lord angelo is severe.
  escalus. it is but needful:
    mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
    but yet, poor claudio! there is no remedy.
    come, sir.                                            exeunt




sce
 
 ___________________________
 
treat you to his bed, give him
    promise of satisfaction. i will presently to saint luke's;
there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected mariana. at that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with angelo, that it may be
    quickly.
  isabella. i thank you for this comfort. fare you well, good
father.
                                                exeunt severally




scene ii.
the street before the prison

enter, on one side, duke disguised as before; on the other,
elbow,
and officers with pompey

  elbow. nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
    world drink brown and white bastard.
  duke. o heavens! what stuff is here?
  pompey. 'twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too,
to
    signify that craft, being richer tha
 
 ___________________________
 
n innocency, stands for
the
    facing.
  elbow. come your way, sir. bless you, good father friar.
  duke. and you, good brother father. what offence hath this man
made
    you, sir?
  elbow. marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take
him
    to be a thief too, sir, for we have found upon him, sir, a
    strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
  duke. fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!
    the evil that thou causest to be done,
    that is thy means to live. do thou but think
    what 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    from such a filthy vice; say to thyself
    'from their abominable and beastly touches
    i drink, i eat, array myself, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 live.'
    canst thou believe thy living is a life,
    so stinkingly depending? go mend, go mend.
  pompey. indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    i would prove-
  duke. nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
    thou wilt prove his. take him to prison, officer;
    correction and instruction must both work
    ere this rude beast will profit.
  elbow. he must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning.
    the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a
whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his
errand.
  duke. that we were all, as some would seem to be,
    from our faults, as his faults from seeming, free.
  elbow. his neck will come to your waist- a cord, sir.

                          enter lucio

  pompey. i spy comfort; i cry bail. here's a gentleman, and a
friend
    of mine.
  luc
 
 ___________________________
 
 lucio. how doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? procures she
still,
    ha?
  pompey. troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  lucio. why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so;
ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd
    consequence; it must be so. art going to prison, pompey?
  pompey. yes, faith, sir.
  lucio. why, 'tis not amiss, pompey. farewell; go, say i sent
thee
    thither. for debt, pompey- or how?
  elbow. for being a bawd, for being a bawd.
  lucio. well, then, imprison him. if imprisonment be the due of
a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right. bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born. farewell, good pompey. commend me
to
    the prison, pompey. you will turn good husband now, pompey;
you
    will keep the house.
  pompey. i hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  lucio. no, indeed, will i not, pompey; it is not the wear. i
will
    pray, pompey, to increase your b
 
 ___________________________
 
ondage. if you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. adieu trusty pompey.
    bless you, friar.
  duke. and you.
  lucio. does bridget paint still, pompey, ha?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  pompey. you will not bail me then, sir?
  lucio. then, pompey, nor now. what news abroad, friar? what
news?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  lucio. go to kennel, pompey, go.

                               exeunt elbow, pompey and officers

    what news, friar, of the duke?
  duke. i know none. can you tell me of any?
  lucio. some say he is with the emperor of russia; other some,
he is
    in rome; but where is he, think you?
  duke. i know not where; but wheresoever, i wish him well.
  lucio. it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. lord angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  duke. he does well i