measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lords, officers, citizens, boy, and attendants




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and mac
 
 ___________________________
 

of
    an english kersey as be pil'd, as thou art pil'd, for a
french
    velvet. do i speak feelingly now?
  lucio. i think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful
feeling of
    thy speech. i will, out of thine own confession, learn to
begin
    thy health; but, whilst i live, forget to drink after thee.
  first gentleman. i think i have done myself wrong, have i not?
  second gentleman. yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted
or
    free.

                        enter mistress overdone

  lucio. behold, behold, where madam mitigation comes! i have
    purchas'd as many diseases under her roof as come to-
  second gentleman. to what, i pray?
  first gentleman. judge.
  second gentleman. to three thousand dolours a year.
  first gentleman. ay, and more.
  lucio. a french crown more.
  first gentleman. thou art always figuring diseases in me, but
thou
    art full of error; i am sound.
  lucio. nay, not, as one would say, healthy; but so sound as
things
    that ar
 
 ___________________________
 
 woman-
  escalus. dost thou detest her therefore?
  elbow. i say, sir, i will detest myself also, as well as she,
that
    this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her
life,
    for it is a naughty house.
  escalus. how dost thou know that, constable?
  elbow. marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
    cardinally given, might have been accus'd in fornication,
    adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
  escalus. by the woman's means?
  elbow. ay, sir, by mistress overdone's means; but as she spit
in
    his face, so she defied him.
  pompey. sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
  elbow. prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man,
    prove it.
  escalus. do you hear how he misplaces?
  pompey. sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving
your
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes. sir, we had but two in
the
    house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in
a
    fruit dish, a dish of some three pen
 
 ___________________________
 
ll thou know'st what they are.
  elbow. marry, i thank your worship for it. thou seest, thou
wicked
    varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now,
    thou varlet; thou art to continue.
  escalus. where were you born, friend?
  froth. here in vienna, sir.
  escalus. are you of fourscore pounds a year?
  froth. yes, an't please you, sir.
  escalus. so. what trade are you of, sir?
  pompey. a tapster, a poor widow's tapster.
  escalus. your mistress' name?
  pompey. mistress overdone.
  escalus. hath she had any more than one husband?
  pompey. nine, sir; overdone by the last.
  escalus. nine! come hither to me, master froth. master froth, i
    would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw
you,
    master froth, and you will hang them. get you gone, and let
me
    hear no more of you.
  froth. i thank your worship. for mine own part, i never come
into
    any room in a taphouse but i am drawn in.
  escalus. well, no more of it, master froth; farew
 
 ___________________________
 
past it yet; and, i say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. say that i said so.
    farewell.                                               exit
  duke. no might nor greatness in mortality
    can censure scape; back-wounding calumny
    the whitest virtue strikes. what king so strong
    can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
    but who comes here?

             enter escalus, provost, and officers with
                           mistress overdone

  escalus. go, away with her to prison.
  mrs. overdone. good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  escalus. double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! this would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
  provost. a bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your
    honour.
  mrs. overdone. my lord, this is one lucio's information against
me.
    mistress kate keepdown was with child by him in the duke's
 
 ___________________________
 

time;
    he promis'd her marriage. his child is a year and a quarter
old
    come philip and jacob; i have kept it myself; and see how he
goes
    about to abuse me.
  escalus. that fellow is a fellow of much license. let him be
call'd
    before us. away with her to prison. go to; no more words.
[exeunt
    officers with mistress overdone]  provost, my brother angelo
will
    not be alter'd: claudio must die to-morrow. let him be
furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. if my
brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  provost. so please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  escalus. good even, good father.
  duke. bliss and goodness on you!
  escalus. of whence are you?
  duke. not of this country, though my chance is no
 
 ___________________________
 
es are
but
    easy when they are known. call your executioner, and off with
    barnardine's head. i will give him a present shrift, and
advise
    him for a better place. yet you are amaz'd, but this shall
    absolutely resolve you. come away; it is almost clear dawn.
                                                          exeunt




scene iii.
the prison

enter pompey

  pompey. i am as well acquainted here as i was in our house of
    profession; one would think it were mistress overdone's own
    house, for here be many of her old customers. first, here's
young
    master rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
    ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made
five
    marks ready money. marry, then ginger was not much in
request,
    for the old women were all dead. then is there here one
master
    caper, at the suit of master threepile the mercer, for some
four
    suits of peach-colour'd satin, which now peaches him a
beggar.
    then