measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lords, officers, citizens, boy, and attendants




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare i
 
 ___________________________
 
. why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
    what shall become of me?
  pompey. come, fear not you: good counsellors lack no clients.
    though you change your place you need not change your trade;
i'll
    be your tapster still. courage, there will be pity taken on
you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
will
    be considered.
  mrs. overdone. what's to do here, thomas tapster? let's
withdraw.
  pompey. here comes signior claudio, led by the provost to
prison;
    and there's madam juliet.                             exeunt

            enter provost, claudio, juliet, and officers;
                            lucio following

  claudio. fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th' world?
    bear me to prison, where i am committed.
  provost. i do it not in evil disposition,
    but from lord angelo by special charge.
  claudio. thus can the demigod authority
    make us pay down for our offence by weight
    the words of heaven:
 
 ___________________________
 
res do pursue,
    like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
    a thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
  lucio. if i could speak so wisely under an arrest, i would send
for
    certain of my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, i had as
lief
    have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.
    what's thy offence, claudio?
  claudio. what but to speak of would offend again.
  lucio. what, is't murder?
  claudio. no.
  lucio. lechery?
  claudio. call it so.
  provost. away, sir; you must go.
  claudio. one word, good friend. lucio, a word with you.
  lucio. a hundred, if they'll do you any good. is lechery so
look'd
    after?
  claudio. thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
    i got possession of julietta's bed.
    you know the lady; she is fast my wife,
    save that we do the denunciation lack
    of outward order; this we came not to,
    only for propagation of a dow'r
    remaining in the coffer of her friends.
    from whom we th
 
 ___________________________
 
 the hideous law,
    as mice by lions- hath pick'd out an act
    under whose heavy sense your brother's life
    falls into forfeit; he arrests him on it,
    and follows close the rigour of the statute
    to make him an example. all hope is gone,
    unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
    to soften angelo. and that's my pith of business
    'twixt you and your poor brother.
  isabella. doth he so seek his life?
  lucio. has censur'd him
    already, and, as i hear, the provost hath
    a warrant for his execution.
  isabella. alas! what poor ability's in me
    to do him good?
  lucio. assay the pow'r you have.
  isabella. my power, alas, i doubt!
  lucio. our doubts are traitors,
    and make us lose the good we oft might win
    by fearing to attempt. go to lord angelo,
    and let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
    men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
    all their petitions are as freely theirs
    as they themselves would owe them.
 
 ___________________________
 
93 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
a hall in angelo's house

enter angelo, escalus, a justice, provost, officers, and other
attendants

  angelo. we must not make a scarecrow of the law,
    setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
    and let it keep one shape till custom make it
    their perch, and not their terror.
  escalus. ay, but yet
    let us be keen, and rather cut a little
    than fall and bruise to death. alas! this gentleman,
    whom i would save, had a most noble father.
    let but your honour know,
    whom i believe to be most strait in virtue,
    that, in the w
 
 ___________________________
 
   that thieves do pass on thieves? 'tis very pregnant,
    the jewel that we find, we stoop and take't,
    because we see it; but what we do not see
    we tread upon, and never think of it.
    you may not so extenuate his offence
    for i have had such faults; but rather tell me,
    when i, that censure him, do so offend,
    let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
    and nothing come in partial. sir, he must die.
  escalus. be it as your wisdom will.
  angelo. where is the provost?
  provost. here, if it like your honour.
  angelo. see that claudio
    be executed by nine to-morrow morning;
    bring him his confessor; let him be prepar'd;
    for that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.        exit provost
  escalus. [aside] well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    and some condemned for a fault alone.

         enter elbow and officers with froth and pompey
 
 ___________________________
 
even, sir.
  escalus. i pray you home to dinner with me.
  justice. i humbly thank you.
  escalus. it grieves me for the death of claudio;
    but there's no remedy.
  justice. lord angelo is severe.
  escalus. it is but needful:
    mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
    but yet, poor claudio! there is no remedy.
    come, sir.                                            exeunt




scene ii.
another room in angelo's house

enter provost and a servant

  servant. he's hearing of a cause; he will come straight.
    i'll tell him of you.
  provost. pray you do. [exit servant] i'll know
    his pleasure; may be he will relent. alas,
    he hath but as offended in a dream!
    all sects, all ages, smack of this vice; and he
    to die for 't!

                            enter angelo

  angelo. now, what's the matter, provost?
  provost. is it your will claudio shall die to-morrow?
  angelo. did not i tell thee yea? h
 
 ___________________________
 
adst thou not order?
    why dost thou ask again?
  provost. lest i might be too rash;
    under your good correction, i have seen
    when, after execution, judgment hath
    repented o'er his doom.
  angelo. go to; let that be mine.
    do you your office, or give up your place,
    and you shall well be spar'd.
  provost. i crave your honour's pardon.
    what shall be done, sir, with the groaning juliet?
    she's very near her hour.
  angelo. dispose of her
    to some more fitter place, and that with speed.

                           re-enter servant

  servant. here is the sister of the man condemn'd
    desires access to you.
  angelo. hath he a sister?
  provost. ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
    and to be shortly of a sisterhood,
    if not already.
  angelo. well, let her be adm
 
 ___________________________
 
itted.                exit servant
    see you the fornicatress be remov'd;
    let her have needful but not lavish means;
    there shall be order for't.

                         enter lucio and isabella

  provost. [going] save your honour!
  angelo. stay a little while. [to isabella] y'are welcome;
what's
    your will?
  isabella. i am a woeful suitor to your honour,
    please but your honour hear me.
  angelo. well; what's your suit?
  isabella. there is a vice that most i do abhor,
    and most desire should meet the blow of justice;
    for which i would not plead, but that i must;
    for which i must not plead, but that i am
    at war 'twixt will and will not.
  angelo. well; the mat
 
 ___________________________
 
ter?
  isabella. i have a brother is condemn'd to die;
    i do beseech you, let it be his fault,
    and not my brother.
  provost. [aside] heaven give thee moving graces.
  angelo. condemn the fault and not the actor of it!
    why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done;
    mine were the very cipher of a function,
    to fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
    and let go by the actor.
  isabella. o just but severe law!
    i had a brother, then. heaven keep your honour!
  lucio. [to isabella] give't not o'er so; to him again, entreat
him,
    kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
    you are too
 
 ___________________________
 
hy sharp and sulphurous bolt,
    splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
    than the soft myrtle. but man, proud man,
    dress'd in a little brief authority,
    most ignorant of what he's most assur'd,
    his glassy essence, like an angry ape,
    plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
    as makes the angels weep; who, with our speens,
    would all themselves laugh mortal.
  lucio. [to isabella] o, to him, to him, wench! he will relent;
    he's coming; i perceive 't.
  provost. [aside] pray heaven she win him.
  isabella. we cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
    great men may jest with saints: 'tis wit in them;
    but in the less foul profanation.
  lucio. [to isabella] thou'rt i' th' right, girl; more o' that.
  isabella. that in the captain's but a choleric word
    which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
  lucio. [to isabella] art avis'd o' that? more on't.
  angelo. why do you put these sayings upon me?
  isabella. because authority, though it err 
 
 ___________________________
 
s't i dream on?
    o cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
    with saints dost bait thy hook! most dangerous
    is that temptation that doth goad us on
    to sin in loving virtue. never could the strumpet,
    with all her double vigour, art and nature,
    once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
    subdues me quite. ever till now,
    when men were fond, i smil'd and wond'red how.          exit




scene iii.
a prison

enter, severally, duke, disguised as a friar, and provost

  duke. hail to you, provost! so i think you are.
  provost. i am the provost. what's your will, good friar?
  duke. bound by my charity and my blest order,
    i come to visit the afflicted spirits
    here in the prison. do me the common right
    to let me see them, and to make me know
    the nature of their crimes, that i may minister
    to them accordingly.
  provost. i would do more than that, if more were needful.

                          enter juliet

    look, here c
 
 ___________________________
 
omes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
    who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
    hath blister'd her report. she is with child;
    and he that got it, sentenc'd- a young man
    more fit to do another such offence
    than die for this.
  duke. when must he die?
  provost. as i do think, to-morrow.
    [to juliet] i have provided for you; stay awhile
    and you shall be conducted.
  duke. repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
  juliet. i do; and bear the shame most patiently.
  duke. i'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
    and try your penitence, if it be sound
    or hollowly put on.
  juliet. i'll gladly learn.
  duke. love you the man that wrong'd you?
  juliet. yes, as i love the woman that wrong'd him.
  duke. so then, it
 
 ___________________________
 
rd ourselves, not heaven,
    showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
    but as we stand in fear-
  juliet. i do repent me as it is an evil,
    and take the shame with joy.
  duke. there rest.
    your partner, as i hear, must die to-morrow,
    and i am going with instruction to him.
    grace go with you! benedicite!                          exit
  juliet. must die to-morrow! o, injurious law,
    that respites me a life whose very comfort
    is still a dying horror!
  provost. 'tis pity of him.                              exeunt




scene iv.
angelo's house

enter angelo

  angelo. when i would pray and think, i think and pray
    to several subjects. heaven hath my empty words,
    whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
    anchors on isabel. heaven in my mouth,
    as if i did but only chew his name,
    and in my heart the strong and swelling evil
    of my conception. the state whereon i studied
    is, like a good thing being often read,
 
 ___________________________
 
993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
the prison

enter duke, disguised as before, claudio, and provost

  duke. so, then you hope of pardon from lord angelo?
  claudio. the miserable have no other medicine
    but only hope:
    i have hope to eve, and am prepar'd to die.
  duke. be absolute for death; either death or life
    shall thereby be the sweeter. reason thus with life.
    if i do lose thee, i do lose a thing
    that none but fools would keep. a breath thou art,
    servile to all the skyey influences,
    that dost this habitation where thou keep'st
    hourly afflict. me
 
 ___________________________
 
 of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
    thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
    to make thy riches pleasant. what's yet in this
    that bears the name of life? yet in this life
    lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
    that makes these odds all even.
  claudio. i humbly thank you.
    to sue to live, i find i seek to die;
    and, seeking death, find life. let it come on.
  isabella. [within] what, ho! peace here; grace and good
company!
  provost. who's there? come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  duke. dear sir, ere long i'll visit you again.
  claudio. most holy sir, i thank you.

                        enter isabella

  isabella. my business is a word or two with claudio.
  provost. and very welcome. look, signior, here's your sister.
  duke. provost, a word with you.
  provost. as many as you please.
  duke. bring me to hear them speak, where i may be conceal'd.
                                         exeunt duke and 
 
 ___________________________
 
provost
  claudio. now, sister, what's the comfort?
  isabella. why,
    as all comforts are; most good, most good, indeed.
    lord angelo, having affairs to heaven,
    intends you for his swift ambassador,
    where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
    therefore, your best appointment make with speed;
    to-morrow you set on.
  claudio. is there no remedy?
  isabella. none, but such remedy as, to save a head,
    to cleave a heart in twain.
  claudio. but is there any?
  isabella. y
 
 ___________________________
 
aving the truth of honour in
her,
    hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to
    receive. i am confessor to angelo, and i know this to be
true;
    therefore prepare yourself to death. do not satisfy your
    resolution with hopes that are fallible; to-morrow you must
die;
    go to your knees and make ready.
  claudio. let me ask my sister pardon. i am so out of love with
life
    that i will sue to be rid of it.
  duke. hold you there. farewell. [exit claudio] provost, a word
with
    you.

                          re-enter provost

  provost. what's your will, father?
  duke. that, now you are come, you will be gone. leave me a
while
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall
touch
    her by my company.
  provost. in good time.                            exit provost
  duke. the hand that hath made you fair hath made you good; the
    goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in
goodness;
    but grace, being
 
 ___________________________
 
hee again, would eat mutton on fridays. he's
not
    past it yet; and, i say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. say that i said so.
    farewell.                                               exit
  duke. no might nor greatness in mortality
    can censure scape; back-wounding calumny
    the whitest virtue strikes. what king so strong
    can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
    but who comes here?

             enter escalus, provost, and officers with
                           mistress overdone

  escalus. go, away with her to prison.
  mrs. overdone. good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  escalus. double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! this would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
  provost. a bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your
    honour.
  mrs. overdone. my lord, this is one lucio's information against
me
 
 ___________________________
 
.
    mistress kate keepdown was with child by him in the duke's
time;
    he promis'd her marriage. his child is a year and a quarter
old
    come philip and jacob; i have kept it myself; and see how he
goes
    about to abuse me.
  escalus. that fellow is a fellow of much license. let him be
call'd
    before us. away with her to prison. go to; no more words.
[exeunt
    officers with mistress overdone]  provost, my brother angelo
will
    not be alter'd: claudio must die to-morrow. let him be
furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. if my
brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  provost. so please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  escalus. good even, good father.
  duke. bliss and goodness on you!
  escalus. of whence are you?
  duke. not of this country, though my chance is now
    to 
 
 ___________________________
 
y debt of your calling. i have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my
brother
    justice have i found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell
him
    he is indeed justice.
  duke. if his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding,
it
    shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath
    sentenc'd himself.
  escalus. i am going to visit the prisoner. fare you well.
  duke. peace be with you!            exeunt escalus and provost

         he who the sword of heaven will bear
         should be as holy as severe;
         pattern in himself to know,
         grace to stand, and virtue go;
         more nor less to others paying
         than by self-offences weighing.
         shame to him whose cruel striking
         kills for faults of his own liking!
         twice treble shame on angelo,
         to weed my vice and let his grow!
         o, what may man within him hide,
         though angel on the ou
 
 ___________________________
 
entreaty too.
  isabella. little have you to say,
    when you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'remember now my brother.'
  mariana. fear me not.
  duke. nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
    he is your husband on a pre-contract.
    to bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    sith that the justice of your title to him
    doth flourish the deceit. come, let us go;
    our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       exeunt




scene ii.
the prison

enter provost and pompey

  provost. come hither, sirrah. can you cut off a man's head?
  pompey. if the man be a bachelor, sir, i can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and i can never cut of a
    woman's head.
  provost. come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a
direct
    answer. to-morrow morning are to die claudio and barnardine.
here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office
lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall
 
 ___________________________
 

redeem
    you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping,
for
    you have been a notorious bawd.
  pompey. sir, i have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but
yet
    i will be content to be a lawful hangman. i would be glad to
    receive some instructions from my fellow partner.
  provost. what ho, abhorson! where's abhorson there?

                          enter abhorson

  abhorson. do you call, sir?
  provost. sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in
your
    execution. if you think it meet, compound with him by the
year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the
present,
    and dismiss him. he cannot plead his estimation with you; he
hath
    been a bawd.
  abhorson. a bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our
mystery.
  pr
 
 ___________________________
 
, using painting,
do
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should
be
    in hanging, if i should be hang'd, i cannot imagine.
  abhorson. sir, it is a mystery.
  pompey. proof?
  abhorson. every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be
too
    little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if
it
    be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little
enough; so
    every true man's apparel fits your thief.

                          re-enter provost

  provost. are you agreed?
  pompey. sir, i will serve him; for i do find your hangman is a
more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask
forgiveness.
  provost. you, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
  abhorson. come on, bawd; i will instruct thee in my trade;
follow.
  pompey. i do desire to learn, sir; and i hope, if you have
occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for
truly,
    sir, for your kindness 
 
 ___________________________
 
i owe you a good turn.
  provost. call hither barnardine and claudio.
                                      exeunt abhorson and pompey
    th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    being a murderer, though he were my brother.

                           enter claudio

    look, here's the warrant, claudio, for thy death;
    'tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    thou must be made immortal. where's barnardine?
  claudio. as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
    when it lies starkly in the t
 
 ___________________________
 
raveller's bones.
    he will not wake.
  provost. who can do good on him?
    well, go, prepare yourself. [knocking within] but hark, what
      noise?
    heaven give your spirits comfort!               exit claudio
    [knocking continues] by and by.
    i hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    for the most gentle claudio.

                 enter duke, disguised as before

    welcome, father.
  duke. the best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
    envelop you, good provost! who call'd here of late?
  provost. none, since the curfew rung.
  duke. not isabel?
  provost. no.
  duke. they will then, ere't be long.
  provost. what comfort is for claudio?
  duke. there's some in hope.
  provost. it is a bitter deputy.
  duke. not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
    even with the stroke and line of his great justice;
    he doth with holy abstinence subdue
    that in himself which he spurs on his pow'r
    to qualify in others. were he meal'd with that

 
 ___________________________
 
    which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
    but this being so, he's just. [knocking within] now are they
      come.                                         exit provost
    this is a gentle provost; seldom when
    the steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [knocking within]
    how now, what noise! that spirit's possess'd with haste
    that wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.

                        re-enter provost

  provost. there he must stay until the officer
    arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  duke. have you no countermand for claudio yet
    but he must die to-morrow?
  provost. none, sir, none.
  duke. as near the dawning, provost, as it is,
    you shall hear more ere morning.
  provost. happily
    you something know; yet i believe there comes
    no countermand; no such example have we.
    besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    lord angelo hath to the public ear
    profess'd the
 
 ___________________________
 
 contrary.

                         enter a messenger
    this is his lordship's man.
  duke. and here comes claudio's pardon.
  messenger. my lord hath sent you this note; and by me this
further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. good morrow;
for
    as i take it, it is almost day.
  provost. i shall obey him.                      exit messenger
  duke. [aside] this is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin
    for which the pardoner himself is in;
    hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    when it is borne in high authority.
    when vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
    that for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
    now, sir, what news?
  provost. i told you: lord angelo, belike thinking me remiss in
mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on;
 
 ___________________________
 
 methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  duke. pray you, let's hear.
  provost. [reads] 'whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the
afternoon,
    barnardine. for my better satisfaction, let me have claudio's
    head sent me by five. let this be duly performed, with a
thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. thus fail
not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
    what say you to this, sir?
  duke. what is that barnardine who is to be executed in th'
    afte
 
 ___________________________
 
rnoon?
  provost. a bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
    one that is a prisoner nine years old.
  duke. how came it that the absent duke had not either deliver'd
him
    to his liberty or executed him? i have heard it was ever his
    manner to do so.
  provost. his friends still wrought reprieves for him; and,
indeed,
    his fact, till now in the government of lord angelo, came not
to
    an undoubted proof.
  duke. it is now apparent?
  provost. most manifest, and not denied by himself.
  duke. hath he borne himself penitently in prison? how seems he
to
    be touch'd?
  provost. a man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as
a
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's
past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
  duke. he wants advice.
  provost. he will hear none. he hath evermore had the liberty of
the
    prison; give him leave to escape hence, he woul
 
 ___________________________
 
d not; drunk
many
    times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. we have very
oft
    awak'd him, as if to carry him to execution, and show'd him a
    seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.
  duke. more of him anon. there is written in your brow, provost,
    honesty and constancy. if i read it not truly, my ancient
skill
    beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning i will lay
myself
    in hazard. claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is
no
    greater forfeit to the law than angelo who hath sentenc'd
him. to
    make you understand this in a manifested effect, i crave but
four
    days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present
and
    a dangerous courtesy.
  provost. pray, sir, in what?
  duke. in 
 
 ___________________________
 
the delaying death.
  provost. alack! how may i do it, having the hour limited, and
an
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the
view
    of angelo? i may make my case as claudio's, to cross this in
the
    smallest.
  duke. by the vow of mine order, i warrant you, if my
instructions
    may be your guide. let this barnardine be this morning
executed,
    and his head borne to angelo.
  provost. angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the
favour.
  duke. o, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it.
shave
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death. you know the course
is
    common. if anything fall to you upon this more than thanks
and
    good fortune, by the saint whom i profess, i will plead
against
    it with my life.
  provost. pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
  duke. were
 
 ___________________________
 
 you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?
  provost. to him and to his substitutes.
  duke. you will think you have made no offence if the duke
avouch
    the justice of your dealing?
  provost. but what likelihood is in that?
  duke. not a resemblance, but a certainty. yet since i see you
    fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can
    with ease attempt you, i will go further than i meant, to
pluck
    all fears out of you. look you, sir, here is the hand and
seal of
    the duke. you know the character, i doubt not; and the signet
is
    not strange to you.
  provost. i know them both.
  duke. the contents of this is the return of the duke; you shall
 
 ___________________________
 
erefore i beseech you
    look forward on the journey you shall go.
  barnardine. i swear i will not die to-day for any man's
persuasion.
  duke. but hear you-
  barnardine. not a word; if you have anything to say to me, come
to
    my ward; for thence will not i to-day.                  exit
  duke. unfit to live or die. o gravel heart!
    after him, fellows; bring him to the block.
                                      exeunt abhorson and pompey

                            enter provost

  provost. now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  duke. a creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    and to transport him in the mind he is
    were damnable.
  provost. here in the prison, father,
    there died this morning of a cruel fever
    one ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
    a man of claudio's years; his beard and head
    just of his colour. what if we do omit
    this reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    and satisfy the deputy with the visage
    of ragozin
 
 ___________________________
 
e, more like to claudio?
  duke. o, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
    dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
    prefix'd by angelo. see this be done,
    and sent according to command; whiles i
    persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
  provost. this shall be done, good father, presently.
    but barnardine must die this afternoon;
    and how shall we continue claudio,
    to save me from the danger that might come
    if he were known alive?
  duke. let this be done:
    put them in secret holds, both barnardine and claudio.
    ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
    to the under generation, you shall find
    your safety manifested.
  provost. i am your free dependant.
  duke. quick, dispatch, and send the 
 
 ___________________________
 
head to angelo.
                                                    exit provost
    now will i write letters to angelo-
    the provost, he shall bear them- whose contents
    shall witness to him i am near at home,
    and that, by great injunctions, i am bound
    to enter publicly. him i'll desire
    to meet me at the consecrated fount,
    a league below the city; and from thence,
    by cold gradation and well-balanc'd form.
    we shall proceed with angelo.

                         re-enter provost

  provost. here is the head; i'll carry it myself.
  duke. convenient is it. make a swift return;
    for i w
 
 ___________________________
 
ould commune with you of such things
    that want no ear but yours.
  provost. i'll make all speed.                             exit
  isabella. [ within ] peace, ho, be here!
  duke. the tongue of isabel. she's come to know
    if yet her brother's pardon be come hither;
    but i will keep her ignorant of her good,
    to make her heavenly comforts of despair
    when it is least expected.

                           enter isabella

  isabella. ho, by your leave!
  duke. good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
  isabella. the better, given me by so
 
 ___________________________
 
use to-night. her cause and yours
    i'll perfect him withal; and he shall bring you
    before the duke; and to the head of angelo
    accuse him home and home. for my poor self,
    i am combined by a sacred vow,
    and shall be absent. wend you with this letter.
    command these fretting waters from your eyes
    with a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    if i pervert your course. who's here?

                           enter lucio

  lucio. good even. friar, where's the provost?
  duke. not within, sir.
  lucio. o pretty isabella, i am pale at mine heart to see thine
eyes
    so red. thou must be patient. i am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; i dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't. but they say the duke will
be
    here to-morrow. by my troth, isabel, i lov'd thy brother. if
the
    old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home, he had

    lived.                                         exit isabe
 
 ___________________________
 
d have liv'd,
    save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
    might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
    by so receiving a dishonour'd life
    with ransom of such shame. would yet he had liv'd!
    alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
    nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.         exit




scene v.
fields without the town

enter duke in his own habit, and friar peter

  duke. these letters at fit time deliver me.   [giving letters]
    the provost knows our purpose and our plot.
    the matter being afoot, keep your instruction
    and hold you ever to our special drift;
    though sometimes you do blench from this to that
    as cause doth minister. go, call at flavius' house,
    and tell him where i stay; give the like notice
    to valentinus, rowland, and to crassus,
    and bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
    but send me flavius first.
    peter. it shall be speeded well.                  exit friar

           
 
 ___________________________
 
, and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
the city gate

enter at several doors duke, varrius, lords; angelo, escalus,
lucio,
provost, officers, and citizens

  duke. my very worthy cousin, fairly met!
    our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
  angelo, escalus. happy return be to your royal grace!
  duke. many and hearty thankings to you both.
    we have made inquiry of you, and we hear
    such goodness of your justice that our soul
    cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
    forerunning more requital.
  angelo. you make my bonds still greater.
  duke. o, your desert speaks loud; and i sh
 
 ___________________________
 
compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
    though they would swear down each particular saint,
    were testimonies against his worth and credit,
    that's seal'd in approbation? you, lord escalus,
    sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
    to find out this abuse, whence 'tis deriv'd.
    there is another friar that set them on;
    let him be sent for.
  peter. would lie were here, my lord! for he indeed
    hath set the women on to this complaint.
    your provost knows the place where he abides,
    and he may fetch him.
  duke. go, do it instantly.                        exit provost
    and you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
    whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
    do with your injuries as seems you best
    in any chastisement. i for a while will leave you;
    but stir not you till you have well determin'd
    upon these slanderers.
  escalus. my lord, we'll do it throughly.             exit duke
    signior lucio, did not
 
 ___________________________
 
a notable
    fellow.
  lucio. as any in vienna, on my word.
  escalus. call that same isabel here once again; i would speak
with
    her. [exit an attendant] pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how i'll handle her.
  lucio. not better than he, by her own report.
  escalus. say you?
  lucio. marry, sir, i think, if you handled her privately, she
would
    sooner confess; perchance, publicly, she'll be asham'd.

       re-enter officers with isabella; and provost with the
                    duke in his friar's habit

  escalus. i will go darkly to work with her.
  lucio. that's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  escalus. come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all
that
    you have said.
  lucio. my lord, here comes the rascal i spoke of, here with the

    provost.
  escalus. in very good time. speak not you to him till we call
upon
    you.
  lucio. mum.
  escalus. come, sir; did you set these women on to slander lord

 
 ___________________________
 
 as you then reported him to be?
  duke. you must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that
my
    report; you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much
worse.
  lucio. o thou damnable fellow! did not i pluck thee by the nose
for
    thy speeches?
  duke. i protest i love the duke as i love myself.
  angelo. hark how the villain would close now, after his
treasonable
    abuses!
  escalus. such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal. away with
him to
    prison! where is the provost? away with him to prison! lay
bolts
    enough upon him; let him speak no more. away with those
giglets
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
                            [the provost lays bands on the duke]
  duke. stay, sir; stay awhile.
  angelo. what, resists he? help him, lucio.
  lucio. come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! why, you
    bald-pated lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? show
your
    knave's visage, with a pox to you! show your sheep-biting
 
 ___________________________
 

face,
    and be hang'd an hour! will't not off?
             [pulls off the friar's bood and discovers the duke]
  duke. thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.
    first, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
    [to lucio] sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    must have a word anon. lay hold on him.
  lucio. this may prove worse than hanging.
  duke. [to escalus] what you have spoke i pardon; sit you down.
    we'll borrow place of him. [to angelo] sir, by your leave.
    hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
    that yet can do thee office? if thou hast,
    rely upon it till my tale be heard,
    and hold no longer out.
  angelo. o my dread l
 
 ___________________________
 
ur grace, like pow'r divine,
    hath look'd upon my passes. then, good prince,
    no longer session hold upon my shame,
    but let my trial be mine own confession;
    immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    is all the grace i beg.
  duke. come hither, mariana.
    say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
  angelo. i was, my lord.
  duke. go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
    do you the office, friar; which consummate,
    return him here again. go with him, provost.
                exeunt angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost
  escalus. my lord, i am more amaz'd at his dishonour
    than at the strangeness of it.
  duke. come hither, isabel.
    your friar is now your prince. as i was then
    advertising and holy to your business,
    not changing heart with habit, i am still
    attorney'd at your service.
  isabella. o, give me pardon,
    that i, your vassal have employ'd and pain'd
    your unknown sovereignty.
  duke. you are pardon'
 
 ___________________________
 
 save his life, and would not rather
    make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r
    than let him so be lost. o most kind maid,
    it was the swift celerity of his death,
    which i did think with slower foot came on,
    that brain'd my purpose. but peace be with him!
    that life is better life, past fearing death,
    than that which lives to fear. make it your comfort,
    so happy is your brother.
  isabella. i do, my lord.

       re-enter angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost

  duke. for this new-married man approaching here,
    whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
    your well-defended honour, you must pardon
    for mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    being criminal in double violation
    of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
    thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    the very mercy of the law cries out
    most audible, even from his proper tongue,
    'an angelo for claudio, death for death!'
    haste still pays 
 
 ___________________________
 
ue sincerity govern'd his deeds
    till he did look on me; since it is so,
    let him not die. my brother had but justice,
    in that he did the thing for which he died;
    for angelo,
    his act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
    and must be buried but as an intent
    that perish'd by the way. thoughts are no subjects;
    intents but merely thoughts.
  mariana. merely, my lord.
  duke. your suit's unprofitable; stand up, i say.
    i have bethought me of another fault.
    provost, how came it claudio was beheaded
    at an unusual hour?
  provost. it was commanded so.
  duke. had you a special warrant for the deed?
  provost. no, my good lord; it was by private message.
  duke. for which i do discharge you of your office;
    give up your keys.
  provost. pardon me, noble lord;
    i thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    yet did repent me, after more advice;
    for testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    that should by private order else have died,
 
 ___________________________
 

    i have reserv'd alive.
  duke. what's he?
  provost. his name is barnardine.
  duke. i would thou hadst done so by claudio.
    go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      exit provost
  escalus. i am sorry one so learned and so wise
    as you, lord angelo, have still appear'd,
    should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    and lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
  angelo. i am sorry that such sorrow i procure;
    and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    that i crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'tis my deserving, and i do entreat it.

       re-enter provost, with barnardine, claudio (muffled)
                            and juliet

 
 
 ___________________________
 
 duke. which is that barnardine?
  provost. this, my lord.
  duke. there was a friar told me of this man.
    sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul,
    that apprehends no further than this world,
    and squar'st thy life according. thou'rt condemn'd;
    but, for those earthly faults, i quit them all,
    and pray thee take this mercy to provide
    for better times to come. friar, advise him;
    i leave him to your hand. what muffl'd fellow's that?
  provost. this is another prisoner that i sav'd,
    who should have died when claudio lost his head;
    as like almost to claudio as himself.    [unmuffles claudio]
  duke. [to isabella] if he be like your brother, for his sake
    is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    he is my brother too. but fitter time for that.
    by this lord angelo perceives he's safe;
    methinks i see a quick'ning in his eye.
    well, angelo, your evil quits 
 
 ___________________________
 
ours.
    i find an apt remission in myself;
    and yet here's one in place i cannot pardon.
    to lucio] you, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
    one all of luxury, an ass, a madman!
    wherein have i so deserv'd of you
    that you extol me thus?
  lucio. faith, my lord, i spoke it but according to the trick.
    if you will hang me for it, you may; but i had rather it
would
    please you i might be whipt.
  duke. whipt first, sir, and hang'd after.
    proclaim it, provost, round about the city,
    if any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow-
    as i have heard him swear himself there's one
    whom he begot with child, let her appear,
    and he shall marry her. the nuptial finish'd,
    let him be whipt and hang'd.
  lucio. i beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.
your
    highness said even now i made you a duke; good my lord, do
not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
  duke. upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
    thy slander
 
 ___________________________
 
nd see our pleasure herein executed.
  lucio. marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping,
    and hanging.
  duke. slandering a prince deserves it.
                                      exeunt officers with lucio
    she, claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo;
    i have confess'd her, and i know her virtue.
    thanks, good friend escalus, for thy much goodness;
    there's more behind that is more gratulate.
    thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    we shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    forgive him, angelo, that brought you home
    the head of ragozine for claudio's:
    th' offence pardons itself. dear isabel,
    i have a motion much imports your good;
    whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
    what's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
    so, bring us to our palace, where we'll show
    what's yet behind that's meet you all should know.
                                      