measure for measure

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lords, officers, citizens, boy, and attendants




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
sh
 
 ___________________________
 
akespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



scene:
vienna


act i. scene i.
the duke's palace

enter duke, escalus, lords, and attendants

  duke. escalus!
  escalus. my lord.
  duke. of government the properties to unfold
    would seem in me t' affect speech and discourse,
    since i am put to know that your own science
    exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
    my strength can give you; then no more remains
    but that to your sufficiency- as your worth is able-
    and let them work. the nature of our people,
    our city's institutions, and the terms
 
 ___________________________
 
   i say, bid come before us, angelo.         exit an attendant
    what figure of us think you he will bear?
    for you must know we have with special soul
    elected him our absence to supply;
    lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
    and given his deputation all the organs
    of our own power. what think you of it?
  escalus. if any in vienna be of worth
    to undergo such ample grace and honour,
    it is lord angelo.

                          enter angelo

  duke. look where he comes.
  angelo. always obedient to your grace's will,
    i come to know your pleasure.
  duke. angelo,
    there is a kind of character in thy life
    that to th' observer doth thy history
    fully unfold. thyself and thy belongings
    are not thine own so proper as to waste
    thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
    heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
    not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
    did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
 
 
 ___________________________
 
ory of a creditor,
    both thanks and use. but i do bend my speech
    to one that can my part in him advertise.
    hold, therefore, angelo-
    in our remove be thou at full ourself;
    mortality and mercy in vienna
    live in thy tongue and heart. old escalus,
    though first in question, is thy secondary.
    take thy commission.
  angelo. now, good my lord,
    let there be some more test made of my metal,
    before so noble and so great a figure
    be stamp'd upon it.
  duke. no more evasion!
    we have with a leaven'd and prepared choice
    proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
    our haste from hence is of so quick condition
    that it prefers itself, and leaves unquestion'd
    matters of needful value. we shall write to you,
    as time and our concernings shall importune,
    how it goes with us, and do look to know
    what doth befall you here. so, fare you well.
    to th' hopeful execution do i leave you
    of your commissions.
  a
 
 ___________________________
 
ngelo. yet give leave, my lord,
    that we may bring you something on the way.
  duke. my haste may not admit it;
    nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
    with any scruple: your scope is as mine own,
    so to enforce or qualify the laws
    as to your soul seems good. give me your hand;
    i'll privily away. i love the people,
    but do not like to stage me to their eyes;
    though it do well, i do not relish well
    their loud applause and aves vehement;
    nor do i think the man of safe discretion
    that does affect it. once more, fare you well.
  an
 
 ___________________________
 
gelo. the heavens give safety to your purposes!
  escalus. lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
  duke. i thank you. fare you well.                         exit
  escalus. i shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
    to have free speech with you; and it concerns me
    to look into the bottom of my place:
    a pow'r i have, but of what strength and nature
    i am not yet instructed.
  angelo. 'tis so with me. let us withdraw together,
    and we may soon our satisfaction have
    touching that point.
  escalus. i'll wait upon your honour.                    exeunt




scene ii.
 
 ___________________________
 

a street

enter lucio and two other gentlemen

  lucio. if the duke, with the other dukes, come not to
composition
    with the king of hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon
the
    king.
  first gentleman. heaven grant us its peace, but not the king of
    hungary's!
  second gentleman. amen.
  lucio. thou conclud'st like the sanctimonious pirate that went
to
    sea with the ten commandments, but scrap'd one out of the
table.
  second gentleman. 'thou shalt not steal'?
  lucio. ay, that he raz'd.
  first gentleman. why, 'twas a commandment to command the
captain
    and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to
steal.
    the
 
 ___________________________
 
 lady; she is fast my wife,
    save that we do the denunciation lack
    of outward order; this we came not to,
    only for propagation of a dow'r
    remaining in the coffer of her friends.
    from whom we thought it meet to hide our love
    till time had made them for us. but it chances
    the stealth of our most mutual entertainment,
    with character too gross, is writ on juliet.
  lucio. with child, perhaps?
  claudio. unhappily, even so.
    and the new deputy now for the duke-
    whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
    or whether that the body public be
    a horse whereon the governor doth ride,
    who, newly in the seat, that it may know
    he can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
    whether the tyranny be in his place,
    or in his eminence that fills it up,
    i stagger in. but this new governor
    awakes me all the enrolled penalties
    which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by th' wall
    so long that nineteen zodiacs ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve gone round
    and none of them been worn; and, for a name,
    now puts the drowsy and neglected act
    freshly on me. 'tis surely for a name.
  lucio. i warrant it is; and thy head stands so tickle on thy
    shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it
off.
    send after the duke, and appeal to him.
  claudio. i have done so, but he's not to be found.
    i prithee, lucio, do me this kind service:
    this day my sister should the cloister enter,
    and there receive her approbation;
    acquaint her with the danger of my state;
    implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
    to the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
    i have great hope in that; for in her youth
    there is a prone and speechless dialect
    such as move men; beside, she hath pr
 
 ___________________________
 
play with reason and discourse,
    and well she can persuade.
  lucio. i pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the
like,
    which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the
    enjoying of thy life, who i would be sorry should be thus
    foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. i'll to her.
  claudio. i thank you, good friend lucio.
  lucio. within two hours.
  claudio. come, officer, away.                           exeunt




scene iii.
a monastery

enter duke and friar thomas

  duke. no, holy father; throw away that thought;
    believe not that the dribbling dart of love
    can pierce a complete bosom. why i desire thee
    to give me secret harbour hath a purpose
    more grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
    of burning youth.
  friar. may your grace speak of it?
  duke. my holy sir, none better knows than you
    how i have ever lov'd the life removed,
    and held in idle price to haunt assemblies
    where youth, and cost,
 
 ___________________________
 
 a witless bravery keeps.
    i have deliver'd to lord angelo,
    a man of stricture and firm abstinence,
    my absolute power and place here in vienna,
    and he supposes me travell'd to poland;
    for so i have strew'd it in the common ear,
    and so it is received. now, pious sir,
    you will demand of me why i do this.
  friar. gladly, my lord.
  duke. we have strict statutes and most biting laws,
    the needful bits and curbs to headstrong steeds,
    which for this fourteen years we have let slip;
    even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave,
    that goes not out to prey. now, as fond fathers,
    having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch,
    only to stick it in their children's sight
    for terror, not to use, in time the rod
    becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees,
    dead to infliction, to themselves are dead
 
 ___________________________
 
;
    and liberty plucks justice by the nose;
    the baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
    goes all decorum.
  friar. it rested in your grace
    to unloose this tied-up justice when you pleas'd;
    and it in you more dreadful would have seem'd
    than in lord angelo.
  duke. i do fear, too dreadful.
    sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
    'twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
    for what i bid them do; for we bid this be done,
    when evil deeds have their permissive pass
    and not the punishment. therefore, indeed, my father,
    i have on angelo impos'd the office;
    who may, in th' ambush of my name, strike home,
    and yet my nature never in the fight
    to do in slander. and to behold his sway,
    i will, as 'twere a b
 
 ___________________________
 
lover have embrac'd.
    as those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
    that from the seedness the bare fallow brings
    to teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
    expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
  isabella. some one with child by him? my cousin juliet?
  lucio. is she your cousin?
  isabella. adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
    by vain though apt affection.
  lucio. she it is.
  isabella. o, let him marry her!
  lucio. this is the point.
    the duke is very strangely gone from hence;
    bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
    in hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
    by those that know the very nerves of state,
    his givings-out were of an infinite distance
    from his true-meant design. upon his place,
    and with full line of his authority,
    governs lord angelo, a man whose blood
    is very snow-broth, one who never feels
    the wanton stings and motions of the sense,
    but doth rebate and blunt his natur
 
 ___________________________
 
e us all!
    some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    and some condemned for a fault alone.

         enter elbow and officers with froth and pompey

  elbow. come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common
houses,
    i know no law; bring them away.
  angelo. how now, sir! what's your name, and what's the matter?
  elbow. if it please your honour, i am the poor duke's
constable,
    and my name is elbow; i do lean upon justice, sir, and do
bring
    in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
  angelo. benefactors! well- what benefactors are they? are they
not
    malefactors?
  elbow. if it please your honour, i know not well what they are;
but
    precise villains they are, that i am sure of, and void of all
    profanation in the world that good christians ought to have.
  escalus. this comes off well; here's a wise officer.

 
 ___________________________
 
, thou liest; thou liest, wicket varlet; the time
is
    yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or
    child.
  pompey. sir, she was respected with him before he married with
her.
  escalus. which is the wiser here, justice or iniquity? is this
    true?
  elbow. o thou caitiff! o thou varlet! o thou wicked hannibal! i
    respected with her before i was married to her! if ever i was
    respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship
think me
    the poor duke's officer. prove this, thou wicked hannibal, or
    i'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee.
  escalus. if he took you a box o' th' ear, you might have your
    action of slander too.
  elbow. marry, i thank your good worship for it. what is't your
    worship's pleasure i shall do with this wicked caitiff?
  escalus. truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him
that
    thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in
his
    courses till thou know'st what they are
 
 ___________________________
 
 and feast upon her eyes? what is't i dream on?
    o cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
    with saints dost bait thy hook! most dangerous
    is that temptation that doth goad us on
    to sin in loving virtue. never could the strumpet,
    with all her double vigour, art and nature,
    once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
    subdues me quite. ever till now,
    when men were fond, i smil'd and wond'red how.          exit




scene iii.
a prison

enter, severally, duke, disguised as a friar, and provost

  duke. hail to you, provost! so i think you are.
  provost. i am the provost. what's your will, good friar?
  duke. bound by my charity and my blest order,
    i come to visit the afflicted spirits
    here in the prison. do me the common right
    to let me see them, and to make me know
    the nature of their crimes, that i may minister
    to them accordingly.
  provost. i would do more than that, if more were needful.

                       
 
 ___________________________
 
   enter juliet

    look, here comes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
    who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
    hath blister'd her report. she is with child;
    and he that got it, sentenc'd- a young man
    more fit to do another such offence
    than die for this.
  duke. when must he die?
  provost. as i do think, to-morrow.
    [to juliet] i have provided for you; stay awhile
    and you shall be conducted.
  duke. repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
  juliet. i do; and bear the shame most patiently.
  duke. i'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
    and try your penitence, if it be sound
    or hollowly put on.
  juliet. i'll gladly learn.
  duke. love you the man that wrong'd you?
  juliet. yes, as i love the woman that wrong'd him.
  duke. so then, it seems, your most offenceful act
    was mutually committed.
  juliet. mutually.
  duke. then was your sin of heavier k
 
 ___________________________
 
ind than his.
  juliet. i do confess it, and repent it, father.
  duke. 'tis meet so, daughter; but lest you do repent
    as that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
    which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven,
    showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
    but as we stand in fear-
  juliet. i do repent me as it is an evil,
    and take the shame with joy.
  duke. there rest.
    your partner, as i hear, must die to-morrow,
    and i am going with instruction to him.
    grace go with you! benedicite!                          exit
  juliet. must die to-morrow! o, injurious law,
    that respites me a life whose very comfort
    is still a dying horror!
  provost. 'tis pity of him.                              exeunt




scene iv.
angelo's house

enter angelo

  angelo. when i would pray and think, i think and pray
    to several subjec
 
 ___________________________
 
william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
the prison

enter duke, disguised as before, claudio, and provost

  duke. so, then you hope of pardon from lord angelo?
  claudio. the miserable have no other medicine
    but only hope:
    i have hope to eve, and am prepar'd to die.
  duke. be absolute for death; either death or life
    shall thereby be the sweeter. reason thus with life.
    if i do lose thee, i do lose a thing
    that none but fools would keep. a breath thou art,
    servile to all the skyey influences,
    that dost this habitation
 
 ___________________________
 
 neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
    to make thy riches pleasant. what's yet in this
    that bears the name of life? yet in this life
    lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
    that makes these odds all even.
  claudio. i humbly thank you.
    to sue to live, i find i seek to die;
    and, seeking death, find life. let it come on.
  isabella. [within] what, ho! peace here; grace and good
company!
  provost. who's there? come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  duke. dear sir, ere long i'll visit you again.
  claudio. most holy sir, i thank you.

                        enter isabella

  isabella. my business is a word or two with claudio.
  provost. and very welcome. look, signior, here's your sister.
  duke. provost, a word with you.
  provost. as many as you please.
  duke. bring me to hear them speak, where i may be conceal'd.
                                         exeunt duke and provost
  claudio. now, sister, what's the comfort?
  isab
 
 ___________________________
 
erness
    ne'er issu'd from his blood. take my defiance;
    die; perish. might but my bending down
    reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
    i'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
    no word to save thee.
  claudio. nay, hear me, isabel.
  isabella. o fie, fie, fie!
    thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
    mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd;
    'tis best that thou diest quickly.
  claudio. o, hear me, isabella.

                            re-enter duke

  duke. vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
  isabella. what is your will?
  duke. might you dispense with your leisure, i would by and by
have
    some speech with you; the satisfaction i would require is
    likewise your own benefit.
  isabella. i have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen
out
    of other affairs; but i will attend you awhile.
                                                   [walks apart]
  duke. son, i have overheard what hath pass'd betwe
 
 ___________________________
 
nt with the
    disposition of natures. she, having the truth of honour in
her,
    hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to
    receive. i am confessor to angelo, and i know this to be
true;
    therefore prepare yourself to death. do not satisfy your
    resolution with hopes that are fallible; to-morrow you must
die;
    go to your knees and make ready.
  claudio. let me ask my sister pardon. i am so out of love with
life
    that i will sue to be rid of it.
  duke. hold you there. farewell. [exit claudio] provost, a word
with
    you.

                          re-enter provost

  provost. what's your will, father?
  duke. that, now you are come, you will be gone. leave me a
while
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall
touch
    her by my company.
  provost. in good time.                            exit provost
  duke. the hand that hath made you fair hath made you good; the
    goodness that is cheap in beauty make
 
 ___________________________
 
grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the
body
    of it ever fair. the assault that angelo hath made to you,
    fortune hath convey'd to my understanding; and, but that
frailty
    hath examples for his falling, i should wonder at angelo. how
    will you do to content this substitute, and to save your
brother?
  isabella. i am now going to resolve him; i had rather my
brother
    die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. but, o,
how
    much is the good duke deceiv'd in angelo! if ever he return,
and
    i can speak to him, i will open my lips in vain, or discover
his
    government.
  duke. that shall not be much amiss; yet, as the matter now
stands,
    he will avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only.
    therefore fasten your ear on my advisings; to the love i have
in
    doing good a remedy presents itself. i do make myself believe
    that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a
merited
    benefit; redeem you
 
 ___________________________
 
r brother from the angry law; do no stain
to
    your own gracious person; and much please the absent duke, if
    peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this
    business.
  isabella. let me hear you speak farther; i have spirit to do
    anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
  duke. virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. have you not
    heard speak of mariana, the sister of frederick, the great
    soldier who miscarried at sea?
  isabella. i have heard of the lady, and good words went with
her
    name.
  duke. she should this angelo have married; was affianced to her
by
    oath, and the nuptial appointed; between which time of the
    contract and limit of the solemnity her brother frederick was
    wreck'd at sea, having in that perished vessel the dow
 
 ___________________________
 
ry of
his
    sister. but mark how heavily this befell to the poor
gentlewoman:
    there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love
toward
    her ever most kind and natural; with him the portion and
sinew of
    her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her combinate
    husband, this well-seeming angelo.
  isabella. can this be so? did angelo so leave her?
  duke. left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his
    comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her
discoveries
    of dishonour; in few, bestow'd her on her own lamentation,
which
    she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is
    washed with them, but relents not.
  isabella. what a merit were it in death to take this poor maid
from
    the world! what corruption in this life that it will let this
man
    live! but how out of this can she avail?

 
 ___________________________
 
  duke. it is a rupture that you may easily heal; and the cure of
it
    not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in
    doing it.
  isabella. show me how, good father.
  duke. this forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of
her
    first affection; his unjust unkindness, that in all reason
should
    have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the
current,
    made it more violent and unruly. go you to angelo; answer his
    requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands
to
    the point; only refer yourself to this advantage: first, that
    your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have
all
    shadow and silenc
 
 ___________________________
 
 it may
    compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is your
brother
    saved, your honour untainted, the poor mariana advantaged,
and
    the corrupt deputy scaled. the maid will i frame and make fit
for
    his attempt. if you think well to carry this as you may, the
    doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.
what
    think you of it?
  isabella. the image of it gives me content already; and i trust
it
    will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
  duke. it lies much in your holding up. haste you speedily to
    angelo; if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him
    promise of satisfaction. i will presently to saint luke's;
there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected mariana. at that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with angelo, that it may be
    quickly.
  isabella. i thank you for this comfort. fare you well, good
father.
                                                exeunt severally




scene ii.

 
 ___________________________
 
the street before the prison

enter, on one side, duke disguised as before; on the other,
elbow,
and officers with pompey

  elbow. nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
    world drink brown and white bastard.
  duke. o heavens! what stuff is here?
  pompey. 'twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too,
to
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for
the
    facing.
  elbow. come your way, sir. bless you, good father friar.
  duke. and you, good brother father. what offence hath this man
made
    you, sir?
  elbow. marry, sir, he ha
 
 ___________________________
 
th offended the law; and, sir, we take
him
    to be a thief too, sir, for we have found upon him, sir, a
    strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
  duke. fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!
    the evil that thou causest to be done,
    that is thy means to live. do thou but think
    what 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    from such a filthy vice; say to thyself
    'from their abominable and beastly touches
    i drink, i eat, array myself, and live.'
    canst thou believe thy living is a life,
    so stinkingly depending? go mend, go mend.
  pompey. indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    i would prove-
  
 
 ___________________________
 
duke. nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
    thou wilt prove his. take him to prison, officer;
    correction and instruction must both work
    ere this rude beast will profit.
  elbow. he must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning.
    the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a
whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his
errand.
  duke. that we were all, as some would seem to be,
    from our faults, as his faults from seeming, free.
  elbow. his neck will come to your waist- a cord, sir.

                          enter lucio

  pompey. i spy comfort; i cry bail. here's a gentleman, and a
friend
    of mine.
  lucio. how now, noble pompey! what, at the wheels of caesar?
art
    thou led in triumph? what, is there none of pygmalion's
images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    poc
 
 ___________________________
 
ket and extracting it clutch'd? what reply, ha? what
say'st
    thou to this tune, matter, and method? is't not drown'd i'
th'
    last rain, ha? what say'st thou, trot? is the world as it
was,
    man? which is the way? is it sad, and few words? or how? the
    trick of it?
  duke. still thus, and thus; still worse!
  lucio. how doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? procures she
still,
    ha?
  pompey. troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  lucio. why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so;
ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd
    consequence; it must be so. art going to prison, pompey?
  pompey. yes, faith, sir.
  lucio. why, 'tis not amiss, pompey. farewell; go, say i sent
thee
   
 
 ___________________________
 
y, 'tis his right. bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born. farewell, good pompey. commend me
to
    the prison, pompey. you will turn good husband now, pompey;
you
    will keep the house.
  pompey. i hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  lucio. no, indeed, will i not, pompey; it is not the wear. i
will
    pray, pompey, to increase your bondage. if you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. adieu trusty pompey.
    bless you, friar.
  duke. and you.
  lucio. does bridget paint still, pompey, ha?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  pompey. you will not bail me then, sir?
  lucio. then, pompey, nor now. what news abroad, friar? what
news?
  elbow. come your ways, sir; come.
  lucio. go to kennel, pompey, go.

                               exeunt elbow, pompey and officers

    what news, friar, of the duke?
  duke. i know none. can you tell me of any?
  lucio. some say he is with the emperor of russia; other some,

 
 ___________________________
 
he is
    in rome; but where is he, think you?
  duke. i know not where; but wheresoever, i wish him well.
  lucio. it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. lord angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  duke. he does well in't.
  lucio. a little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.
  duke. it is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
  lucio. yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it
is
    well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar,
till
    eating and drinking be put down. they say this angelo was not

    made by man and woman after this downright way of creation.
is it
    true, think you?
  duke. how should he be made, then?
  lucio. some report a sea-maid spawn'd him; some, that he was
begot
    between two stock-fishes. b
 
 ___________________________
 
ut it is certain that when he
makes
    water his urine is congeal'd ice; that i know to be true. and
he
    is a motion generative; that's infallible.
  duke. you are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
  lucio. why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the
rebellion
    of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! would the duke
that
    is absent have done this? ere he would have hang'd a man for
the
    getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the
nursing a
    thousand. he had some feeling of the sport; he knew the
service,
    and that instructed him to mercy.
  duke. i never heard the absent duke much detected for women; he
was
    not inclin'd that way.
  lucio. o, sir, you are deceiv'd.
  duke. 'tis not possible.
  lucio. who- not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and his
use
    was
 
 ___________________________
 
 to put a ducat in her clack-dish. the duke had crotchets
in
    him. he would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
  duke. you do him wrong, surely.
  lucio. sir, i was an inward of his. a shy fellow was the duke;
and
    i believe i know the cause of his withdrawing.
  duke. what, i prithee, might be the cause?
  lucio. no, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the
teeth
    and the lips; but this i can let you understand: the greater
file
    of the subject held the duke to be wise.
  duke. wise? why, no question but he was.
  lucio. a very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
  duke. either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking; the very
    stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must,
upon a
    warranted need, give him a better proclamation. let him be
but
    testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear
to
    the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. therefore
you
    speak unskilfully; or, if your 
 
 ___________________________
 
knowledge be more, it is much
    dark'ned in your malice.
  lucio. sir, i know him, and i love him.
  duke. love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with
dearer
    love.
  lucio. come, sir, i know what i know.
  duke. i can hardly believe that, since you know not what you
speak.
    but, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let
me
    desire you to make your answer before him. if it be honest
you
    have spoke, you have courage to maintain it; i am bound to
call
    upon you; and i pray you your name?
  lucio. sir, my name is lucio, well known to the duke.
  duke. he shall know you better, sir, if i may live to report
you.
  lucio. i fear you not.
  duke. o, you hope the duke will return no more; or you imagine
me
    too unhurtful an opposite. but, indeed, i can do
 
 ___________________________
 
 you little
harm:
    you'll forswear this again.
  lucio. i'll be hang'd first. thou art deceiv'd in me, friar.
but no
    more of this. canst thou tell if claudio die to-morrow or no?
  duke. why should he die, sir?
  lucio. why? for filling a bottle with a tun-dish. i would the
duke
    we talk of were return'd again. this ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not
build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. the duke yet
would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to

    light. would he were return'd! marry, this claudio is
condemned
    for untrussing. farewell, good friar; i prithee pray for me.
the
    duke, i say to thee again, would eat mutton on fridays. he's
not
    past it yet; and, i say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. say that i said so.
    farewell.                                               exit
  duke.
 
 ___________________________
 
erdone

  escalus. go, away with her to prison.
  mrs. overdone. good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  escalus. double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! this would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
  provost. a bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your
    honour.
  mrs. overdone. my lord, this is one lucio's information against
me.
    mistress kate keepdown was with child by him in the duke's
time;
    he promis'd her marriage. his child is a year and a quarter
old
    come philip and jacob; i have kept it myself; and see how he
goes
    about to abuse me.
  escalus. that fellow is a fellow of much license. let him be
call'd
    before us. away with her to prison. go to; no more words.
[exeunt
    officers with mistress overdone]  provost, my brother angelo
will
    not be alter'd: claudio must die to-morrow. let him be
furnish'd
    with divines, and have all chari
 
 ___________________________
 
table preparation. if my
brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  provost. so please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  escalus. good even, good father.
  duke. bliss and goodness on you!
  escalus. of whence are you?
  duke. not of this country, though my chance is now
    to use it for my time. i am a brother
    of gracious order, late come from the see
    in special business from his holiness.
  escalus. what news abroad i' th' world?
  duke. none, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that
the
    dissolution of it must cure it. novelty is only in request;
and,
    as it is, as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it
is
    virtuous to be constant in any undertakeing. there is sca
 
 ___________________________
 
rce
    truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security
enough
    to make fellowships accurst. much upon this riddle runs the
    wisdom of the world. this news is old enough, yet it is every
    day's news. i pray you, sir, of what disposition was the
duke?
  escalus. one that, above all other strifes, contended
especially to
    know himself.
  duke. what pleasure was he given to?
  escalus. rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    anything which profess'd to make him rejoice; a gentleman of
all
    temperance. but leave we him to his events, with a prayer
they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    claudio prepar'd. i am made to understand that you have lent
him
    visitation.
  duke. he professes to have received no sinister measure from
his
    judge, but most willingly humbles h
 
 ___________________________
 
t had he framed to himself, by the instruction of
his
    frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which i, by my good
    leisure, have discredited to him, and now he is resolv'd to
die.
  escalus. you have paid the heavens your function, and the
prisoner
    the very debt of your calling. i have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my
brother
    justice have i found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell
him
    he is indeed justice.
  duke. if his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding,
it
    shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath
    sentenc'd himself.
  escalus. i am going to visit the prisoner. fare you well.
  duke. peace be with you!            exeunt escalus and provost

         he who the sword of heaven will bear
         should be as holy as severe;
         pattern in himself to know,
         grace to stand, and virtue go;
         more nor less to others paying
         th
 
 ___________________________
 
y likeness, made in crimes,
         make a practice on the times,
         to draw with idle spiders' strings
         most ponderous and substantial things!
         craft against vice i must apply.
         with angelo to-night shall lie
         his old betrothed but despised;
         so disguise shall, by th' disguised,
         pay with falsehood false exacting,
         and perform an old contracting.                    exit




act iv. scene i.
the moated grange at saint duke's

enter mariana; and boy singing

                             song

           take, o, take those lips away,
             that so sweetly were forsworn;
           and those eyes, the break of day,
             lights that do mislead the morn;
           but my kisses bring again, bring again;
           seals of love, but seal'd in vain, seal'd in vain.

                  enter duke, disguised as before

  mariana. break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
    here come
 
 ___________________________
 
s a man of comfort, whose advice
    hath often still'd my brawling discontent.          exit boy
    i cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
    you had not found me here so musical.
    let me excuse me, and believe me so,
    my mirth it much displeas'd, but pleas'd my woe.
  duke. 'tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
    to make bad good and good provoke to harm.
    i pray you tell me hath anybody inquir'd for me here to-day.
much
    upon this time have i promis'd here to meet.
  mariana. you have not been inquir'd after; i have sat here all
day.

                         enter isabella

  duke. i do constantly believe you. the time is come even now. i
    shall crave your forbearance a little. may be i will call
upon
    you anon, for some advan
 
 ___________________________
 
tage to yourself.
  mariana. i am always bound to you.                        exit
  duke. very well met, and well come.
    what is the news from this good deputy?
  isabella. he hath a garden circummur'd with brick,
    whose western side is with a vineyard back'd;
    and to that vineyard is a planched gate
    that makes his opening with this bigger key;
    this other doth command a little door
    which from the vineyard to the garden leads.
    there have i made my promise
    upon the heavy middle of the night
    to call upon him.
  duke. but shall you on your kn
 
 ___________________________
 
owledge find this way?
  isabella. i have ta'en a due and wary note upon't;
    with whispering and most guilty diligence,
    in action all of precept, he did show me
    the way twice o'er.
  duke. are there no other tokens
    between you 'greed concerning her observance?
  isabella. no, none, but only a repair i' th' dark;
    and that i have possess'd him my most stay
    can be but brief; for i have made him know
    i have a servant comes with me along,
    that stays upon me; whose persuasion is
    i come about my brother.
  duke. 'tis well borne up.
    i have not yet made known to mariana
    a word of this. what ho, within! come forth.

                       re-ent
 
 ___________________________
 
er mariana

    i pray you be acquainted with this maid;
    she comes to do you good.
  isabella. i do desire the like.
  duke. do you persuade yourself that i respect you?
  mariana. good friar, i know you do, and have found it.
  duke. take, then, this your companion by the hand,
    who hath a story ready for your ear.
    i shall attend your leisure; but make haste;
    the vaporous night approaches.
  mariana. will't please you walk aside?
                                     exeunt mariana and isabella
  duke. o place and greatness! millions of false eyes
    are stuck upon thee. volumes of report
    run with these false, and most contrarious quest
    upon thy doings. thousand escapes of wit
    make thee the
 
 ___________________________
 
 father of their idle dream,
    and rack thee in their fancies.

                 re-enter mariana and isabella

    welcome, how agreed?
  isabella. she'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
    if you advise it.
  duke. it is not my consent,
    but my entreaty too.
  isabella. little have you to say,
    when you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'remember now my brother.'
  mariana. fear me not.
  duke. nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
    he is your husband on a pre-contract.
    to bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    sith that the justice of your title to him
    doth flourish the deceit. come, let us go;
    our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       exeunt




scene ii.
the prison

enter provost and pompey

  provost. come hither, sirrah. can you cut off a man's head?
  pompey. if the man be a bachelor, sir, i can; but if he be a
    married man,
 
 ___________________________
 
u must be made immortal. where's barnardine?
  claudio. as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
    when it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
    he will not wake.
  provost. who can do good on him?
    well, go, prepare yourself. [knocking within] but hark, what
      noise?
    heaven give your spirits comfort!               exit claudio
    [knocking continues] by and by.
    i hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    for the most gentle claudio.

                 enter duke, disguised as before

    welcome, father.
  duke. the best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
    envelop you, good provost! who call'd here of late?
  provost. none, since the curfew rung.
  duke. not isabel?
  provost. no.
  duke. they will then, ere't be long.
  provost. what comfort is for claudio?
  duke. there's some in hope.
  provost. it is a bitter deputy.
  duke. not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
    even with the stroke and line of his great justice;
    he doth
 
 ___________________________
 

    but this being so, he's just. [knocking within] now are they
      come.                                         exit provost
    this is a gentle provost; seldom when
    the steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [knocking within]
    how now, what noise! that spirit's possess'd with haste
    that wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.

                        re-enter provost

  provost. there he must stay until the officer
    arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  duke. have you no countermand for claudio yet
    but he must die to-morrow?
  provost. none, sir, none.
  duke. as near the dawning, provost, as it is,
    you shall hear more ere morning.
  provost. happily
    you something know; yet i believe there comes
    no countermand; no such example have we.
    besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    lord angelo hath to the public ear
    profess'd the contrary.

                         enter a messenger
    this is his lordship's man.
 
 ___________________________
 

  duke. and here comes claudio's pardon.
  messenger. my lord hath sent you this note; and by me this
further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. good morrow;
for
    as i take it, it is almost day.
  provost. i shall obey him.                      exit messenger
  duke. [aside] this is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin
    for which the pardoner himself is in;
    hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    when it is borne in high authority.
    when vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
    that for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
    now, sir, what news?
  provost. i told you: lord angelo, belike thinking me remiss in
mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  du
 
 ___________________________
 
ke. pray you, let's hear.
  provost. [reads] 'whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the
afternoon,
    barnardine. for my better satisfaction, let me have claudio's
    head sent me by five. let this be duly performed, with a
thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. thus fail
not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
    what say you to this, sir?
  duke. what is that barnardine who is to be executed in th'
    afternoon?
  provost. a bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
    one that is a prisoner nine years old.
  duke. how came it that the absent duke had not either deliver'd
him
    to his liberty or executed him? i have heard it was ever his
    manner to do so.
  provost. his friends still wrought reprieves for him; and,
indeed,
    his fact, till now in the government of lord angelo, came not
to
    an undoubted proof.
 
 ___________________________
 

  duke. it is now apparent?
  provost. most manifest, and not denied by himself.
  duke. hath he borne himself penitently in prison? how seems he
to
    be touch'd?
  provost. a man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as
a
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's
past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
  duke. he wants advice.
  provost. he will hear none. he hath evermore had the liberty of
the
    prison; give him leave to escape hence, he would not; drunk
many
    times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. we have very
oft
    awak'd him, as if to carry him to execution, and show'd him a
    seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.
  duke. more of him anon. there is written in your brow, provost,
    honesty and constancy. if i read it not truly, my ancient
skill
    b
 
 ___________________________
 
eguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning i will lay
myself
    in hazard. claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is
no
    greater forfeit to the law than angelo who hath sentenc'd
him. to
    make you understand this in a manifested effect, i crave but
four
    days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present
and
    a dangerous courtesy.
  provost. pray, sir, in what?
  duke. in the delaying death.
  provost. alack! how may i do it, having the hour limited, and
an
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the
view
    of angelo? i may make my case as claudio's, to cross this in
the
    smallest.
  duke. by the vow of mine order, i warrant you, if my
instructions
    may be your guide. let this barnardine be this morning
executed,
    and his head borne to angelo.
  provost. angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the
favour.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
duke. o, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it.
shave
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death. you know the course
is
    common. if anything fall to you upon this more than thanks
and
    good fortune, by the saint whom i profess, i will plead
against
    it with my life.
  provost. pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
  duke. were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?
  provost. to him and to his substitutes.
  duke. you will think you have made no offence if the duke
avouch
    the justice of your dealing?
  provost. but what likelihood is in that?
  duke. not a resemblance, but a certainty. yet since i see you
    fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can
    with ease attempt you, i will go further than i meant, to
pluck
    all fears out of you. look you, sir, here is the hand and
seal of
    the duke. y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou know the character, i doubt not; and the signet
is
    not strange to you.
  provost. i know them both.
  duke. the contents of this is the return of the duke; you shall
    anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find
within
    these two days he will be here. this is a thing that angelo
knows
    not; for he this very day receives letters of strange tenour,
    perchance of the duke's death, perchance entering into some
    monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what is writ. look, th'
    unfolding star calls up the shepherd. put not yourself into
    amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are
but
    easy when they are known. call your executioner, and off with
    barnardine's head. i will give him a present shrift, and
advise
    him for a better place. yet you are amaz'd, but this shall
    absolutely resolve you. come away; it is almost clear 
 
 ___________________________
 
on. is the axe upon the block, sirrah?
  pompey. very ready, sir.
  barnardine. how now, abhorson, what's the news with you?
  abhorson. truly, sir, i would desire you to clap into your
prayers;
    for, look you, the warrant's come.
  barnardine. you rogue, i have been drinking all night; i am not
    fitted for't.
  pompey. o, the better, sir! for he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the
next
    day.

                  enter duke, disguised as before

  abhorson. look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father.
    do we jest now, think you?
  duke. sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you
are
    to depart, i am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray
with
    you.
  barnardine. friar, not i; i have been drinking hard all night,
and
    i will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out
my
    brains with billets. i will not consent to die this day,
that's
    certain.
  duke. o,
 
 ___________________________
 
 sir, you must; and therefore i beseech you
    look forward on the journey you shall go.
  barnardine. i swear i will not die to-day for any man's
persuasion.
  duke. but hear you-
  barnardine. not a word; if you have anything to say to me, come
to
    my ward; for thence will not i to-day.                  exit
  duke. unfit to live or die. o gravel heart!
    after him, fellows; bring him to the block.
                                      exeunt abhorson and pompey

                            enter provost

  provost. now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  duke. a creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    and to transport him in the mind he is
    were damnable.
  provost. here in the prison, father,
    there died this morning of a cruel fever
    one ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
   a man of claudio's years; his beard and head
    just of his colour. what if we do omit
    this reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    and satisfy the deputy with the visage
    of ragozine, more like to claudio?
  duke. o, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
    dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
    prefix'd by angelo. see this be done,
    and sent according to command; whiles i
    persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
  provost. this shall be done, good father, presently.
    but barnardine must die this afternoon;
    and how shall we continue claudio,
    to save me from the danger that might come
    if he were known alive?
  duke. let this be done:
    put them in secret hold
 
 ___________________________
 
s, both barnardine and claudio.
    ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
    to the under generation, you shall find
    your safety manifested.
  provost. i am your free dependant.
  duke. quick, dispatch, and send the head to angelo.
                                                    exit provost
    now will i write letters to angelo-
    the provost, he shall bear them- whose contents
    shall witness to him i am near at home,
    and that, by great injunctions, i am bound
    to enter publicly. him i'll desire
    to meet me at the consecrated fount,
    a league below the city; and from thence,
    by cold gradation and well-balanc'd form.
    we shall proceed w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith angelo.

                         re-enter provost

  provost. here is the head; i'll carry it myself.
  duke. convenient is it. make a swift return;
    for i would commune with you of such things
    that want no ear but yours.
  provost. i'll make all speed.                             exit
  isabella. [ within ] peace, ho, be here!
  duke. the tongue of isabel. she's come to know
    if yet her brother's pardon be come hither;
    but i will keep her ignorant of her good,
    to make her heavenly comforts of despair
    when it is least expected.

                           enter isabella

  isabella. ho, by your leave!
  duke. good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
  isabella. the better, given me by so holy a man.
    hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
  duke. he hath releas'd him, isabel, from
 
 ___________________________
 
 the world.
    his head is off and sent to angelo.
  isabella. nay, but it is not so.
  duke. it is no other.
    show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience,
  isabella. o, i will to him and pluck out his eyes!
  duke. you shall not be admitted to his sight.
  isabella. unhappy claudio! wretched isabel!
    injurious world! most damned angelo!
  duke. this nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
    forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
    mark what i say, which you shall find
    by every syllable a faithful verity.
    the duke comes home to-morrow. nay, dry your eyes.
    one of our covent, and his confessor,
    gives me this instance. already he hath carried
    notice to escalus and angelo,
    who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    there to give up their pow'r. if you can, pace your wisdom
    in that good p
 
 ___________________________
 
ath that i would wish it go,
    and you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
    grace of the duke, revenges to your heart,
    and general honour.
  isabella. i am directed by you.
  duke. this letter, then, to friar peter give;
    'tis that he sent me of the duke's return.
    say, by this token, i desire his company
    at mariana's house to-night. her cause and yours
    i'll perfect him withal; and he shall bring you
    before the duke; and to the head of angelo
    accuse him home and home. for my poor self,
    i am combined by a sacred vow,
    and shall be absent. wend you with this letter.
    command these fretting waters from your eyes
    with a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    if i pervert your course. who's here?

                           enter lucio

  lucio. good even. friar, where's the provost?
  duke. not within, sir.
  lucio. o pretty isabella, i am pale at mine heart to see thine
eyes
 
 ___________________________
 

    so red. thou must be patient. i am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; i dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't. but they say the duke will
be
    here to-morrow. by my troth, isabel, i lov'd thy brother. if
the
    old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home, he had

    lived.                                         exit isabella
  duke. sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your
reports;
    but the best is, he lives not in them.
  lucio. friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as i do; he's a
    better woodman than thou tak'st him for.
  duke. well, you'll answer this one day. fare ye well.
  lucio. nay, tarry; i'll go along with thee; i can tell thee
pretty
    tales of the duke.
  duke. you have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be
    true; if not true, none were enough.
  lucio. i was once before him 
 
 ___________________________
 
for getting a wench with child.
  duke. did you such a thing?
  lucio. yes, marry, did i; but i was fain to forswear it: they
would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  duke. sir, your company is fairer than honest. rest you well.
  lucio. by my troth, i'll go with thee to the lane's end. if
bawdy
    talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. nay, friar, i
am a
    kind of burr; i shall stick.                          exeunt




scene iv.
angelo's house

enter angelo and escalus

  escalus. every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other.
  angelo. in most uneven and distracted manner. his actions show
much
    like to madness; pray heaven hi
 
 ___________________________
 
 bears a so credent bulk
    that no particular scandal once can touch
    but it confounds the breather. he should have liv'd,
    save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
    might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
    by so receiving a dishonour'd life
    with ransom of such shame. would yet he had liv'd!
    alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
    nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.         exit




scene v.
fields without the town

enter duke in his own habit, and friar peter

  duke. these letters at fit time deliver me.   [giving letters]
    the provost knows our purpose and our plot.
    the matter being afoot, keep your instruction
    and hold you ever to our special drift;
    though sometimes you do blench from this to that
    as cause doth minister. go, call at flavius' house,
    and tell him where i stay; give the like notice
    to valentinus, rowland, and to crassus,
    and bid them bring the trumpets to the
 
 ___________________________
 
 gate;
    but send me flavius first.
    peter. it shall be speeded well.                  exit friar

                             enter varrius

  duke. i thank thee, varrius; thou hast made good haste.
    come, we will walk. there's other of our friends
    will greet us here anon. my gentle varrius!           exeunt




scene vi.
a street near the city gate

enter isabella and mariana

  isabella. to speak so indirectly i am loath;
    i would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
    that is your part. yet i am advis'd to do it;
    he says, to veil full purpose.
  mariana. be rul'd by him.
  isabella. besides, he tells me 
 
 ___________________________
 
that, if peradventure
    he speak against me on the adverse side,
    i should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
    that's bitter to sweet end.
  mariana. i would friar peter-

                         enter friar peter

  isabella. o, peace! the friar is come.
  peter. come, i have found you out a stand most fit,
    where you may have such vantage on the duke
    he shall not pass you. twice have the trumpets sounded;
    the generous and gravest citizens
    have hent the gates, and very near upon
    the duke is ent'ring; therefore, hence, away.         exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long 
 
 ___________________________
 
as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
the city gate

enter at several doors duke, varrius, lords; angelo, escalus,
lucio,
provost, officers, and citizens

  duke. my very worthy cousin, fairly met!
    our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
  angelo, escalus. happy return be to your royal grace!
  duke. many and hearty thankings to you both.
    we have made inquiry of you, and we hear
    such goodness of your justice that our soul
    cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
    forerunning more requital.
  angelo. you make my bonds still greater.
  duke. o, your desert speaks loud; and i should wrong it
    to lock it in t
 
 ___________________________
 
deserves, with characters of brass,
    a forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
    and razure of oblivion. give me your hand.
    and let the subject see, to make them know
    that outward courtesies would fain proclaim
    favours that keep within. come, escalus,
    you must walk by us on our other hand,
    and good supporters are you.

                 enter friar peter and isabella

  peter. now is your time; speak loud, and kneel before him.
  isabella. justice, o royal duke! vail your regard
    upon a wrong'd- i would fain have said a maid!
    o worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
    by throwing it on any other object
    till you have heard me in my true complaint,
    and given me justice, justice, justice, justice.
  duke. relate your wrongs. in what? by whom? be brief.
    here is lord angelo shall give you justice;
    reveal yourself to him.
  isabella. o worthy duke,
    you bid me seek redemption of the devil!
    hear me yourself; for that
 
 ___________________________
 
. my lord, her wits, i fear me, are not firm;
    she hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
    cut off by course of justice-
  isabella. by course of justice!
  angelo. and she will speak most bitterly and strange.
  isabella. most strange, but yet most truly, will i speak.
    that angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
    that angelo's a murderer, is't not strange?
    that angelo is an adulterous thief,
    an hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
    is it not strange and strange?
  duke. nay, it is ten times strange.
  isabella. it is not truer he is angelo
    than this is all as true as it is strange;
    nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth
    to th' end of reck'ning.
  duke. away with her. poor soul,
    she speaks this in th' infirmity of sense.
  isabella. o prince! i conjure thee, as thou believ'st
    there is another comfort than this world,
    that thou neglect me not with that opinion
    that i am touch'd with madness. make not impossible
    
 
 ___________________________
 
that which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible
    but one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
    may seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,
    as angelo; even so may angelo,
    in all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
    be an arch-villain. believe it, royal prince,
    if he be less, he's nothing; but he's more,
    had i more name for badness.
  duke. by mine honesty,
    if she be mad, as i believe no other,
    her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
    such a dependency of thing on thing,
    as e'er i heard in madness.
  isabella. o gracious duke,
    harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
    for inequality; but let your reason serve
    to make the truth appear where it seems hid,
    and hide the false seems true.
  duke. many that are not mad
    have, sure, more lack of reason. what would you say?
  isabella. i
 
 ___________________________
 
 am the sister of one claudio,
    condemn'd upon the act of fornication
    to lose his head; condemn'd by angelo.
    i, in probation of a sisterhood,
    was sent to by my brother; one lucio
    as then the messenger-
  lucio. that's i, an't like your grace.
    i came to her from claudio, and desir'd her
    to try her gracious fortune with lord angelo
    for her poor brother's pardon.
  isabella. that's he, indeed.
  duke. you were not bid to speak.
  lucio. no, my good lord;
    nor wish'd to hold my peace.
  duke. i wish you now, then;
    pray you take note of it; and when you have
    a business for yourself, pray heaven you then
    be perfect.
  lucio. i warrant your honour.
  duke. the warrant's for yourself; take heed to't.
  isabella. this gentleman told somewhat of my tale.
  lucio. right.
  duke. it may be right; but you are i' the wrong
    to speak before your time. proceed.
  isabella.
 
 ___________________________
 
 i went
    to this pernicious caitiff deputy.
  duke. that's somewhat madly spoken.
  isabella. pardon it;
    the phrase is to the matter.
  duke. mended again. the matter- proceed.
  isabella. in brief- to set the needless process by,
    how i persuaded, how i pray'd, and kneel'd,
    how he refell'd me, and how i replied,
    for this was of much length- the vile conclusion
    i now begin with grief and shame to utter:
    he would not, but by gift of my chaste body
    to his concupiscible intemperate lust,
    release my brother; and, after much debatement,
    my sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
    and i did yield
 
 ___________________________
 
 to him. but the next morn betimes,
    his purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
    for my poor brother's head.
  duke. this is most likely!
  isabella. o that it were as like as it is true!
  duke. by heaven, fond wretch, thou know'st not what thou
speak'st,
    or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
    in hateful practice. first, his integrity
    stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
    that with such vehemency he should pursue
    faults proper to himself. if he had so offended,
    he would have weigh'd thy brother by himself,
    and not have cut him off. some one hath set you on;
    confess the truth, and say by whose advice
    thou cam'st here to c
 
 ___________________________
 
omplain.
  isabella. and is this all?
    then, o you blessed ministers above,
    keep me in patience; and, with ripened time,
    unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
    in countenance! heaven shield your grace from woe,
    as i, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!
  duke. i know you'd fain be gone. an officer!
    to prison with her! shall we thus permit
    a blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
    on him so near us? this needs must be a practice.
    who knew of your intent and coming hither?
  isabella. one that i would were here, friar lodowick.
  duke. a ghostly father, belike. who knows that lodowick?
  lucio. my lord, i know him; 'tis a meddling friar.
    i do not like the man; had he been lay, my lord,
    for certain words he spake again
 
 ___________________________
 
st your grace
    in your retirement, i had swing'd him soundly.
  duke. words against me? this's a good friar, belike!
    and to set on this wretched woman here
    against our substitute! let this friar be found.
  lucio. but yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
    i saw them at the prison; a saucy friar,
    a very scurvy fellow.
  peter. blessed be your royal grace!
    i have stood by, my lord, and i have heard
    your royal ear abus'd. first, hath this woman
    most wrongfully accus'd your substitute;
    who is as free from touch or soil w
 
 ___________________________
 
ith her
    as she from one ungot.
  duke. we did believe no less.
    know you that friar lodowick that she speaks of?
  peter. i know him for a man divine and holy;
    not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
    as he's reported by this gentleman;
    and, on my trust, a man that never yet
    did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.
  lucio. my lord, most villainously; believe it.
  peter. well, he in time may come to clear himself;
    but at this instant he is sick, my lord,
    of a strange fever. upon his mere request-
 
 ___________________________
 

    being come to knowledge that there was complaint
    intended 'gainst lord angelo- came i hither
    to speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
    is true and false; and what he, with his oath
    and all probation, will make up full clear,
    whensoever he's convented. first, for this woman-
    to justify this worthy nobleman,
    so vulgarly and personally accus'd-
    her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
    till she herself confess it.
  duke. good friar, let's hear it.         exit isabella guarded
    do you not smile at this, lord angelo?
    o heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
    give us some seats. come, cousin angelo;
    in this i'll be impartial; be you judge
    of your own cause.

                     enter mariana veiled

    is this the witness, friar?
  first let her show her face, and after speak.
  mariana. pardon, my lord; i will not show my face
    until my husband bid me.
  duke. what, are you ma
 
 ___________________________
 
rried?
  mariana. no, my lord.
  duke. are you a maid?
  mariana. no, my lord.
  duke. a widow, then?
  mariana. neither, my lord.
  duke. why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife.
  lucio. my lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither
    maid, widow, nor wife.
  duke. silence that fellow. i would he had some cause
    to prattle for himself.
  lucio. well, my lord.
  mariana. my lord, i do confess i ne'er was married,
    and i confess, besides, i am no maid.
    i have known my husband; yet my husband
    knows not that ever he knew me.
  lucio. he was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  duke. for the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
  lucio. well, my lord.
  duke. this is no witness for lord angelo.
  mariana. now i come to'
 
 ___________________________
 
t, my lord:
    she that accuses him of fornication,
    in self-same manner doth accuse my husband;
    and charges him, my lord, with such a time
    when i'll depose i had him in mine arms,
    with all th' effect of love.
  angelo. charges she moe than me?
  mariana. not that i know.
  duke. no? you say your husband.
  mariana. why, just, my lord, and that is angelo,
    who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
    but knows he thinks that he knows isabel's.
  angelo. this is a strange abuse. let's see thy face.
  mariana. my husband bids me; now i will unmask.
                                                     [unveiling]
    this is that face, thou cruel angelo,
    which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
    this is the hand which, with a vow'd contr
 
 ___________________________
 
act,
    was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
    that took away the match from isabel,
    and did supply thee at thy garden-house
    in her imagin'd person.
  duke. know you this woman?
  lucio. carnally, she says.
  duke. sirrah, no more.
  lucio. enough, my lord.
  angelo. my lord, i must confess i know this woman;
    and five years since there was some speech of marriage
    betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
    partly for that her promised proportions
    came short of composition; but in chief
    for that her reputation was disvalued
    in levity. since which time of five years
    i never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
    upon my faith and honour.
  mariana. noble pr
 
 ___________________________
 
ast gone, in's garden-house,
    he knew me as a wife. as this is true,
    let me in safety raise me from my knees,
    or else for ever be confixed here,
    a marble monument!
  angelo. i did but smile till now.
    now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice;
    my patience here is touch'd. i do perceive
    these poor informal women are no more
    but instruments of some more mightier member
    that sets them on. let me have way, my lord,
    to find this practice out.
  duke. ay, with my heart;
    and punish them to your height of pleasure.
    thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
    compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
    though they would swear down each particular saint,
    were testimonies against his worth and credit,
    that's seal'd in approbation? you, lord escalus,
    sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
    to find out this abuse, whence 'tis deriv'd.
    there is another friar that set them on;
    let 
 
 ___________________________
 
him be sent for.
  peter. would lie were here, my lord! for he indeed
    hath set the women on to this complaint.
    your provost knows the place where he abides,
    and he may fetch him.
  duke. go, do it instantly.                        exit provost
    and you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
    whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
    do with your injuries as seems you best
    in any chastisement. i for a while will leave you;
    but stir not you till you have well determin'd
    upon these slanderers.
  escalus. my lord, we'll do it throughly.             exit duke
    signior lucio, did not you say you knew that friar lodowick
to be
    a dishonest person
 
 ___________________________
 
?
  lucio. 'cucullus non facit monachum': honest in nothing but in
his
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of
the
    duke.
  escalus. we shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
    enforce them against him. we shall find this friar a notable
    fellow.
  lucio. as any in vienna, on my word.
  escalus. call that same isabel here once again; i would speak
with
    her. [exit an attendant] pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how i'll handle her.
  lucio. not better than he, by her own report.
  escalus. say you?
  lucio. marry, sir, i think, if you handled her privatel
 
 ___________________________
 
y, she
would
    sooner confess; perchance, publicly, she'll be asham'd.

       re-enter officers with isabella; and provost with the
                    duke in his friar's habit

  escalus. i will go darkly to work with her.
  lucio. that's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  escalus. come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all
that
    you have said.
  lucio. my lord, here comes the rascal i spoke of, here with the

    provost.
  escalus. in very good time. speak not you to him till we call
upon
    you.
  lucio. mum.
  escalus. come, sir; did you set these women on to slander lord
    angelo? they have confess'd you
 
 ___________________________
 
 did.
  duke. 'tis false.
  escalus. how! know you where you are?
  duke. respect to your great place! and let the devil
    be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
    where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.
  escalus. the duke's in us; and we will hear you speak;
    look you speak justly.
  duke. boldly, at least. but, o, poor souls,
    come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
    good night to your redress! is the duke gone?
    then is your cause gone too. the duke's unjust
    thus to retort your manifest appeal,
    and put your trial in the villain's mouth
    which here you come to accuse.
  lucio. this is the rascal; this is he i spoke of.
  escalus. why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
    is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
    to accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth,
    and in the witness of his proper ear,
    to call him villain; and then to glance from him
    to th' duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  take him hence; to th' rack with him! we'll touze you
    joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
    what, 'unjust'!
  duke. be not so hot; the duke
    dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
    dare rack his own; his subject am i not,
    nor here provincial. my business in this state
    made me a looker-on here in vienna,
    where i have seen corruption boil and bubble
    till it o'errun the stew: laws for all faults,
    but faults so countenanc'd that the strong statutes
    stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
    as much in mock as mark.
  escalus. slander to th' state! away with him to prison!
  angelo
 
 ___________________________
 
. what can you vouch against him, signior lucio?
    is this the man that you did tell us of?
  lucio. 'tis he, my lord. come hither, good-man bald-pate.
    do you know me?
  duke. i remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. i met
you at
    the prison, in the absence of the duke.
  lucio. o did you so? and do you remember what you said of the
duke?
  duke. most notedly, sir.
  lucio. do you so, sir? and was the duke a fleshmonger, a fool,
and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  duke. you must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that
my
    report; you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much
worse.
  lucio. o thou damnable fellow! did not i pluck thee by the nose
for
    thy speeches?
  duke. i protest i love the duke as i love myself.
  angelo. hark how the villain would close now, after his
treasonable
    abuses!
  escalus. such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal. a
 
 ___________________________
 
way with
him to
    prison! where is the provost? away with him to prison! lay
bolts
    enough upon him; let him speak no more. away with those
giglets
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
                            [the provost lays bands on the duke]
  duke. stay, sir; stay awhile.
  angelo. what, resists he? help him, lucio.
  lucio. come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! why, you
    bald-pated lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? show
your
    knave's visage, with a pox to you! show your sheep-biting
face,
    and be hang'd an hour! will't not off?
             [pulls off the friar's bood and discovers the duke]
  duke. thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.
    first, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  [to lucio] sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    must have a word anon. lay hold on him.
  lucio. this may prove worse than hanging.
  duke. [to escalus] what you have spoke i pardon; sit you down.
    we'll borrow place of him. [to angelo] sir, by your leave.
    hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
    that yet can do thee office? if thou hast,
    rely upon it till my tale be heard,
    and hold no longer out.
  angelo. o my dread lord,
    i should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
    to think i can be undiscernible,
    when i perceive your grace, like pow'r divine,
    hath look'd upon my passes. then, good princ
 
 ___________________________
 
e,
    no longer session hold upon my shame,
    but let my trial be mine own confession;
    immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    is all the grace i beg.
  duke. come hither, mariana.
    say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
  angelo. i was, my lord.
  duke. go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
    do you the office, friar; which consummate,
    return him here again. go with him, provost.
                exeunt angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost
  escalus. my lord, i am more amaz'd at his dishonour
    than at the strangeness of it.
  duke. come hither, isabel.
    your friar is now your prince. as i was then
    advertising and holy to your business,
    not changing heart with habit, i am still
    attorney'd at your ser
 
 ___________________________
 
vice.
  isabella. o, give me pardon,
    that i, your vassal have employ'd and pain'd
    your unknown sovereignty.
  duke. you are pardon'd, isabel.
    and now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
    your brother's death, i know, sits at your heart;
    and you may marvel why i obscur'd myself,
    labouring to save his life, and would not rather
    make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r
    than let him so be lost. o most kind maid,
    it was the swift celerity of his death,
    which i did think with slower foot came on,
    that brain'd my purpose. but peace be with him!
    that life is better li
 
 ___________________________
 
fe, past fearing death,
    than that which lives to fear. make it your comfort,
    so happy is your brother.
  isabella. i do, my lord.

       re-enter angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost

  duke. for this new-married man approaching here,
    whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
    your well-defended honour, you must pardon
    for mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    being criminal in double violation
    of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
    thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    the very mercy of the law cries out
    most audible, even from his proper tongue,
    'an angelo for claudio, death for death!'
    haste still pays haste, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 leisure answers leisure;
    like doth quit like, and measure still for measure.
    then, angelo, thy fault's thus manifested,
    which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
    we do condemn thee to the very block
    where claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
    away with him!
  mariana. o my most gracious lord,
    i hope you will not mock me with a husband.
  duke. it is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
    consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
    i thought your marriage fit; else imputation,
    for that he knew you, might reproach your life,
    and choke your good to come. for his possessions,
    although by confiscation they are ours,
    we do instate and widow you withal
    to buy you a better husband.
  mariana. o my dear lord,
    i crave no other, nor no better man.
  duke. never crave him; we are definitive.
  mariana
 
 ___________________________
 
. gentle my liege-                           [kneeling]
  duke. you do but lose your labour.
    away with him to death! [to lucio] now, sir, to you.
  mariana. o my good lord! sweet isabel, take my part;
    lend me your knees, and all my life to come
    i'll lend you all my life to do you service.
  duke. against all sense you do importune her.
    should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
    her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    and take her hence in horror.
  mariana. isabel,
    sweet isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
    hold up your hands, say nothing; i'll speak all.
    they say best men moulded out of faults;
    and, for the most, become much more the better
    for being a little bad; so may my husband.
    o isabel, will you not lend a knee?
  duke. he dies 
 
 ___________________________
 
ok, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
    as if my brother liv'd. i partly think
    a due sincerity govern'd his deeds
    till he did look on me; since it is so,
    let him not die. my brother had but justice,
    in that he did the thing for which he died;
    for angelo,
    his act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
    and must be buried but as an intent
    that perish'd by the way. thoughts are no subjects;
    intents but merely thoughts.
  mariana. merely, my lord.
  duke. your suit's unprofitable; stand up, i say.
    i have bethought me of another fault.
    provost, how came it claudio was beheaded
    at an unusual hour?
  provost. it was commanded so.
  duke. had you a special warrant for the deed?
  provost. no, my good lord; it was by private message.
  duke. for which i do discharge you of your office;
    give up your keys.
  provost. pardon me, noble lord;
    i thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    yet did repent me, after more advic
 
 ___________________________
 
e;
    for testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    that should by private order else have died,
    i have reserv'd alive.
  duke. what's he?
  provost. his name is barnardine.
  duke. i would thou hadst done so by claudio.
    go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      exit provost
  escalus. i am sorry one so learned and so wise
    as you, lord angelo, have still appear'd,
    should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    and lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
  angelo. i am sorry that such sorrow i procure;
    and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    that i crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'tis my deserving, and i do entreat it.

 
 ___________________________
 

       re-enter provost, with barnardine, claudio (muffled)
                            and juliet

  duke. which is that barnardine?
  provost. this, my lord.
  duke. there was a friar told me of this man.
    sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul,
    that apprehends no further than this world,
    and squar'st thy life according. thou'rt condemn'd;
    but, for those earthly faults, i quit them all,
    and pray thee take this mercy to provide
    for better times to come. friar, advise him;
    i leave him to your hand. what muffl'd fellow's that?
  provost. this is another prisoner that i sav'd,
    who should have died when claudio los
 
 ___________________________
 
t his head;
    as like almost to claudio as himself.    [unmuffles claudio]
  duke. [to isabella] if he be like your brother, for his sake
    is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    he is my brother too. but fitter time for that.
    by this lord angelo perceives he's safe;
    methinks i see a quick'ning in his eye.
    well, angelo, your evil quits you well.
    look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.
    i find an apt remission in myself;
    and yet here's one in place i cannot pardon.
    to lu
 
 ___________________________
 
cio] you, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
    one all of luxury, an ass, a madman!
    wherein have i so deserv'd of you
    that you extol me thus?
  lucio. faith, my lord, i spoke it but according to the trick.
    if you will hang me for it, you may; but i had rather it
would
    please you i might be whipt.
  duke. whipt first, sir, and hang'd after.
    proclaim it, provost, round about the city,
    if any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow-
    as i have heard him swear himself there's one
    whom he begot with child, let her appear,
    and he shall marry her. the nuptial finish'd,
    let him be whipt and hang'd.
  lucio. i beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.
your
    highness said even now i made you a duke; good my lord, do
not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 duke. upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
    thy slanders i forgive; and therewithal
    remit thy other forfeits. take him to prison;
    and see our pleasure herein executed.
  lucio. marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping,
    and hanging.
  duke. slandering a prince deserves it.
                                      exeunt officers with lucio
    she, claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo;
    i have confess'd her, and i know her virtue.
    thanks, good friend escalus, for thy much goodness;
    there's more behind that is more gratulate.
    thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    we shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    forgive him, angelo, that brought you home
