speare



dramatis personae

  vincentio, the duke
  angelo, the deputy
  escalus, an ancient lord
  claudio, a young gentleman
  lucio, a fantastic
  two other like gentlemen
  varrius, a gentleman, servant to the duke
  provost
  thomas, friar
  peter, friar
  a justice
  elbow, a simple constable
  froth, a foolish gentleman
  pompey, a clown and servant to mistress overdone
  abhorson, an executioner
  barnardine, a dissolute prisoner

  isabella, sister to claudio
  mariana, betrothed to angelo
  juliet, beloved of claudio
  francisca, a nun
  mistress overdone, a bawd

  lords, officers, citizens, boy, and attendants




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use onl
 
 ___________________________
 

    that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a
merited
    benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain
to
    your own gracious person; and much please the absent duke, if
    peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this
    business.
  isabella. let me hear you speak farther; i have spirit to do
    anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
  duke. virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. have you not
    heard speak of mariana, the sister of frederick, the great
    soldier who miscarried at sea?
  isabella. i have heard of the lady, and good words went with
her
    name.
  duke. she should this angelo have married; was affianced to her
by
    oath, and the nuptial appointed; between which time of the
    contract and limit of the solemnity her brother frederick was
    wreck'd at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of
his
    sister. but mark how heavily this befell to the poor
gentlewoman:
  
 
 ___________________________
 
fer yourself to this advantage: first, that
    your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have
all
    shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to
convenience.
    this being granted in course- and now follows all: we shall
    advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in
your
    place. if the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may
    compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is your
brother
    saved, your honour untainted, the poor mariana advantaged,
and
    the corrupt deputy scaled. the maid will i frame and make fit
for
    his attempt. if you think well to carry this as you may, the
    doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.
what
    think you of it?
  isabella. the image of it gives me content already; and i trust
it
    will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
  duke. it lies much in your holding up. haste you speedily to
    angelo; if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him
 
 
 ___________________________
 
   promise of satisfaction. i will presently to saint luke's;
there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected mariana. at that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with angelo, that it may be
    quickly.
  isabella. i thank you for this comfort. fare you well, good
father.
                                                exeunt severally




scene ii.
the street before the prison

enter, on one side, duke disguised as before; on the other,
elbow,
and officers with pompey

  elbow. nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
 in crimes,
         make a practice on the times,
         to draw with idle spiders' strings
         most ponderous and substantial things!
         craft against vice i must apply.
         with angelo to-night shall lie
         his old betrothed but despised;
         so disguise shall, by th' disguised,
         pay with falsehood false exacting,
         and perform an old contracting.                    exit




act iv. scene i.
the moated grange at saint duke's

enter mariana; and boy singing

                             song

           take, o, take those lips away,
             that so sweetly were forsworn;
           and those eyes, the break of day,
             lights that do mislead the morn;
           but my kisses bring again, bring again;
           seals of love, but seal'd in vain, seal'd in vain.

                  enter duke, disguised as before

  mariana. break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
    here comes a man of comfort,
 
 ___________________________
 
 whose advice
    hath often still'd my brawling discontent.          exit boy
    i cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
    you had not found me here so musical.
    let me excuse me, and believe me so,
    my mirth it much displeas'd, but pleas'd my woe.
  duke. 'tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
    to make bad good and good provoke to harm.
    i pray you tell me hath anybody inquir'd for me here to-day.
much
    upon this time have i promis'd here to meet.
  mariana. you have not been inquir'd after; i have sat here all
day.

                         enter isabella

  duke. i do constantly believe you. the time is come even now. i
    shall crave your forbearance a little. may be i will call
upon
    you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
  mariana. i am always bound to you.                        exit
  duke. very well met, and well come.
    what is the news from this good deputy?
  isabella. he hath a garden circummur'd with brick,
    w
 
 ___________________________
 
 diligence,
    in action all of precept, he did show me
    the way twice o'er.
  duke. are there no other tokens
    between you 'greed concerning her observance?
  isabella. no, none, but only a repair i' th' dark;
    and that i have possess'd him my most stay
    can be but brief; for i have made him know
    i have a servant comes with me along,
    that stays upon me; whose persuasion is
    i come about my brother.
  duke. 'tis well borne up.
    i have not yet made known to mariana
    a word of this. what ho, within! come forth.

                       re-enter mariana

    i pray you be acquainted with this maid;
    she comes to do you good.
  isabella. i do desire the like.
  duke. do you persuade yourself that i respect you?
  mariana. good friar, i know you do, and have found it.
  duke. take, then, this your companion by the hand,
    who hath a story ready for your ear.
    i shall attend your leisure; but make haste;
    the vaporous night approaches
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  mariana. will't please you walk aside?
                                     exeunt mariana and isabella
  duke. o place and greatness! millions of false eyes
    are stuck upon thee. volumes of report
    run with these false, and most contrarious quest
    upon thy doings. thousand escapes of wit
    make thee the father of their idle dream,
    and rack thee in their fancies.

                 re-enter mariana and isabella

    welcome, how agreed?
  isabella. she'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
    if you advise it.
  duke. it is not my consent,
    but my entreaty too.
  isabella. little have you to say,
    when you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'remember now my brother.'
  mariana. fear me not.
  duke. nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
    he is your husband on a pre-contract.
    to bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    sith that the justice of your t
 
 ___________________________
 
  notice to escalus and angelo,
    who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    there to give up their pow'r. if you can, pace your wisdom
    in that good path that i would wish it go,
    and you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
    grace of the duke, revenges to your heart,
    and general honour.
  isabella. i am directed by you.
  duke. this letter, then, to friar peter give;
    'tis that he sent me of the duke's return.
    say, by this token, i desire his company
    at mariana's house to-night. her cause and yours
    i'll perfect him withal; and he shall bring you
    before the duke; and to the head of angelo
    accuse him home and home. for my poor self,
    i am combined by a sacred vow,
    and shall be absent. wend you with this letter.
    command these fretting waters from your eyes
    with a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    if i pervert your course. who's here?

                           enter lucio

  lucio. good even. friar, where's
 
 ___________________________
 
ke notice
    to valentinus, rowland, and to crassus,
    and bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
    but send me flavius first.
    peter. it shall be speeded well.                  exit friar

                             enter varrius

  duke. i thank thee, varrius; thou hast made good haste.
    come, we will walk. there's other of our friends
    will greet us here anon. my gentle varrius!           exeunt




scene vi.
a street near the city gate

enter isabella and mariana

  isabella. to speak so indirectly i am loath;
    i would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
    that is your part. yet i am advis'd to do it;
    he says, to veil full purpose.
  mariana. be rul'd by him.
  isabella. besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
    he speak against me on the adverse side,
    i should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
    that's bitter to sweet end.
  mariana. i would friar peter-

                         enter friar peter

  isabella. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he's convented. first, for this woman-
    to justify this worthy nobleman,
    so vulgarly and personally accus'd-
    her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
    till she herself confess it.
  duke. good friar, let's hear it.         exit isabella guarded
    do you not smile at this, lord angelo?
    o heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
    give us some seats. come, cousin angelo;
    in this i'll be impartial; be you judge
    of your own cause.

                     enter mariana veiled

    is this the witness, friar?
  first let her show her face, and after speak.
  mariana. pardon, my lord; i will not show my face
    until my husband bid me.
  duke. what, are you married?
  mariana. no, my lord.
  duke. are you a maid?
  mariana. no, my lord.
  duke. a widow, then?
  mariana. neither, my lord.
  duke. why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife.
  lucio. my lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither
    maid, widow, nor wife.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 duke. silence that fellow. i would he had some cause
    to prattle for himself.
  lucio. well, my lord.
  mariana. my lord, i do confess i ne'er was married,
    and i confess, besides, i am no maid.
    i have known my husband; yet my husband
    knows not that ever he knew me.
  lucio. he was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  duke. for the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
  lucio. well, my lord.
  duke. this is no witness for lord angelo.
  mariana. now i come to't, my lord:
    she that accuses him of fornication,
    in self-same manner doth accuse my husband;
    and charges him, my lord, with such a time
    when i'll depose i had him in mine arms,
    with all th' effect of love.
  angelo. charges she moe than me?
  mariana. not that i know.
  duke. no? you say your husband.
  mariana. why, just, my lord, and that is angelo,
    who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
    but knows he thinks that he knows isabel's.
 
 ___________________________
 

  angelo. this is a strange abuse. let's see thy face.
  mariana. my husband bids me; now i will unmask.
                                                     [unveiling]
    this is that face, thou cruel angelo,
    which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
    this is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
    was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
    that took away the match from isabel,
    and did supply thee at thy garden-house
    in her imagin'd person.
  duke. know you this woman?
  lucio. carnally, she says.
  duke. sirrah,
 
 ___________________________
 
 no more.
  lucio. enough, my lord.
  angelo. my lord, i must confess i know this woman;
    and five years since there was some speech of marriage
    betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
    partly for that her promised proportions
    came short of composition; but in chief
    for that her reputation was disvalued
    in levity. since which time of five years
    i never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
    upon my faith and honour.
  mariana. noble prince,
    as there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
    as there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
    i am affianc'd this man's wife as strongly
    as words could make up vows. and, my good lord,
    but tuesday night last gone, in's garden-house,
    he knew me as a wife. as this is true,
    let me in safety raise me from my knees,
    or else for ever be confixed here,
    a marble monument!
  angelo. i did but smile till now.
    now, good my lord, g
 
 ___________________________
 
ee office? if thou hast,
    rely upon it till my tale be heard,
    and hold no longer out.
  angelo. o my dread lord,
    i should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
    to think i can be undiscernible,
    when i perceive your grace, like pow'r divine,
    hath look'd upon my passes. then, good prince,
    no longer session hold upon my shame,
    but let my trial be mine own confession;
    immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    is all the grace i beg.
  duke. come hither, mariana.
    say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
  angelo. i was, my lord.
  duke. go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
    do you the office, friar; which consummate,
    return him here again. go with him, provost.
                exeunt angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost
  escalus. my lord, i am more amaz'd at his dishonour
    than at the strangeness of it.
  duke. come hither, isabel.
    your friar is now your prince. as i was then
    advertising and holy to yo
 
 ___________________________
 
 myself,
    labouring to save his life, and would not rather
    make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r
    than let him so be lost. o most kind maid,
    it was the swift celerity of his death,
    which i did think with slower foot came on,
    that brain'd my purpose. but peace be with him!
    that life is better life, past fearing death,
    than that which lives to fear. make it your comfort,
    so happy is your brother.
  isabella. i do, my lord.

       re-enter angelo, mariana, friar peter, and provost

  duke. for this new-married man approaching here,
    whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
    your well-defended honour, you must pardon
    for mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    being criminal in double violation
    of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
    thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    the very mercy of the law cries out
    most audible, even from his proper tongue,
    'an angelo for claudio, death for deat
 
 ___________________________
 
h!'
    haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
    like doth quit like, and measure still for measure.
    then, angelo, thy fault's thus manifested,
    which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
    we do condemn thee to the very block
    where claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
    away with him!
  mariana. o my most gracious lord,
    i hope you will not mock me with a husband.
  duke. it is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
    consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
    i thought your marriage fit; else imputation,
    for that he knew you, might reproach your life,
    and choke your good to come. for his possessions,
    although by confiscation they are ours,
    we do instate and widow you withal
    to buy you a better husband.
  mariana. o my dear lord,
    i crave n
 
 ___________________________
 
o other, nor no better man.
  duke. never crave him; we are definitive.
  mariana. gentle my liege-                           [kneeling]
  duke. you do but lose your labour.
    away with him to death! [to lucio] now, sir, to you.
  mariana. o my good lord! sweet isabel, take my part;
    lend me your knees, and all my life to come
    i'll lend you all my life to do you service.
  duke. against all sense you do importune her.
    should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
    her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    and take her hence in horror.
  mariana. isabel,
    sweet isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
    hold up your hands, say nothing; i'll speak all.
    they say best men moulded out of faults;
    a
 
 ___________________________
 
] most bounteous sir,
    look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
    as if my brother liv'd. i partly think
    a due sincerity govern'd his deeds
    till he did look on me; since it is so,
    let him not die. my brother had but justice,
    in that he did the thing for which he died;
    for angelo,
    his act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
    and must be buried but as an intent
    that perish'd by the way. thoughts are no subjects;
    intents but merely thoughts.
  mariana. merely, my lord.
  duke. your suit's unprofitable; stand up, i say.
    i have bethought me of another fault.
    provost, how came it claudio was beheaded
    at an unusual hour?
  provost. it was commanded so.
  duke. had you a special warrant for the deed?
  provost. no, my good lord; it was by private message.
  duke. for which i do discharge you of your office;
    give up your keys.
  provost. pardon me, noble lord;
    i thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    yet did r
 
 ___________________________
 
t
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
  duke. upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
    thy slanders i forgive; and therewithal
    remit thy other forfeits. take him to prison;
    and see our pleasure herein executed.
  lucio. marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping,
    and hanging.
  duke. slandering a prince deserves it.
                                      exeunt officers with lucio
    she, claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo;
    i have confess'd her, and i know her virtue.
    thanks, good friend escalus, for thy much goodness;
    there's more behind that is more gratulate.
    thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    we shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    forgive him, angelo, that brought you home
    the head of ragozine for claudio's:
    th' offence pardons itself. dear isabel,
    i have a motion much imports your good;
    whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
  