
    from which we would not have you warp. call hither,
    i say, bid come before us, angelo.         exit an attendant
    what figure of us think you he will bear?
    for you must know we have with special soul
    elected him our absence to supply;
    lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
    and given his deputation all the organs
    of our own power. what think you of it?
  escalus. if any in vienna be of worth
    to undergo such ample grace and honour,
    it is lord angelo.

                          enter angelo

  duke. look where he comes.
  angelo. always obedient to your grace's will,
    i come to know your pleasure.
  duke. angelo,
    there is a kind of character in thy life
    that to th' observer doth thy history
    fully unfold. thyself and thy belongings
    are not thine own so proper as to waste
    thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
    heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
    not light them for themselves; for if our vir
 
 ___________________________
 

    be considered.
  mrs. overdone. what's to do here, thomas tapster? let's
withdraw.
  pompey. here comes signior claudio, led by the provost to
prison;
    and there's madam juliet.                             exeunt

            enter provost, claudio, juliet, and officers;
                            lucio following

  claudio. fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th' world?
    bear me to prison, where i am committed.
  provost. i do it not in evil disposition,
    but from lord angelo by special charge.
  claudio. thus can the demigod authority
    make us pay down for our offence by weight
    the words of heaven: on whom it will, it will;
    on whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.
  lucio. why, how now, claudio, whence comes this restraint?
  claudio. from too much liberty, my lucio, liberty;
    as surfeit is the father of much fast,
    so every scope by the immoderate use
    turns to restraint. our natures do pursue,
    like rats that ravin down their
 
 ___________________________
 
 away that thought;
    believe not that the dribbling dart of love
    can pierce a complete bosom. why i desire thee
    to give me secret harbour hath a purpose
    more grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
    of burning youth.
  friar. may your grace speak of it?
  duke. my holy sir, none better knows than you
    how i have ever lov'd the life removed,
    and held in idle price to haunt assemblies
    where youth, and cost, a witless bravery keeps.
    i have deliver'd to lord angelo,
    a man of stricture and firm abstinence,
    my absolute power and place here in vienna,
    and he supposes me travell'd to poland;
    for so i have strew'd it in the common ear,
    and so it is received. now, pious sir,
    you will demand of me why i do this.
  friar. gladly, my lord.
  duke. we have strict statutes and most biting laws,
    the needful bits and curbs to headstrong steeds,
    which for this fourteen years we have let slip;
    even like an o'ergrown lion in
 
 ___________________________
 
p the threat'ning twigs of birch,
    only to stick it in their children's sight
    for terror, not to use, in time the rod
    becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees,
    dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;
    and liberty plucks justice by the nose;
    the baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
    goes all decorum.
  friar. it rested in your grace
    to unloose this tied-up justice when you pleas'd;
    and it in you more dreadful would have seem'd
    than in lord angelo.
  duke. i do fear, too dreadful.
    sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
    'twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
    for what i bid them do; for we bid this be done,
    when evil deeds have their permissive pass
    and not the punishment. therefore, indeed, my father,
    i have on angelo impos'd the office;
    who may, in th' ambush of my name, strike home,
    and yet my nature never in the fight
    to do in slander. and to behold his sway,
    i will, as '
 
 ___________________________
 
twere a brother of your order,
    visit both prince and people. therefore, i prithee,
    supply me with the habit, and instruct me
    how i may formally in person bear me
    like a true friar. moe reasons for this action
    at our more leisure shall i render you.
    only, this one: lord angelo is precise;
    stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
    that his blood flows, or that his appetite
    is more to bread than stone. hence shall we see,
    if power change purpose, what our seemers be.         exeunt




scene iv.
a nunnery

enter isabella and francisca

  isabella. and have you nuns no farther privileges?
  francisca. are not these large enough?
  isabella. yes, truly; i speak not as desiring more,
    but rather wishing a more strict restraint
    
 
 ___________________________
 
school-maids change their names
    by vain though apt affection.
  lucio. she it is.
  isabella. o, let him marry her!
  lucio. this is the point.
    the duke is very strangely gone from hence;
    bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
    in hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
    by those that know the very nerves of state,
    his givings-out were of an infinite distance
    from his true-meant design. upon his place,
    and with full line of his authority,
    governs lord angelo, a man whose blood
    is very snow-broth, one who never feels
    the wanton stings and motions of the sense,
    but doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
    with profits of the mind, study and fast.
    he- to give fear to use and liberty,
    which have for long run by the hideous law,
    as mice by lions- hath pick'd out an act
    under whose heavy sense your brother's life
    falls into forfeit; he arrests him on it,
    and follows close the rigour of the statute
    to m
 
 ___________________________
 
er
    to soften angelo. and that's my pith of business
    'twixt you and your poor brother.
  isabella. doth he so seek his life?
  lucio. has censur'd him
    already, and, as i hear, the provost hath
    a warrant for his execution.
  isabella. alas! what poor ability's in me
    to do him good?
  lucio. assay the pow'r you have.
  isabella. my power, alas, i doubt!
  lucio. our doubts are traitors,
    and make us lose the good we oft might win
    by fearing to attempt. go to lord angelo,
    and let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
    men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
    all their petitions are as freely theirs
    as they themselves would owe them.
  isabella. i'll see what i can do.
  lucio. but speedily.
  isabella. i will about it straight;
    no longer staying but to give the mother
    notice of my affair. i humbly thank you.
    commend me to my brother; soon at night
    i'll send him certain word of my success.
  lucio. i take my lea
 
 ___________________________
 
it for some
    piece of money, and go through with all.
  escalus. look you, bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the
    most sufficient of your parish.
  elbow. to your worship's house, sir?
  escalus. to my house. fare you well.              [exit elbow]
    what's o'clock, think you?
  justice. eleven, sir.
  escalus. i pray you home to dinner with me.
  justice. i humbly thank you.
  escalus. it grieves me for the death of claudio;
    but there's no remedy.
  justice. lord angelo is severe.
  escalus. it is but needful:
    mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
    but yet, poor claudio! there is no remedy.
    come, sir.                                            exeunt




scene ii.
another room in angelo's house

enter provost and a servant

  servant. he's hearing of a cause; he will come straight.
    i'll tell him of you.
  provost. pray you do. [exit servant] i'll know
    his pleasure; may be he wil
 
 ___________________________
 
ect gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
the prison

enter duke, disguised as before, claudio, and provost

  duke. so, then you hope of pardon from lord angelo?
  claudio. the miserable have no other medicine
    but only hope:
    i have hope to eve, and am prepar'd to die.
  duke. be absolute for death; either death or life
    shall thereby be the sweeter. reason thus with life.
    if i do lose thee, i do lose a thing
    that none but fools would keep. a breath thou art,
    servile to all the skyey influences,
    that dost this habitation where thou keep'st
    hourly afflict. merely, thou art death's fool;
    for him thou labour'st
 
 ___________________________
 
thank you.

                        enter isabella

  isabella. my business is a word or two with claudio.
  provost. and very welcome. look, signior, here's your sister.
  duke. provost, a word with you.
  provost. as many as you please.
  duke. bring me to hear them speak, where i may be conceal'd.
                                         exeunt duke and provost
  claudio. now, sister, what's the comfort?
  isabella. why,
    as all comforts are; most good, most good, indeed.
    lord angelo, having affairs to heaven,
    intends you for his swift ambassador,
    where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
    therefore, your best appointment make with speed;
    to-morrow you set on.
  claudio. is there no remedy?
  isabella. none, but such remedy as, to save a head,
    to cleave a heart in twain.
  claudio. but is there any?
  isabella. yes, brother, you may live:
    there is a devilish mercy in the judge,
    if you'll implore it, that will free your life,
    but fe
 
 ___________________________
 
ays, sir; come.
  lucio. go to kennel, pompey, go.

                               exeunt elbow, pompey and officers

    what news, friar, of the duke?
  duke. i know none. can you tell me of any?
  lucio. some say he is with the emperor of russia; other some,
he is
    in rome; but where is he, think you?
  duke. i know not where; but wheresoever, i wish him well.
  lucio. it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. lord angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  duke. he does well in't.
  lucio. a little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.
  duke. it is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
  lucio. yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it
is
    well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar,
till
    eating and drinking be put down. they say this angelo was not

    made by man and woma
 
 ___________________________
 
                        re-enter provost

  provost. there he must stay until the officer
    arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  duke. have you no countermand for claudio yet
    but he must die to-morrow?
  provost. none, sir, none.
  duke. as near the dawning, provost, as it is,
    you shall hear more ere morning.
  provost. happily
    you something know; yet i believe there comes
    no countermand; no such example have we.
    besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    lord angelo hath to the public ear
    profess'd the contrary.

                         enter a messenger
    this is his lordship's man.
  duke. and here comes claudio's pardon.
  messenger. my lord hath sent you this note; and by me this
further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. good morrow;
for
    as i take it, it is almost day.
  provost. i shall obey him.                      exit messenger
  duke. [aside
 
 ___________________________
 
] this is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin
    for which the pardoner himself is in;
    hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    when it is borne in high authority.
    when vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
    that for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
    now, sir, what news?
  provost. i told you: lord angelo, belike thinking me remiss in
mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  duke. pray you, let's hear.
  provost. [reads] 'whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the
afternoon,
    barnardine. for my better satisfaction, let me have claudio's
    head sent me by five. let this be duly performed, with a
thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet
 
 ___________________________
 
our peril.'
    what say you to this, sir?
  duke. what is that barnardine who is to be executed in th'
    afternoon?
  provost. a bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
    one that is a prisoner nine years old.
  duke. how came it that the absent duke had not either deliver'd
him
    to his liberty or executed him? i have heard it was ever his
    manner to do so.
  provost. his friends still wrought reprieves for him; and,
indeed,
    his fact, till now in the government of lord angelo, came not
to
    an undoubted proof.
  duke. it is now apparent?
  provost. most manifest, and not denied by himself.
  duke. hath he borne himself penitently in prison? how seems he
to
    be touch'd?
  provost. a man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as
a
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's
past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
  duke. he wants advice.
  provost. he will hear none. he hath evermo
 
 ___________________________
 
 supporters are you.

                 enter friar peter and isabella

  peter. now is your time; speak loud, and kneel before him.
  isabella. justice, o royal duke! vail your regard
    upon a wrong'd- i would fain have said a maid!
    o worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
    by throwing it on any other object
    till you have heard me in my true complaint,
    and given me justice, justice, justice, justice.
  duke. relate your wrongs. in what? by whom? be brief.
    here is lord angelo shall give you justice;
    reveal yourself to him.
  isabella. o worthy duke,
    you bid me seek redemption of the devil!
    hear me yourself; for that which i must speak
    must either punish me, not being believ'd,
    or wring redress from you. hear me, o, hear me, here!
  angelo. my lord, her wits, i fear me, are not firm;
    she hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
    cut off by course of justice-
  isabella. by course of justice!
  angelo. and she will speak most bit
 
 ___________________________
 
 hid,
    and hide the false seems true.
  duke. many that are not mad
    have, sure, more lack of reason. what would you say?
  isabella. i am the sister of one claudio,
    condemn'd upon the act of fornication
    to lose his head; condemn'd by angelo.
    i, in probation of a sisterhood,
    was sent to by my brother; one lucio
    as then the messenger-
  lucio. that's i, an't like your grace.
    i came to her from claudio, and desir'd her
    to try her gracious fortune with lord angelo
    for her poor brother's pardon.
  isabella. that's he, indeed.
  duke. you were not bid to speak.
  lucio. no, my good lord;
    nor wish'd to hold my peace.
  duke. i wish you now, then;
    pray you take note of it; and when you have
    a business for yourself, pray heaven you then
    be perfect.
  lucio. i warrant your honour.
  duke. the warrant's for yourself; take heed to't.
  isabella. this gentleman told somewhat of my tale.
  lucio. right.
  duke. it may be right; bu
 
 ___________________________
 
of?
  peter. i know him for a man divine and holy;
    not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
    as he's reported by this gentleman;
    and, on my trust, a man that never yet
    did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.
  lucio. my lord, most villainously; believe it.
  peter. well, he in time may come to clear himself;
    but at this instant he is sick, my lord,
    of a strange fever. upon his mere request-
    being come to knowledge that there was complaint
    intended 'gainst lord angelo- came i hither
    to speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
    is true and false; and what he, with his oath
    and all probation, will make up full clear,
    whensoever he's convented. first, for this woman-
    to justify this worthy nobleman,
    so vulgarly and personally accus'd-
    her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
    till she herself confess it.
  duke. good friar, let's hear it.         exit isabella guarded
    do you not smile at this, lord angelo?
    o 
 
 ___________________________
 
her
    maid, widow, nor wife.
  duke. silence that fellow. i would he had some cause
    to prattle for himself.
  lucio. well, my lord.
  mariana. my lord, i do confess i ne'er was married,
    and i confess, besides, i am no maid.
    i have known my husband; yet my husband
    knows not that ever he knew me.
  lucio. he was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  duke. for the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
  lucio. well, my lord.
  duke. this is no witness for lord angelo.
  mariana. now i come to't, my lord:
    she that accuses him of fornication,
    in self-same manner doth accuse my husband;
    and charges him, my lord, with such a time
    when i'll depose i had him in mine arms,
    with all th' effect of love.
  angelo. charges she moe than me?
  mariana. not that i know.
  duke. no? you say your husband.
  mariana. why, just, my lord, and that is angelo,
    who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
    but knows he thinks that he kno
 
 ___________________________
 
e up your keys.
  provost. pardon me, noble lord;
    i thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    yet did repent me, after more advice;
    for testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    that should by private order else have died,
    i have reserv'd alive.
  duke. what's he?
  provost. his name is barnardine.
  duke. i would thou hadst done so by claudio.
    go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      exit provost
  escalus. i am sorry one so learned and so wise
    as you, lord angelo, have still appear'd,
    should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    and lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
  angelo. i am sorry that such sorrow i procure;
    and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    that i crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'tis my deserving, and i do entreat it.

       re-enter provost, with barnardine, claudio (muffled)
                            and juliet

  duke. which is that barnardine?
  provost. this, my lord.
  duke. there 
 
 ___________________________
 
or better times to come. friar, advise him;
    i leave him to your hand. what muffl'd fellow's that?
  provost. this is another prisoner that i sav'd,
    who should have died when claudio lost his head;
    as like almost to claudio as himself.    [unmuffles claudio]
  duke. [to isabella] if he be like your brother, for his sake
    is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    he is my brother too. but fitter time for that.
    by this lord angelo perceives he's safe;
    methinks i see a quick'ning in his eye.
    well, angelo, your evil quits you well.
    look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.
    i find an apt remission in myself;
    and yet here's one in place i cannot pardon.
    to lucio] you, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
    one all of luxury, an ass, a madman!
    wherein have i so deserv'd of you
    that you extol me thus?
  lucio. faith, my lord, i spoke it but according to the trick.
 