the taming of the shrew

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

    persons in the induction
  a lord
  christopher sly, a tinker
  hostess
  page
  players
  huntsmen
  servants

  baptista minola, a gentleman of padua
  vincentio, a merchant of pisa
  lucentio, son to vincentio, in love with bianca
  petruchio, a gentleman of verona, a suitor to katherina

    suitors to bianca
  gremio
  hortensio

    servants to lucentio
  tranio
  biondello

    servants to petruchio
  grumio
  curtis

  a pedant

    daughters to baptista
  katherina, the shrew
  bianca

  a widow

  tailor, haberdasher, and servants attending on baptista and
    petruchio

                             scene:
            padua, and petruchio's house in the country

sc_1
                      induction. scene i.
                  before an alehouse on a heath

                      enter hostess and sly

  sly. i'll
 
 ___________________________
 
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act i. scene i.
padua. a public place

enter lucentio and his man tranio

  lucentio. tranio, since for the great desire i had
    to see fair padua, nursery of arts,
    i am arriv'd for fruitful lombardy,
    the pleasant garden of great italy,
    and by my father's love and leave am arm'd
    with his good will and thy good company,
    my trusty servant well approv'd in all,
    here let us breathe, and haply institute
    a course of learning and ingenious studies.
    pisa, renowned for grave citizens,
    gave me my being and m
 
 ___________________________
 
s virtue and this moral discipline,
    let's be no stoics nor no stocks, i pray,
    or so devote to aristotle's checks
    as ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd.
    balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
    and practise rhetoric in your common talk;
    music and poesy use to quicken you;
    the mathematics and the metaphysics,
    fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
    no profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en;
    in brief, sir, study what you most affect.
  lucentio. gramercies, tranio, well dost thou advise.
    if, biondello, thou wert come ashore,
    we could at once put us in readiness,
    and take a lodging fit to entertain
    such friends as time in padua shall beget.

      enter baptista with his two daughters, katherina
        and bianca; gremio, a pantaloon; hortensio,
        suitor to bianca. lucentio and tranio stand by

    but stay awhile; what company is this?
  tranio. master, some show to welcome us to town.
  baptista. ge
 
 ___________________________
 
less you were of gentler, milder mould.
  katherina. i' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear;
    iwis it is not halfway to her heart;
    but if it were, doubt not her care should be
    to comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool,
    and paint your face, and use you like a fool.
  hortensio. from all such devils, good lord deliver us!
  gremio. and me, too, good lord!
  tranio. husht, master! here's some good pastime toward;
    that wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
  lucentio. but in the other's silence do i see
    maid's mild behaviour and sobriety.
    peace, tranio!
  tranio. well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.
  baptista. gentlemen, that i may soon make good
    what i have said- bianca, get you in;
    and let it not displease thee, good bianca,
    for i will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
  katherina. a pretty peat! it is best
    put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
  bianca. sister, content you in my discontent.
    sir, to your p
 
 ___________________________
 
leasure humbly i subscribe;
    my books and instruments shall be my company,
    on them to look, and practise by myself.
  lucentio. hark, tranio, thou mayst hear minerva speak!
  hortensio. signior baptista, will you be so strange?
    sorry am i that our good will effects
    bianca's grief.
  gremio. why will you mew her up,
    signior baptista, for this fiend of hell,
    and make her bear the penance of her tongue?
  baptista. gentlemen, content ye; i am resolv'd.
    go in, bianca.                                   exit bianca
    and for i know she taketh most delight
    in music, instruments, and poetry,
 
 ___________________________
 
nd then have to't afresh. sweet bianca! happy
man
    be his dole! he that runs fastest gets the ring. how say you,
    signior gremio?
  gremio. i am agreed; and would i had given him the best horse
in
    padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed
her,
    and bed her, and rid the house of her! come on.
                                     exeunt gremio and hortensio
  tranio. i pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
    that love should of a sudden take such hold?
  lucentio. o tranio, till i found it to be true,
    i never thought it possible or likely.
    but see! while idly i stood looking on,
    i found the effect of love in idleness;
    and now in plainness do confess to thee,
    that art to me as secret and as dear
    as anna to the queen of carthage was-
    tranio, i burn, i pine, i perish, tranio,
    if i achieve not this young modest girl.
    counsel me, tranio, for i know thou canst;
    assist me, tranio, for i know thou wilt.
  trani
 
 ___________________________
 
o. master, it is no time to chide you now;
    affection is not rated from the heart;
    if love have touch'd you, nought remains but so:
    'redime te captum quam queas minimo.'
  lucentio. gramercies, lad. go forward; this contents;
    the rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
  tranio. master, you look'd so longly on the maid.
    perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
  lucentio. o, yes, i saw sweet beauty in her face,
    such as the daughter of agenor had,
    that made great jove to humble him to her hand,
    when with his knees he kiss'd the cretan strand.
  tranio. saw you no more? mark'd you not how her sister
    began to scold and raise up such a storm
    that mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
  lucentio. tranio, i saw her coral lips to move,
    and with her breath she did perfume the air;
    sacred and sweet was all i saw in her.
  tranio.
 
 ___________________________
 
 nay, then 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
    i pray, awake, sir. if you love the maid,
    bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. thus it stands:
    her elder sister is so curst and shrewd
    that, till the father rid his hands of her,
    master, your love must live a maid at home;
    and therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
    because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.
  lucentio. ah, tranio, what a cruel father's he!
    but art thou not advis'd he took some care
    to get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
  tranio. ay, marry, am i, sir, and now 'tis plotted.
  lucentio. i have it, tranio.
  tranio. master, for my hand,
    both our inventions meet and jump in one.
  lucentio. tell me thine first.
  tranio. you will be schoolmaster,
    and undertake the teaching of the maid-
    that's your device.
  lucentio. it is. may it be done?
  tranio. not
 
 ___________________________
 
 possible; for who shall bear your part
    and be in padua here vincentio's son;
    keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
    visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
  lucentio. basta, content thee, for i have it full.
    we have not yet been seen in any house,
    nor can we be distinguish'd by our faces
    for man or master. then it follows thus:
    thou shalt be master, tranio, in my stead,
    keep house and port and servants, as i should;
    i will some other be- some florentine,
    some neapolitan, or meaner man of pisa.
    'tis hatch'd, and shall be so. tranio, at once
    uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak.
    when biondello comes, he
 
 ___________________________
 
 waits on thee;
    but i will charm him first to keep his tongue.
  tranio. so had you need.                [they exchange habits]
    in brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
    and i am tied to be obedient-
    for so your father charg'd me at our parting:
    'be serviceable to my son' quoth he,
    although i think 'twas in another sense-
    i am content to be lucentio,
    because so well i love lucentio.
  lucentio. tranio, be so because lucentio loves;
    and let me be a slave t' achieve that maid
    whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.

                       enter biondello.

    here comes the rogue. sirrah, where have you been?
  biondello. where have i been! nay, how now! where are you?
    master, has my fellow tranio stol'n your clothes?
    or you stol'n his? or both? pray, what's the news?
  lucentio. sirrah, come hither; 'tis no time to jest,
    and therefore frame your manners to the time.
    your
 
 ___________________________
 
 fellow tranio here, to save my life,
    puts my apparel and my count'nance on,
    and i for my escape have put on his;
    for in a quarrel since i came ashore
    i kill'd a man, and fear i was descried.
    wait you on him, i charge you, as becomes,
    while i make way from hence to save my life.
    you understand me?
  biondello. i, sir? ne'er a whit.
  lucentio. and not a jot of tranio in your mouth:
    tranio is chang'd into lucentio.
  biondello. the better for him; would i were so too!
  tranio. so could i, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
    that lucentio indeed had baptista's youngest daughter.
    but, sirrah, not for my sake but your master's, i advise
    you use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.
    when i am alone, why, then i am tranio;
    but in all places else your master lucentio.
  lucentio. tranio, let's go.
    one thing more rests, that thyself execute-
    to make one am
 
 ___________________________
 
e access unto bianca
    till katherine the curst have got a husband.
  grumio. katherine the curst!
    a title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  hortensio. now shall my friend petruchio do me grace,
    and offer me disguis'd in sober robes
    to old baptista as a schoolmaster
    well seen in music, to instruct bianca;
    that so i may by this device at least
    have leave and leisure to make love to her,
    and unsuspected court her by herself.

        enter gremio with lucentio disguised as cambio

  grumio. here's no knavery! see, to beguile the old folks, how
the
    young folks lay their heads together! master, master, look
about
    you. who goes there, ha?
  hortensio. peace, grumio! it is the rival of my love.
petruchio,
    stand by awhile.
  grumio. a proper stripling, and an amorous!
                                              [they stand aside]
  gremio. o, very well; i have perus'd the note.
    hark you, sir; i'll have them very fairly bound
 
 ___________________________
 
-
    all books of love, see that at any hand;
    and see you read no other lectures to her.
    you understand me- over and beside
    signior baptista's liberality,
    i'll mend it with a largess. take your paper too,
    and let me have them very well perfum'd;
    for she is sweeter than perfume itself
    to whom they go to. what will you read to her?
  lucentio. whate'er i read to her, i'll plead for you
    as for my patron, stand you so assur'd,
    as firmly as yourself were still in place;
    yea, and perhaps with more successful words
    than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
  gremio. o this learning, what a thing it is!
  grumio. o this woodcock, what an ass it is!
  petruchio. peace, sirrah!
  hortensio. grumio, mum!                       [coming forward]
    god save you, signior gremio!
  gremio. and you are well met, signior 
 
 ___________________________
 
o great a blow to hear
    as will a chestnut in a fariner's fire?
    tush! tush! fear boys with bugs.
  grumio. for he fears none.
  gremio. hortensio, hark:
    this gentleman is happily arriv'd,
    my mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
  hortensio. i promis'd we would be contributors
    and bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
  gremio. and so we will- provided that he win her.
  grumio. i would i were as sure of a good dinner.

    enter tranio, bravely apparelled as lucentio, and biondello

  tranio. gentlemen, god save you! if i may be bold,
    tell me, i beseech you, which is the readiest way
    to the house of signior baptista minola?
  biondello. he that has the two fair daughters; is't he you
mean?
  tranio. even he, biondello.
  gremio. hark you, sir, you mean not her to-
  tranio. perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
  petruchio. not her that chides, sir, at any hand, i pray.
  tranio. i love no chiders, sir. biondello, let's away.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
lucentio.  [aside]  well begun, tranio.
  hortensio. sir, a word ere you go.
    are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
  tranio. and if i be, sir, is it any offence?
  gremio. no; if without more words you will get you hence.
  tranio. why, sir, i pray, are not the streets as free
    for me as for you?
  gremio. but so is not she.

  tranio. for what reason, i beseech you?
  gremio. for this reason, if you'll know,
    that she's the choice love of signior gremio.
  hortensio
 
 ___________________________
 
. that she's the chosen of signior hortensio.
  tranio. softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
    do me this right- hear me with patience.
    baptista is a noble gentleman,
    to whom my father is not all unknown,
    and, were his daughter fairer than she is,
    she may more suitors have, and me for one.
    fair leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
    then well one more may fair bianca have;
    and so she shall: lucentio shall make one,
    though paris came in hope to speed alone.
  gremio. what, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
  lucentio. sir, give him head; i know he'll prove a jade.
  petruchio. hortensio, to what end are all these words?
  hortensio. sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
    did you yet ever see baptista's daughter?
  tranio. no, sir, but hear i do that he hath two:
    the one as famous for a scolding tongue
    as is the other for beauteous modesty.
  petruchio. sir, sir, the
 
 ___________________________
 
thee in.
                                                     exit bianca
  katherina. what, will you not suffer me? nay, now i see
    she is your treasure, she must have a husband;
    i must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day,
    and for your love to her lead apes in hell.
    talk not to me; i will go sit and weep,
    till i can find occasion of revenge.          exit katherina
  baptista. was ever gentleman thus griev'd as i?
    but who comes here?

        enter gremio, with lucentio in the habit of a mean man;
         petruchio, with hortensio as a musician; and tranio,
    as lucentio, with his boy, biondello, bearing a lute and
books

  gremio. good morrow, neighbour baptista.
  baptista. good morrow, neighbour gremio.
    god save you, gentlemen!
  petruchio. and you, good sir! pray, have you not a daughter
    call'd katherina, fair and virtuous?
  baptista. i have a daughter, sir, call'd katherina.
  gremio. you are too blunt; go to it orderly.
  petruchi
 
 ___________________________
 
s sake.
  gremio. saving your tale, petruchio, i pray,
    let us that are poor petitioners speak too.
    bacare! you are marvellous forward.
  petruchio. o, pardon me, signior gremio! i would fain be doing.
  gremio. i doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing.
    neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, i am sure of it. to
    express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly
    beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young
    scholar  [presenting lucentio]  that hath been long studying
at
    rheims; as cunning in greek, latin, and other languages, as
the
    other in music and mathematics. his name is cambio. pray
accept
    his service.
  baptista. a thousand thanks, signior gremio. welcome, good
cambio.
    [to tranio]  but, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a
stranger.
    may i be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
  tranio. pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own
    that, being a stranger in this city here,
    do m
 
 ___________________________
 
anca, fair and virtuous.
    nor is your firm resolve unknown to me
    in the preferment of the eldest sister.
    this liberty is all that i request-
    that, upon knowledge of my parentage,
    i may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
    and free access and favour as the rest.
    and toward the education of your daughters
    i here bestow a simple instrument,
    and this small packet of greek and latin books.
    if you accept them, then their worth is great.
  baptista. lucentio is your name? of whence, i pray?
  tranio. of pisa, sir; son to vincentio.
  baptista. a mighty man of pisa. by report
    i know him well. you are very welcome, sir.
    take you the lute, and you the set of books;
    you shall go see your pupils presently.
    holla, within!

                         enter a servant

    sirrah, lead these gentlemen
    to my daughters; and tell them both
    these are their tutors. bid them use them well.

                exit servant leading 
 
 ___________________________
 
hortensio carrying the lute
                                     and lucentio with the books

    we will go walk a little in the orchard,
    and then to dinner. you are passing welcome,
    and so i pray you all to think yourselves.
  petruchio. signior baptista, my business asketh haste,
    and every day i cannot come to woo.
    you knew my father well, and in him me,
    left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
    which i have bettered rather than decreas'd.
    then tell me, if i get your daughter's love,
    what dowry shall i have with her to wif
 
 ___________________________
 
eave, and thank you both.
  gremio. adieu, good neighbour.                   exit baptista
    now, i fear thee not.
    sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
    to give thee all, and in his waning age
    set foot under thy table. tut, a toy!
    an old italian fox is not so kind, my boy.              exit
  tranio. a vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
    yet i have fac'd it with a card of ten.
    'tis in my head to do my master good:
    i see no reason but suppos'd lucentio
    must get a father, call'd suppos'd vincentio;
    and that's a wonder- fathers commonly
    do get their children; but in this case of wooing
    a child shall get a sire, if i fail not of my cunning.
 exit




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so 
 
 ___________________________
 
long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
padua. baptista's house

enter lucentio as cambio, hortensio as licio, and bianca

  lucentio. fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir.
    have you so soon forgot the entertainment
    her sister katherine welcome'd you withal?
  hortensio. but, wrangling pedant, this is
    the patroness of heavenly harmony.
    then give me leave to have prerogative;
    and when in music we have spent an hour,
    your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
  lucentio. preposterous ass, that never read so far
    to know the cause why music was ordain'd!
    was it not to refresh the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i will not bear these braves of thine.
  bianca. why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
    to strive for that which resteth in my choice.
    i arn no breeching scholar in the schools,
    i'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
    but learn my lessons as i please myself.
    and to cut off all strife: here sit we down;
    take you your instrument, play you the whiles!
    his lecture will be done ere you have tun'd.
  hortensio. you'll leave his lecture when i am in tune?
  lucentio. that will be never- tune your instrument.
  bianca. where left we last?
  lucentio. here, madam:
    'hic ibat simois, hic est sigeia tellus,
    hic steterat priami regia celsa senis.'
  bianca. construe them.
  lucentio. 'hic ibat' as i told you before- 'simois' i am
lucentio-
    'hic est' son unto vincentio of pisa- 'sigeia tellus'
disguised
    thus to get your love- 'hic steterat' and that lucentio that
    comes a-wooing- 'priami' is my man tranio- 'regia' bearing my
    por
 
 ___________________________
 
t- 'celsa senis' that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
  hortensio. madam, my instrument's in tune.
  bianca. let's hear. o fie! the treble jars.
  lucentio. spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
  bianca. now let me see if i can construe it: 'hic ibat simois'
i
    know you not- 'hic est sigeia tellus' i trust you not- 'hic
    steterat priami' take heed he hear us not- 'regia' presume
not-
   'celsa senis' despair not.
  hortensio. madam, 'tis now in tune.
  lucentio. all but the bass.
  hortensio. the bass is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
    [aside]  how fiery and forward our pedant is!
    now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.
    pedascule, i'll watch you better yet.
  bianca. in time i may believe, yet i mistrust.
  lucentio. mistrust it not- for sure, aeacides
    was ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.
  bianca. i must believe my master; else, i promise you,
    i should be arguing still upon that doubt;
    but let it r
 
 ___________________________
 
est. now, licio, to you.
    good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
    that i have been thus pleasant with you both.
  hortensio.  [to lucentio]  you may go walk and give me leave
      awhile;
    my lessons make no music in three parts.
  lucentio. are you so formal, sir? well, i must wait,
    [aside]  and watch withal; for, but i be deceiv'd,
    our fine musician groweth amorous.
  hortensio. madam, before you touch the instrument
    to learn the order of my fingering,
    i must begin with rudiments of art,
    to teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
    more pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
    than hath been taught by any of my trade;
    and there it is in writing fairly drawn.
  bianca. why, i am past my gamut long ago.

 
 ___________________________
 
 "e la mi" show pity or i die.'
    call you this gamut? tut, i like it not!
    old fashions please me best; i am not so nice
    to change true rules for odd inventions.

                       enter a servant

  servant. mistress, your father prays you leave your books
    and help to dress your sister's chamber up.
    you know to-morrow is the wedding-day.
  bianca. farewell, sweet masters, both; i must be gone.
                                       exeunt bianca and servant
  lucentio. faith, mistress, then i have no cause to stay.
 exit
  hortensio. but i have cause to pry into this pedant;
    methinks he looks as though he were in love.
    yet if thy thoughts, bianca, be so humble
    to cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale-
    seize thee that list. if once i find thee ranging,
  hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.             exit




scene ii.
padua. before baptista's house

enter baptista, gremio, tranio as lucentio, katherina, bianca,
luc
 
 ___________________________
 
entio as cambio, and attendants

  baptista.  [to tranio]  signior lucentio, this is the 'pointed
day
    that katherine and petruchio should be married,
    and yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
    what will be said? what mockery will it be
    to want the bridegroom when the priest attends
    to speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
    what says lucentio to this shame of ours?
  katherina. no shame but mine; i must, forsooth, be forc'd
    to give my hand, oppos'd against my heart,
    unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen,
    who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
    i told you, i, he was a frantic fool,
    hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour;
    and, to be noted for a merry man,
    he'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
    make friends invited, and proclaim the banns;
    yet never means to wed wh
 
 ___________________________
 
          exeunt baptista, gremio, biondello, and attendents
  tranio. but to her love concerneth us to ad
    her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    as i before imparted to your worship,
    i am to get a man- whate'er he be
    it skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
    and he shall be vincentio of pisa,
    and make assurance here in padua
    of greater sums than i have promised.
    so shall you quietly enjoy your hope
    and marry sweet bianca with consent.
  lucentio. were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
    doth watch bianca's steps so narrowly,
    'twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
    which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
    i'll keep mine own despite of all the world.
  tranio. that by degrees we mean to look into
    and watch our vantage in this business;
    we'll over-reach the greybeard, gremio,
    the narrow-prying father, minola,
    the quaint musician, amorous licio-
    all for my master's sake, lucentio.

 
 ___________________________
 
  signior gremio, came you from the church?
  gremio. as willingly as e'er i came from school.
  tranio. and is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
  gremio. a bridegroom, say you? 'tis a groom indeed,
    a grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
  tranio. curster than she? why, 'tis impossible.
  gremio. why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
  tranio. why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
  gremio. tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool, to him!
    i'll tell you, sir lucentio: when the priest
    should ask if katherine should be his wife,
    'ay, by gogs-wouns' quoth he, and swore so loud
    that, all amaz'd, the priest let fall the book;
    and as he stoop'd again to take it up,
    this mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
    that down fell priest and book, and book and priest.
    'now take them up,' quoth he 'if any list.'
  tranio. what said the wench, when he rose again?
  gremio. trembled and shook, for why he stamp'd and swore
    as if
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the proudest he
    that stops my way in padua. grumio,
    draw forth thy weapon; we are beset with thieves;
    rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
    fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, kate;
    i'll buckler thee against a million.
                         exeunt petruchio, katherina, and grumio
  baptista. nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
  gremio. went they not quickly, i should die with laughing.
  tranio. of all mad matches, never was the like.
  lucentio. mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
  bianca. that, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
  gremio. i warrant him, petruchio is kated.
  baptista. neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom
wants
    for to supply the places at the table,
    you know there wants no junkets at the feast.
    lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place;
    and let bianca take her sister's room.
  tranio. shall sweet bianca practise how to bride it?
  baptista. she shall, luce
 
 ___________________________
 
 hurly i intend
    that all is done in reverend care of her-
    and, in conclusion, she shall watch all night;
    and if she chance to nod i'll rail and brawl
    and with the clamour keep her still awake.
    this is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
    and thus i'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
    he that knows better how to tame a shrew,
    now let him speak; 'tis charity to show.                exit




scene ii.
padua. before baptista's house

enter tranio as lucentio, and hortensio as licio

  tranio. is 't possible, friend licio, that mistress bianca
    doth fancy any other but lucentio?
    i tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
  hortensio. sir, to satisfy you in what i have said,
    stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
                                              [they stand aside]

               enter bianca, and lucentio as cambio

  lucentio. now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
  bianca. what, master, read you, f
 
 ___________________________
 
irst resolve me that.
  lucentio. i read that i profess, 'the art to love.'
  bianca. and may you prove, sir, master of your art!
  lucentio. while you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart.
                                                   [they retire]
  hortensio. quick proceeders, marry! now tell me, i pray,
    you that durst swear that your mistress blanca
    lov'd none in the world so well as lucentio.
  tranio. o despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
    i tell thee, licio, this is wonderful.
  hortensio. mistake no more; i am not licio.
    nor a musician as i seem to be;
    but one that scorn to live in this disguise
    for such a one as leaves a gentleman
    and makes a god of such a cullion.
    know, sir, that i am call'd hortensio.
  tranio. signior hortensio, i have often heard
    of your entire affection to bianca;
    and since mine eyes are witness of her lightness
 
 ___________________________
 
,
    i will with you, if you be so contented,
    forswear bianca and her love for ever.
  hortensio. see, how they kiss and court! signior lucentio,
    here is my hand, and here i firmly vow
    never to woo her more, but do forswear her,
    as one unworthy all the former favours
    that i have fondly flatter'd her withal.
  tranio. and here i take the like unfeigned oath,
    never to marry with her though she would entreat;
    fie on her! see how beastly she doth court him!
  hortensio. would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
    for me, that i may surely keep mine oath,
    i will be married to a wealthy widow
    
 
 ___________________________
 
ere three days pass, which hath as long lov'd me
    as i have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard.
    and so farewell, signior lucentio.
    kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
    shall win my love; and so i take my leave,
    in resolution as i swore before.                        exit
  tranio. mistress bianca, bless you with such grace
    as 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
    nay, i have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
    and have forsworn you with hortensio.
  bianca. tranio, you jest; but have you both forsworn me?
  tranio. mistress, we have.
  lucentio. then we are rid of licio.
  tranio. i' 
 
 ___________________________
 
r,
    that teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
    to tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

                       enter biondello

  biondello. o master, master, have watch'd so long
    that i am dog-weary; but at last i spied
    an ancient angel coming down the hill
    will serve the turn.
  tranio. what is he, biondello?
  biondello. master, a mercatante or a pedant,
    i know not what; but formal in apparel,
    in gait and countenance surely like a father.
  lucentio. and what of him, tranio?
  tranio. if he be credulous and trust my tale,
    i'll make him glad to seem vincentio,
    and give assurance to baptista minola
    as if he were the right vincentio.
    take in your love, and then let me alone.
                                      exeunt lucentio and bianca

                         enter a pedant

  pedant. god save you, sir!
  tranio. and you, sir; you are welcome.
    travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
  pedant. sir, 
 
 ___________________________
 
sir, 'tis almost two,
    and 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
  petruchio. it shall be seven ere i go to horse.
    look what i speak, or do, or think to do,
    you are still crossing it. sirs, let 't alone;
    i will not go to-day; and ere i do,
    it shall be what o'clock i say it is.
  hortensio. why, so this gallant will command the sun.
                                                          exeunt




scene iv.
padua. before baptista's house

enter tranio as lucentio, and the pedant dressed like vincentio

  tranio. sir, this is the house; please it you that i call?
  pedant. ay, what else? and, but i be deceived,
    signior baptista may remember me
    near twenty years ago in genoa,
    where we were lodgers at the pegasus.
  tranio. 'tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
    with such austerity as longeth to a father.

                       enter biondello

  pedant. i warrant you. but, sir, here comes your boy;
    'twere good he were
 
 ___________________________
 
 school'd.
  tranio. fear you not him. sirrah biondello,
    now do your duty throughly, i advise you.
    imagine 'twere the right vincentio.
  biondello. tut, fear not me.
  tranio. but hast thou done thy errand to baptista?
  biondello. i told him that your father was at venice,
    and that you look'd for him this day in padua.
  tranio. th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
    here comes baptista. set your countenance, sir.

                 enter baptista, and lucentio as cambio

    signior baptista, you are happily met.
    [to the pedant] sir, this is the gentleman i told you of;
    i pray you stand good father to me now;
    give me bianca for my patrimony.
  pedant. soft, son!
    sir, by your leave: having come to padua
    to gather in some debts, my son lucentio
    made me acquainted with a weighty cause
    of love between your daughter and himself;
    and- for the good report i hear of you,
    and for the love he beareth to your daug
 
 ___________________________
 
r,
    and she to him- to stay him not too long,
    i am content, in a good father's care,
    to have him match'd; and, if you please to like
    no worse than i, upon some agreement
    me shall you find ready and willing
    with one consent to have her so bestow'd;
    for curious i cannot be with you,
    signior baptista, of whom i hear so well.
  baptista. sir, pardon me in what i have to say.
    your plainness and your shortness please me well.
    right true it is your son lucentio here
    doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
    or both dissemble deeply their affections;
    and therefore, if you say no more than this,
    that like a father you will deal with him,
    and pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
    the match is made, and all is done-
    your son shall have my daughter with consent.
  tranio. i thank you, sir. where then do you know best
    we be affied, and such assurance ta'en
    as shall with either part's agreement stand?
  baptista
 
 ___________________________
 
. not in my house, lucentio, for you know
    pitchers have ears, and i have many servants;
    besides, old gremio is heark'ning still,
    and happily we might be interrupted.
  tranio. then at my lodging, an it like you.
    there doth my father lie; and there this night
    we'll pass the business privately and well.
    send for your daughter by your servant here;
    my boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
    the worst is this, that at so slender warning
    you are like to have a thin and slender pit
 
 ___________________________
 
tance.
  baptista. it likes me well. cambio, hie you home,
    and bid bianca make her ready straight;
    and, if you will, tell what hath happened-
    lucentio's father is arriv'd in padua,
    and how she's like to be lucentio's wife.      exit lucentio
  biondello. i pray the gods she may, with all my heart.
  tranio. dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
                                                  exit biondello
    signior baptista, shall i lead the way?
    welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer;
    come, sir; we will better it in pisa.
  baptista. i follow you.                                 exeunt

            re-enter lucentio as cambio, and biondello

  biondello. cambio.
  lucentio. what say'st thou, bion
 
 ___________________________
 
dello?
  biondello. you saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
  lucentio. biondello, what of that?
  biondello. faith, nothing; but has left me here behind to
expound
    the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
  lucentio. i pray thee moralize them.
  biondello. then thus: baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving
    father of a deceitful son.
  lucentio. and what of him?
  biondello. his daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
  lucentio. and then?
  biondello. the old priest at saint luke's church is at your
command
    at all hours.
  lucentio. and what of all this?
  biondello. i cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    counterfeit assurance. take your assurance of her, cum
privilegio
    ad imprimendum solum; to th' church take the priest, clerk,
and
    some sufficient honest witnesses.
    if this be not that you look for, i have more to say,
    but bid bianca farewell for ever and a day.
  lucentio. 
 
 ___________________________
 
hear'st thou, biondello?
  biondello. i cannot tarry. i knew a wench married in an
afternoon
    as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and
so
    may you, sir; and so adieu, sir. my master hath appointed me
to
    go to saint luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against
you
    come with your appendix.
 exit
  lucentio. i may and will, if she be so contented.
    she will be pleas'd; then wherefore should i doubt?
    hap what hap may, i'll roundly go about her;
    it shall go hard if cambio go without her.              exit




scene v.
a public road

enter petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and servants

  petruchio. come on, a god's name; once more toward our
father's.
    good lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
  katherina. the moon? the sun! it is not moonlight now.
  petruchio.
 
 ___________________________
 
ther.
    pardon, i pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
  petruchio. do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
    which way thou travellest- if along with us,
    we shall be joyful of thy company.
  vincentio. fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
    that with your strange encounter much amaz'd me,
    my name is call'd vincentio, my dwelling pisa,
    and bound i am to padua, there to visit
    a son of mine, which long i have not seen.
  petruchio. what is his name?
  vincentio. lucentio, gentle sir.
  petruchio. happily met; the happier for thy son.
    and now by law, as well as reverend age,
    i may entitle thee my loving father:
    the sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
    thy son by this hath married. wonder not,
    nor be not grieved- she is of good esteem,
    her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
    beside, so qualified as may beseem
    the spouse of any noble gentleman.
    let me embrace with old vincentio;
    and wander we to see thy honest son
 
 ___________________________
 
orks of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
padua. before lucentio's house

enter biondello, lucentio, and bianca; gremio is out before

  biondello. softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  lucentio. i fly, biondello; but they may chance to need thee at
    home, therefore leave us.
  biondello. nay, faith, i'll see the church a your back, and
then
    come back to my master's as soon as i can.
                          exeunt lucentio, bianca, and biondello
  gremio. i marvel cambio comes not all this while.

           enter petruchi
 
 ___________________________
 
o, katherina, vincentio, grumio,
                          and attendants

  petruchio. sir, here's the door; this is lucentio's house;
    my father's bears more toward the market-place;
    thither must i, and here i leave you, sir.
  vincentio. you shall not choose but drink before you go;
    i think i shall command your welcome here,
    and by all likelihood some cheer is toward.         [knocks]
  gremio. they're busy within; you were best knock louder.
                                [pedant looks out of the window]
  pedant. what's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
  vincentio. is signior
 
 ___________________________
 
 lucentio within, sir?
  pedant. he's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
  vincentio. what if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to
make
    merry withal?
  pedant. keep your hundred pounds to yourself; he shall need
none so
    long as i live.
  petruchio. nay, i told you your son was well beloved in padua.
do
    you hear, sir? to leave frivolous circumstances, i pray you
tell
    signior lucentio that his father is come from pisa, and is
here
    at the door to speak with him.
  pedant. thou liest: his father is come from padua, and here
looking
    out at the window.
  vincentio. art thou his father?
  pedant. ay, sir; so his mother says, if i may believe her.
  petruchio.  [to vincentio]  why, how now, gentleman!
    why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another man's
name.
  pedant. lay hands on the villain; i believe 'a means to cozen
    somebody in this city under
 
 ___________________________
 
,
but
    your words show you a madman. why, sir, what 'cerns it you if
i
    wear pearl and gold? i thank my good father, i am able to
    maintain it.
  vincentio. thy father! o villain! he is a sailmaker in bergamo.
  baptista. you mistake, sir; you mistake, sir. pray, what do you

    think is his name?
  vincentio. his name! as if i knew not his name! i have brought
him
    up ever since he was three years old, and his name is tranio.
  pedant. away, away, mad ass! his name is lucentio; and he is
mine
    only son, and heir to the lands of me, signior vicentio.
  vincentio. lucentio! o, he hath murd'red his master! lay hold
on
    him, i charge you, in the duke's name. o, my son, my son!
tell
    me, thou villain, where is my son, lucentio?
  tranio. call forth an officer.

                      enter one with an officer

    carry this mad knave to the gaol. father baptista, i charge
you
    see that he be forthcoming.
  vincentio. carry me to the gaol!
  gre
 
 ___________________________
 
mio. stay, officer; he shall not go to prison.
  baptista. talk not, signior gremio; i say he shall go to
prison.
  gremio. take heed, signior baptista, lest you be cony-catch'd
in
    this business; i dare swear this is the right vincentio.
  pedant. swear if thou dar'st.
  gremio. nay, i dare not swear it.
  tranio. then thou wert best say that i am not lucentio.
  gremio. yes, i know thee to be signior lucentio.
  baptista. away with the dotard; to the gaol with him!
  vincentio. thus strangers may be hal'd and abus'd. o monstrous
    villain!

          re-enter biondello, with lucentio and bianca

  biondello. o, we are spoil'd; and yonder he is! deny him,
forswear
    him, or else we are all undone.
         exeunt biondello, tranio, and pedant, as fast as may be
  lucentio.  [kneeling]  pardon, sweet father.
  vincentio. lives my sweet son?
  bianca. pardon, dear father.
  baptista. 
 
 ___________________________
 
how hast thou offended?
    where is lucentio?
  lucentio. here's lucentio,
    right son to the right vincentio,
    that have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
    while counterfeit supposes blear'd thine eyne.
  gremio. here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
  vincentio. where is that damned villain, tranio,
    that fac'd and brav'd me in this matter so?
  baptista. why, tell me, is not this my cambio?
  bianca. cambio is chang'd into lucentio.
  lucentio. love wrought these miracles. bianca's love
    made me exchange my state with tranio,
    while he did bear my countenance in the town;
    and happily i have arrived at the last
    unto the wished haven of my bliss.
    what tranio did, myself enforc'd him to;
    then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
  vincentio. i'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me
to
    the gaol.
  baptista.  [to lucentio]  but do you hear, sir? have you
married my
    daughter without a
 
 ___________________________
 
sking my good will?
  vincentio. fear not, baptista; we will content you, go to; but
i
    will in to be revenged for this villainy.               exit
  baptista. and i to sound the depth of this knavery.       exit
  lucentio. look not pale, bianca; thy father will not frown.
                                      exeunt lucentio and bianca
  gremio. my cake is dough, but i'll in among the rest;
    out of hope of all but my share of the feast.           exit
  katherina. husband, let's follow to see the end of this ado.
  petruchio. first kiss me, kate, and we will.
  katherina. what, in the midst of the street?
  petruchio. what, art thou asham'd of me?
  katherina. no, sir; god forbid; but asham'd to kiss.
  petruchio. why, then, let's home again. come, sirrah, let's
away.
  katherina. nay, i will give thee
 
 ___________________________
 
 a kiss; now pray thee, love,
stay.
  petruchio. is not this well? come, my sweet kate:
    better once than never, for never too late.           exeunt




scene ii.
lucentio's house

enter baptista, vincentio, gremio, the pedant, lucentio, bianca,
petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and widow. the servingmen with
tranio,
biondello, and grumio, bringing in a banquet

  lucentio. at last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    and time it is when raging war is done
    to smile at scapes and perils overblown.
    my fair bianca, bid my father welcome,
    while i with self-same kindness welcome thine.
    brother petruchio, sister katherina,
    and thou, hortensio, with thy loving widow,
    feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
    my banquet is to close our stomachs up
    after our great good cheer. pray you, sit down;
    for now we sit to cha
 
 ___________________________
 
ore i'll sleep again.
  petruchio. nay, that you shall not; since you have begun,
    have at you for a bitter jest or two.
  bianca. am i your bird? i mean to shift my bush,
    and then pursue me as you draw your bow.
    you are welcome all.
                             exeunt bianca, katherina, and widow
  petruchio. she hath prevented me. here, signior tranio,
    this bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
    therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.
  tranio. o, sir, lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
    which runs himself, and catches for his master.
  petruchio. a good swift simile, but something currish.
  tranio. 'tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself;
    'tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
  baptista. o, o, petruchio! tranio hits you now.
  lucentio. i thank thee for that gird, good tranio.
  hortensio. confess, confess; hath he not hit you here?
  petruchio. 'a has a little gall'd me, i confess;
    and, as the jest did glance 
 
 ___________________________
 
away from me,
    'tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.
  baptista. now, in good sadness, son petruchio,
    i think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
  petruchio. well, i say no; and therefore, for assurance,
    let's each one send unto his wife,
    and he whose wife is most obedient,
    to come at first when he doth send for her,
    shall win the wager which we will propose.
  hortensio. content. what's the wager?
  lucentio. twenty crowns.
  petruchio. twenty crowns?
    i'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
    but twenty times so much upon my wife.
  lucentio. a hundred then.
  hortensio. content.
  petruchio. a match! 'tis done.
  hortensio. who shall begin?
  lucentio. that will i.
    go, biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
  biondello. i go.                                          exit
  baptista. son, i'll be your half bianca comes.
  lucentio. i'll have no halves; i'll bear it all mys
 
 ___________________________
 
                 re-enter katherina

  baptista. now, by my holidame, here comes katherina!
  katherina. what is your will, sir, that you send for me?
  petruchio. where is your sister, and hortensio's wife?
  katherina. they sit conferring by the parlour fire.
  petruchio. go, fetch them hither; if they deny to come.
    swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
    away, i say, and bring them hither straight.
                                                  exit katherina
  lucentio. here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
  hortensio. and so it is. i wonder what it bodes.
  petruchio. marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
    an awful rule, and right supremacy;
    and, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy.
  baptista. now fair befall thee, good petruchio!
    the wager thou hast won; and i will ad
    unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
    another dowry to another daughter,
    for she is chang'd, as she had never been.
  petruchio.
 
 ___________________________
 
 virtue and obedience.

                 re-enter katherina with bianca and widow

    see where she comes, and brings your froward wives
    as prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
    katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not:
    off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
                                            [katherina complies]
  widow. lord, let me never have a cause to sigh
    till i be brought to such a silly pass!
  bianca. fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
  lucentio. i would your duty were as foolish too;
    the wisdom of your duty, fair bianca,
    hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper-time!
  bianca. the more fool you for laying on my duty.
  petruchio. katherine, i charge thee, tell these headstrong
women
    what duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
  widow. come, come, you're mocking; we will have no telling.
  petruchio. come on, i say; and first begin with her.
  widow. she shall not.
  petruchio. i say she shall. and first beg
 
 ___________________________
 
y heart as great, my reason haply more,
    to bandy word for word and frown for frown;
    but now i see our lances are but straws,
    our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
    that seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
    then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
    and place your hands below your husband's foot;
    in token of which duty, if he please,
    my hand is ready, may it do him ease.
  petruchio. why, there's a wench! come on, and kiss me, kate.
  lucentio. well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha't.
  vincentio. 'tis a good hearing when children are toward.
  lucentio. but a harsh hearing when women are froward.
  petruchio. come, kate, we'll to bed.
    we three are married, but you two are sped.
    [to lucentio]  'twas i won the wager, though you hit the
white;
    and being a winner, god give you good night!
                                  exeunt petruchio and katherina
  hortensio. now go thy ways; thou hast tam'd a curst sh
 
 ___________________________
 
row.
  lucentio. 'tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tam'd so.
                                                          exeunt

the end