the taming of the shrew

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

    persons in the induction
  a lord
  christopher sly, a tinker
  hostess
  page
  players
  huntsmen
  servants

  baptista minola, a gentleman of padua
  vincentio, a merchant of pisa
  lucentio, son to vincentio, in love with bianca
  petruchio, a gentleman of verona, a suitor to katherina

    suitors to bianca
  gremio
  hortensio

    servants to lucentio
  tranio
  biondello

    servants to petruchio
  grumio
  curtis

  a pedant

    daughters to baptista
  katherina, the shrew
  bianca

  a widow

  tailor, haberdasher, and servants attending on baptista and
    petruchio

                             scene:
            padua, and petruchio's house in the country

sc_1
                      inductio
 
 ___________________________
 
ou ask me why-
    sufficeth, my reasons are both good and weighty.      exeunt

                 the presenters above speak

  first servant. my lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
  sly. yes, by saint anne do i. a good matter, surely; comes
there
    any more of it?
  page. my lord, 'tis but begun.
  sly. 'tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady
    would 'twere done!                        [they sit and mark]




scene ii.
padua. before hortensio's house

enter petruchio and his man grumio

  petruchio. verona, for a while i take my leave,
    to see my friends in padua; but of all
    my best beloved and approved friend,
    hortensio; and i trow this is his house.
    here, sirrah grumio, knock, i say.
 grumio. knock, sir! whom should i knock?
    is there any man has rebus'd your worship?
  petruchio. villain, i say, knock me here soundly.
  grumio. knock you here, sir? why, sir, what am i, sir, that i
    should knock you here, sir?
  petruchio.
 
 ___________________________
 
 villain, i say, knock me at this gate,
    and rap me well, or i'll knock your knave's pate.
  grumio. my master is grown quarrelsome. i should knock you
first,
    and then i know after who comes by the worst.
  petruchio. will it not be?
    faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock i'll ring it;
    i'll try how you can sol-fa, and sing it.
                                     [he wrings him by the ears]
  grumio. help, masters, help! my master is mad.
  petruchio. now knock when i bid you, sirrah villain!

                        enter hortensio

  hortensio. how now! what's the matter? my old friend grumio and
my
    good friend petruchio! how do you all at verona?
  petruchio. signior hortensio, come you to part the fray?
    'con tutto il cuore ben trovato' may i say.
  hortensio. alla nostra casa ben venuto,
    molto honorato signor mio petruchio.
    rise, grumio, rise; we will compound this quarrel.
  grumio. nay, 'tis no matter, sir,
 
 ___________________________
 
 what he 'leges in latin. if
this
    be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service- look you,
sir:
    he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. well, was it
fit
    for a servant to use his master so; being, perhaps, for aught
i
    see, two and thirty, a pip out?
    whom would to god i had well knock'd at first,
    then had not grumio come by the worst.
  petruchio. a senseless villain! good hortensio,
    i bade the rascal knock upon your gate,
    and could not get him for my heart to do it.
  grumio. knock at the gate? o heavens! spake you not these words
    plain: 'sirrah knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and
    knock me soundly'? and come you now with 'knocking at the
gate'?
  petruchio. sirrah, be gone, or talk not, i advise you.
  hortensio. petruchio, patience; i am grumio's pledge;
    why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and
 
 ___________________________
 
 you,
    your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant grumio.
    and tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
    blows you to padua here from old verona?
  petruchio. such wind as scatters young men through the world
    to seek their fortunes farther than at home,
    where small experience grows. but in a few,
    signior hortensio, thus it stands with me:
    antonio, my father, is deceas'd,
    and i have thrust myself into this maze,
    haply to wive and thrive as best i may;
    crowns in my purse i have, and goods at home,
    and so am come abroad to see the world.
  hortensio. petruchio, shall i then come roundly to thee
    and wish the
 
 ___________________________
 
e to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
    thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel,
    and yet i'll promise thee she shall be rich,
    and very rich; but th'art too much my friend,
    and i'll not wish thee to her.
  petruchio. signior hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
    few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
    one rich enough to be petruchio's wife,
    as wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
    be she as foul as was florentius' love,
    as old as sibyl, and as curst and shrewd
    as socrates' xanthippe or a worse-
    she moves me not, or not removes, at least,
    affection's edge in me, were she as rough
    as are the swelling adriatic seas.
    i come to wive it wealthily in padua;
    if wealthily, then happily in padua.
  grumio. nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind
is.
    why, give him gold 
 
 ___________________________
 
enough and marry him to a puppet or an
    aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head,
though
    she has as many diseases as two and fifty horses. why,
nothing
    comes amiss, so money comes withal.
  hortensio. petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
    i will continue that i broach'd in jest.
    i can, petruchio, help thee to a wife
    with wealth enough, and young and beauteous;
    brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman;
    her only fault, and that is faults enough,
    is- that she is intolerable curst,
    and shrewd and froward so beyond all measure
    that, were my state far worser than it is,
    i would not wed her for a mine of gold.
  petruchio. hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect.
    tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough;
    for i will board her though she 
 
 ___________________________
 
chide as loud
    as thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
  hortensio. her father is baptista minola,
    an affable and courteous gentleman;
    her name is katherina minola,
    renown'd in padua for her scolding tongue.
  petruchio. i know her father, though i know not her;
    and he knew my deceased father well.
    i will not sleep, hortensio, till i see her;
    and therefore let me be thus bold with you
    to give you over at this first encounter,
    unless you will accompany me thither.
  grumio. i pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. o'
my
    word, and she knew him as well as i do, she would think
scolding
    would do little good upon him. she may perhaps call him half
a
    score knave
 
 ___________________________
 
s or so. why, that's nothing; and he begin once,
he'll
    rail in his rope-tricks. i'll tell you what, sir: an she
stand
    him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so
    disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see
    withal than a cat. you know him not, sir.
  hortensio. tarry, petruchio, i must go with thee,
    for in baptista's keep my treasure is.
    he hath the jewel of my life in hold,
    his youngest daughter, beautiful bianca;
    and her withholds from me, and other more,
    suitors to her and rivals in my love;
    supposing it a thing impossible-
    for those defects i have before rehears'd-
    that ever katherina will be woo'd.
    therefore this order hath baptista ta'en,
    that none shall have access unto bianca
    till katherine the curst have 
 
 ___________________________
 
got a husband.
  grumio. katherine the curst!
    a title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  hortensio. now shall my friend petruchio do me grace,
    and offer me disguis'd in sober robes
    to old baptista as a schoolmaster
    well seen in music, to instruct bianca;
    that so i may by this device at least
    have leave and leisure to make love to her,
    and unsuspected court her by herself.

        enter gremio with lucentio disguised as cambio

  grumio. here's no knavery! see, to beguile the old folks, how
the
    young folks lay their heads together! master, master, look
about
    you. who goes ther
 
 ___________________________
 
e, ha?
  hortensio. peace, grumio! it is the rival of my love.
petruchio,
    stand by awhile.
  grumio. a proper stripling, and an amorous!
                                              [they stand aside]
  gremio. o, very well; i have perus'd the note.
    hark you, sir; i'll have them very fairly bound-
    all books of love, see that at any hand;
    and see you read no other lectures to her.
    you understand me- over and beside
    signior baptista's liberality,
    i'll mend it with a largess. take your paper too,
    and let me have them very wel
 
 ___________________________
 
l perfum'd;
    for she is sweeter than perfume itself
    to whom they go to. what will you read to her?
  lucentio. whate'er i read to her, i'll plead for you
    as for my patron, stand you so assur'd,
    as firmly as yourself were still in place;
    yea, and perhaps with more successful words
    than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
  gremio. o this learning, what a thing it is!
  grumio. o this woodcock, what an ass it is!
  petruchio. peace, sirrah!
  hortensio. grumio, mum!                       [coming forward]
    god save you, signior gremio!
  gremio. and you are well met, signior hortensio.
    trow you whither i am going? to baptista minola.
    i promis'd to enquire carefully
    about a schoolmaster for the fair bianca;
    and by good fortune i have lighted well
    on this young man; for learning and behaviour
    fit for her turn, well read in poetry
    and other books- good ones, i warrant ye.
  hor
 
 ___________________________
 
nd that my deeds shall prove.
  grumio. and that his bags shall prove.
  hortensio. gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love.
    listen to me, and if you speak me fair
    i'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
    here is a gentleman whom by chance i met,
    upon agreement from us to his liking,
    will undertake to woo curst katherine;
    yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
  gremio. so said, so done, is well.
    hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
  petruchio. i know she is an irksome brawling scold;
    if that be all, masters, i hear no harm.
  gremio. no, say'st me so, friend? what countryman?
  petruchio. born in verona, old antonio's son.
    my father dead, my fortune lives for me;
    and i do hope good days and long to see.
  gremio. o sir, such a life with such a wife were strange!
    but if you have a stomach, to't a god's name;
    you shall have me assisting you in all.
    but will you woo this wild-cat?
  petruchio. will i l
 
 ___________________________
 
ive?
  grumio. will he woo her? ay, or i'll hang her.
  petruchio. why came i hither but to that intent?
    think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
    have i not in my time heard lions roar?
    have i not heard the sea, puff'd up with winds,
    rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
    have i not heard great ordnance in the field,
    and heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
    have i not in a pitched battle heard
    loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
    and do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
    that gives not 
 
 ___________________________
 
hat he win her.
  grumio. i would i were as sure of a good dinner.

    enter tranio, bravely apparelled as lucentio, and biondello

  tranio. gentlemen, god save you! if i may be bold,
    tell me, i beseech you, which is the readiest way
    to the house of signior baptista minola?
  biondello. he that has the two fair daughters; is't he you
mean?
  tranio. even he, biondello.
  gremio. hark you, sir, you mean not her to-
  tranio. perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
  petruchio. not her that chides, sir, at any hand, i pray.
  tranio. i love no chiders, sir. biondello, let's away.
  lucentio.  [aside]  well begun, tranio.
  hortensio. sir, a word ere you go.
    are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
  tranio. and if i be, sir, is it any offence?
  gremio. no; if without more words you will get you hence.
  tranio. why, sir, i pray, are not the streets as free
    for me as for you?
  gremio. but so is not she.

  tranio. for what reason, i be
 
 ___________________________
 
me with patience.
    baptista is a noble gentleman,
    to whom my father is not all unknown,
    and, were his daughter fairer than she is,
    she may more suitors have, and me for one.
    fair leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
    then well one more may fair bianca have;
    and so she shall: lucentio shall make one,
    though paris came in hope to speed alone.
  gremio. what, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
  lucentio. sir, give him head; i know he'll prove a jade.
  petruchio. hortensio, to what end are all these words?
  hortensio. sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
    did you yet ever see baptista's daughter?
  tranio. no, sir, but hear i do that he hath two:
    the one as famous for a scolding tongue
    as is the other for beauteous modesty.
  petruchio. sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.
  gremio. yea, leave that labour to great hercules,
    and let it be more than alcides' twelve.
  petruchio. sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
  
 
 ___________________________
 
d since you do profess to be a suitor,
    you must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
    to whom we all rest generally beholding.
  tranio. sir, i shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
    please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
    and quaff carouses to our mistress' health;
    and do as adversaries do in law-
    strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
  grumio, biondello. o excellent motion! fellows, let's be gone.
  hortensio. the motion's good indeed, and be it so.
    petruchio, i shall be your ben venuto.                exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by
 
 ___________________________
 
                exit bianca
  katherina. what, will you not suffer me? nay, now i see
    she is your treasure, she must have a husband;
    i must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day,
    and for your love to her lead apes in hell.
    talk not to me; i will go sit and weep,
    till i can find occasion of revenge.          exit katherina
  baptista. was ever gentleman thus griev'd as i?
    but who comes here?

        enter gremio, with lucentio in the habit of a mean man;
         petruchio, with hortensio as a musician; and tranio,
    as lucentio, with his boy, biondello, bearing a lute and
books

  gremio. good morrow, neighbour baptista.
  baptista. good morrow, neighbour gremio.
    god save you, gentlemen!
  petruchio. and you, good sir! pray, have you not a daughter
    call'd katherina, fair and virtuous?
  baptista. i have a daughter, sir, call'd katherina.
  gremio. you are too blunt; go to it orderly.
  petruchio. you wrong me, signior gremio; give me leave.
 
 ___________________________
 
entertainment,
    i do present you with a man of mine,
                                          [presenting hortensio]
    cunning in music and the mathematics,
    to instruct her fully in those sciences,
    whereof i know she is not ignorant.
    accept of him, or else you do me wrong-
    his name is licio, born in mantua.
  baptista. y'are welcome, sir, and he for your good sake;
    but for my daughter katherine, this i know,
    she is not for your turn, the more my grief.
  petruchio. i see you do not mean to part with her;
    or else you like not of my company.
  baptista. mistake me not; i speak but as i find.
    whence are you, sir? what may i call your name?
  petruchio. petruchio is my name, antonio's son,
    a man well known throughout all italy.
  baptista. i know him well; you are welcome for his sake.
  gremio. saving your tale, petruchio, i pray,
    let us that are poor petitioners speak too.
    bacare! you are marvellous forward.
  petruchio. o, pa
 
 ___________________________
 
your pupils presently.
    holla, within!

                         enter a servant

    sirrah, lead these gentlemen
    to my daughters; and tell them both
    these are their tutors. bid them use them well.

                exit servant leading hortensio carrying the lute
                                     and lucentio with the books

    we will go walk a little in the orchard,
    and then to dinner. you are passing welcome,
    and so i pray you all to think yourselves.
  petruchio. signior baptista, my business asketh haste,
    and every day i cannot come to woo.
    you knew my father well, and in him me,
    left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
    which i have bettered rather than decreas'd.
    then tell me, if i get your daughter's love,
    what dowry shall i have with her to wife?
  baptista. after my death, the one half of my lands
    and, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
  petruchio. and for that dowry, i'll assure her of
    her widowh
 
 ___________________________
 
ood, be it that she survive me,
    in all my lands and leases whatsoever.
    let specialities be therefore drawn between us,
    that covenants may be kept on either hand.
  baptista. ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
    that is, her love; for that is all in all.
  petruchio. why, that is nothing; for i tell you, father,
    i am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
    and where two raging fires meet together,
    they do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
    though little fire grows great with little wind,
    yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all.
    so i to her, and so she yields to me;
    for i am rough, and woo not like a babe.
  baptista. well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed
    but be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.
  petru
 
 ___________________________
 
frets,
    and bow'd her hand to teach her fingering,
    when, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
    'frets, call you these?' quoth she 'i'll fume with them.'
    and with that word she struck me on the head,
    and through the instrument my pate made way;
    and there i stood amazed for a while,
    as on a pillory, looking through the lute,
    while she did call me rascal fiddler
    and twangling jack, with twenty such vile terms,
    as she had studied to misuse me so.
  petruchio. now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
    i love her ten times more than e'er i did.
    o, how i long to have some chat with her!
  baptista. well, go with me, and be not so discomfited;
    proceed in practice with my younger daughter;
    she's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
    signior petruchio, will you go with us,
    or shall i send my daughter kate to you?
  petruchio. i pray you do.             exeunt all but petruchio
    i'll attend her here,
    and woo her
 
 ___________________________
 
 she sings as sweetly as a nightingale.
    say that she frown; i'll say she looks as clear
    as morning roses newly wash'd with dew.
    say she be mute, and will not speak a word;
    then i'll commend her volubility,
    and say she uttereth piercing eloquence.
    if she do bid me pack, i'll give her thanks,
    as though she bid me stay by her a week;
    if she deny to wed, i'll crave the day
    when i shall ask the banns, and when be married.
    but here she comes; and now, petruchio, speak.

                        enter katherina

    good morrow, kate- for that's your name, i hear.
  katherina. well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
    they call me katherine that do talk of me.
  petruchio. you lie, in faith, for you are call'd plain kate,
    and bonny kate, and sometimes kate the curst;
    but, kate, the prettiest kate in christendom,
    kate of kate hall, my super-dainty kate,
    for dainties are all kates, and therefore, kate,
    take th
 
 ___________________________
 
is of me, kate of my consolation-
    hearing thy mildness prais'd in every town,
    thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
    yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
    myself am mov'd to woo thee for my wife.
  katherina. mov'd! in good time! let him that mov'd you hither
    remove you hence. i knew you at the first
    you were a moveable.
  petruchio. why, what's a moveable?
  katherina. a join'd-stool.
  petruchio. thou hast hit it. come, sit on me.
  katherina. asses are made to bear, and so are you.
  petruchio. women are made to bear, and so are you.
  katherina. no such jade as you, if me you mean.
  petruchio. alas, good kate, i will not burden thee!
    for, knowing thee to be but young and light-
  katherina. too light for such a swain as you to catch;
    and yet as heavy as my weight should be.
  petruchio. should be! should- buzz!
  katherina. well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
  petruch
 
 ___________________________
 
io. o, slow-wing'd turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
  katherina. ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
  petruchio. come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry.
  katherina. if i be waspish, best beware my sting.
  petruchio. my remedy is then to pluck it out.
  katherina. ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
  petruchio. who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?
    in his tail.
  katherina. in his tongue.
  petruchio. whose tongue?
  katherina. yours, if you talk of tales; and so farewell.
  petruchio. what, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again,
    good kate; i am a gentleman.
  katherina. that i'll try.                    [she strikes him]
  petruchio. i swear i'll cuff you, if you strike again.
  katherina. so may you lose your arms.
    if you strike me, you are no gentleman;
    and if no gentleman, why then no arms.
  petruchio. a herald, kate? o, put me in thy books!
  katherina. wh
 
 ___________________________
 
at is your crest- a coxcomb?
  petruchio. a combless cock, so kate will be my hen.
  katherina. no cock of mine: you crow too like a craven.
  petruchio. nay, come, kate, come; you must not look so sour.
  katherina. it is my fashion, when i see a crab.
  petruchio. why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.
  katherina. there is, there is.
  petruchio. then show it me.
  katherina. had i a glass i would.
  petruchio. what, you mean my face?
  katherina. well aim'd of such a young one.
  petruchio. now, by saint george, i am too young for you.
  katherina. yet you are wither'd.
  petruchio. 'tis with cares.
  katherina. i care not.
  petruchio. nay, hear you, kate- in sooth, you scape not so.
  katherina. i chafe you, if i tarry; let me go.
  petruchio. no, not a whit; i find you passing gentle.
    'twas told me you were rough, and coy, and sullen,
    and now i find report a very liar;
    for 
 
 ___________________________
 
nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
    nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk;
    but thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers;
    with gentle conference, soft and affable.
    why does the world report that kate doth limp?
    o sland'rous world! kate like the hazel-twig
    is straight and slender, and as brown in hue
    as hazel-nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.
    o, let me see thee walk. thou dost not halt.
  katherina. go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
  petruchio. did ever dian so become a grove
    as kate this chamber with her princely gait?
    o, be thou dian, and let her be kate;
    and then let kate be chaste, and dian sportful!
  katherina. where did you study all this goodly speech?
  petruchio. it is extempore, from my mother wit.
  katherina. a witty mother! witless else her son.
  petruchio. am i not wise?
  katherina. yes, keep you warm.
  petruchio. marry, so i mean, sweet katherine, in thy bed.
    and therefore, setting all thi
 
 ___________________________
 
 now, kate, i am a husband for your turn;
    for, by this light, whereby i see thy beauty,
    thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
    thou must be married to no man but me;
    for i am he am born to tame you, kate,
    and bring you from a wild kate to a kate
    conformable as other household kates.

               re-enter baptista, gremio, and tranio

    here comes your father. never make denial;
    i must and will have katherine to my wife.
  baptista. now, signior petruchio, how speed you with my
daughter?
  petruchio. how but well, sir? how but well?
    it were impossible i should speed amiss.
  baptista. why, how now, daughter katherine, in your dumps?
  katherina. call you me daughter? now i promise you
    you have show'd a tender fatherly regard
    to wish me wed to one half lunatic,
    a mad-cap ruffian and a swearing jack,
    that thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
  petruchio. father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world
    that tal
 
 ___________________________
 
k'd of her have talk'd amiss of her.
    if she be curst, it is for policy,
    for,she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
    she is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
    for patience she will prove a second grissel,
    and roman lucrece for her chastity.
    and, to conclude, we have 'greed so well together
    that upon sunday is the wedding-day.
  katherina. i'll see thee hang'd on sunday first.
  gremio. hark, petruchio; she says she'll see thee hang'd first.
  tranio. is this your speeding? nay, then good-night our part!
  petruchio. be patient, gentlemen. i choose her for myself;
    if she and i be pleas'd, what's that to you?
    'tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone,
    that she shall still be curst in company.
    i tell you 'tis incredible to believe.
    how much she loves me- o, the kindest kate!
    she hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
    she vied so fast, protesting oath on oath
 
 ___________________________
 
,
    that in a twink she won me to her love.
    o, you are novices! 'tis a world to see,
    how tame, when men and women are alone,
    a meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
    give me thy hand, kate; i will unto venice,
    to buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
    provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
    i will be sure my katherine shall be fine.
  baptista. i know not what to say; but give me your hands.
    god send you joy, petruchio! 'tis a match.
  gremio, tranio. amen, say we; we will be witnesses.
  petruchio. father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
    i will to venice; sunday comes apace;
    we will have rings and things, and fine array;
    and kiss me, kate; we will be married a sunday.
                        exeunt petruchio and katherina severally
  gremio. was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?
  baptista. faith, gentlemen, now i play a merchant's part,
    and venture madly on a desperate mart.
  tra
 
 ___________________________
 
looks as though he were in love.
    yet if thy thoughts, bianca, be so humble
    to cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale-
    seize thee that list. if once i find thee ranging,
  hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.             exit




scene ii.
padua. before baptista's house

enter baptista, gremio, tranio as lucentio, katherina, bianca,
lucentio as cambio, and attendants

  baptista.  [to tranio]  signior lucentio, this is the 'pointed
day
    that katherine and petruchio should be married,
    and yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
    what will be said? what mockery will it be
    to want the bridegroom when the priest attends
    to speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
    what says lucentio to this shame of ours?
  katherina. no shame but mine; i must, forsooth, be forc'd
    to give my hand, oppos'd against my heart,
    unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen,
    who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
    i told you, i, he was a fra
 
 ___________________________
 
ntic fool,
    hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour;
    and, to be noted for a merry man,
    he'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
    make friends invited, and proclaim the banns;
    yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
    now must the world point at poor katherine,
    and say 'lo, there is mad petruchio's wife,
    if it would please him come and marry her!'
  tranio. patience, good katherine, and baptista too.
    upon my life, petruchio means but well,
    whatever fortune stays him from his word.
    though he be blunt, i know him passing wise;
    though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
  katherina. would katherine had never seen him though!
                    exit, weeping, followed by bianca and others
  baptista. go, girl, i cannot blame thee now to weep,
    for such an injury would vex a very saint;
    much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

                           enter biondello

    master, m
 
 ___________________________
 
aster! news, and such old news as you never heard
of!
  baptista. is it new and old too? how may that be?
  biondello. why, is it not news to hear of petruchio's coming?
  baptista. is he come?
  biondello. why, no, sir.
  baptista. what then?
  biondello. he is coming.
  baptista. when will he be here?
  biondello. when he stands where i am and sees you there.
  tranio. but, say, what to thine old news?
  biondello. why, petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old
    jerkin; a pair of old breeches thrice turn'd; a pair of boots
    that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another lac'd; an
old
    rusty sword ta'en out of the town armoury, with a broken
hilt,
    and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipp'd, with
an
    old motley saddle and stirrups of no kindred; besides,
possess'd
    with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled
with
    the lampass, infected with the fashions, f
 
 ___________________________
 
n the other, gart'red with a red and blue list; an old hat,
and
    the humour of forty fancies prick'd in't for a feather; a
    monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a christian
    footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
  tranio. 'tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
    yet oftentimes lie goes but mean-apparell'd.
  baptista. i am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
  biondello. why, sir, he comes not.
  baptista. didst thou not say he comes?
  biondello. who? that petruchio came?
  baptista. ay, that petruchio came.
  biondello. no, sir; i say his horse comes with him on his back.
  baptista. why, that's all one.
  biondello. nay, by saint jamy,
             i hold you a penny,
             a horse and a man
             is more than one,
             and yet not many.

                  enter petruchio and grumio

  petruchio. come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
  baptista. you are welcome, sir.
  petruchio. and yet i come not well.
  bap
 
 ___________________________
 
tista. and yet you halt not.
  tranio. not so well apparell'd
    as i wish you were.
  petruchio. were it better, i should rush in thus.
    but where is kate? where is my lovely bride?
    how does my father? gentles, methinks you frown;
    and wherefore gaze this goodly company
    as if they saw some wondrous monument,
    some comet or unusual prodigy?
  baptista. why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day.
    first were we sad, fearing you would not come;
    now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
    fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
    an eye-sore to our so
 
 ___________________________
 
lemn festival!
  tranio. and tell us what occasion of import
    hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
    and sent you hither so unlike yourself?
  petruchio. tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear;
    sufficeth i am come to keep my word,
    though in some part enforced to digress,
    which at more leisure i will so excuse
    as you shall well be satisfied withal.
    but where is kate? i stay too long from her;
    the morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.
  tranio. see not your bride in these unreverent robes;
    go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
  petruchio. not i, believe me; thus i'll visit her.
  baptista. but 
 
 ___________________________
 
thus, i trust, you will not marry her.
  petruchio. good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with
words;
    to me she's married, not unto my clothes.
    could i repair what she will wear in me
    as i can change these poor accoutrements,
    'twere well for kate and better for myself.
    but what a fool am i to chat with you,
    when i should bid good-morrow to my bride
    and seal the title with a lovely kiss!
                                  exeunt petruchio and grumio
  tranio. he hath some meaning in his mad attire.
    we will persuade him, be it possible,
    to put on better ere he go to church.
  baptista. i'll after him and see the event of this.
              exeunt baptista, gremio, biondello, and attendents
  tranio. but to her love concerneth us to ad
    her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    as i before imparted to your worship,
    i am to get a man- whate'er he be
    it skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
 
 ___________________________
 
having no other reason
    but that his beard grew thin and hungerly
    and seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
    this done, he took the bride about the neck,
    and kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
    that at the parting all the church did echo.
    and i, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
    and after me, i know, the rout is coming.
    such a mad marriage never was before.
    hark, hark! i hear the minstrels play.         [music plays]

       enter petruchio, katherina, bianca, baptista, hortensio,
                         grumio, and train

  petruchio. gentlemen and friends, i thank you for your pains.
    i know you think to dine with me to-day,
    and have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer
    but so it is- my haste doth call me hence,
    and therefore here i mean to take my leave.
  baptista. is't possible you will away to-night?
  petruchio. i must away to-day before night come.
    make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
 
 ___________________________
 

    you would entreat me rather go than stay.
    and, honest company, i thank you all
    that have beheld me give away myself
    to this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
    dine with my father, drink a health to me.
    for i must hence; and farewell to you all.
  tranio. let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
  petruchio. it may not be.
  gremio. let me entreat you.
  petruchio. it cannot be.
  katherina. let me entreat you.
  petruchio. i am content.
  katherina. are you content to stay?
  petruchio. i am content you shall entreat me stay;
    but yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
  katherina. now, if you love me, stay.
  petruchio. grumio, my horse.
  grumio. ay, sir, they be ready; the oats have eaten the horses.
  katherina. nay, then,
    do what thou canst, i will not go to-day;
    no, nor to-morrow, not till i please myself.
    the door is open, sir; there lies your way;
    you may be jogging whiles yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ur boots are green;
    for me, i'll not be gone till i please myself.
    'tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom
    that take it on you at the first so roundly.
  petruchio. o kate, content thee; prithee be not angry.
  katherina. i will be angry; what hast thou to do?
    father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.
  gremio. ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
  katherina. gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.
    i see a woman may be made a fool
    if she had not a spirit to resist.
  petruchio. they shall go forward, kate, at thy command.
    obey the bride, you that attend on her;
    go to the feast, revel and domineer,
    carouse full measu
 
 ___________________________
 
y goods, my chattels, she is my house,
    my household stuff, my field, my barn,
    my horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing,
    and here she stands; touch her whoever dare;
    i'll bring mine action on the proudest he
    that stops my way in padua. grumio,
    draw forth thy weapon; we are beset with thieves;
    rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
    fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, kate;
    i'll buckler thee against a million.
                         exeunt petruchio, katherina, and grumio
  baptista. nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
  gremio. went they not quickly, i should die with laughing.
  tranio. of all mad matches, never was the like.
  lucentio. mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
  bianca. that, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
  gremio. i warrant him, petruchio is kated.
  baptista. neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom
wants
    for to supply the places at the table,
    you know there wants no jun
 
 ___________________________
 
he complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iv. scene i.
petruchio's country house

enter grumio

  grumio. fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and
all
    foul ways! was ever man so beaten? was ever man so ray'd? was
    ever man so weary? i am sent before to make a fire, and they
are
    coming after to warm them. now were not i a little pot and
soon
    hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the
roof
    of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere i should come by a
fire to
    thaw me. but i with blowing the fire sh
 
 ___________________________
 
me home, grumio!
  philip. how now, grumio!
  joseph. what, grumio!
  nicholas. fellow grumio!
  nathaniel. how now, old lad!
  grumio. welcome, you!- how now, you!- what, you!- fellow, you!-
and
    thus much for greeting. now, my spruce companions, is all
ready,
    and all things neat?
  nathaniel. all things is ready. how near is our master?
  grumio. e'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be not-
   cock's passion, silence! i hear my master.

                     enter petruchio and katherina

  petruchio. where be these knaves? what, no man at door
    to hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
    where is nathaniel, gregory, philip?
  all servants. here, here, sir; here, sir.
  petruchio. here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
    you logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
    what, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
    where is the foolish knave i sent before?
  grumio. here, sir; as foolish as i was before.
  petruchio. you peasant swain! you whoreson
 
 ___________________________
 
 malt-horse drudge!
    did i not bid thee meet me in the park
    and bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
  grumio. nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
    and gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' th' heel;
    there was no link to colour peter's hat,
    and walter's dagger was not come from sheathing;
    there were none fine but adam, ralph, and gregory;
    the rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
    yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
  petruchio. go, rascals, go and fetch my supper in.
                                   exeunt some of the servingmen

    [sings]  where is the life that late i led?
             where are those-

    sit down, kate, and welcome. soud, soud, soud, soud!

                 re-enter servants with supper

    why, when, i say? nay, good sweet kate, be merry.
    off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?

    [sings]  it was the friar of orders grey,
             as he forth walked on hi
 
 ___________________________
 
                  enter one with water

    where's my spaniel troilus? sirrah, get you hence,
    and bid my cousin ferdinand come hither:
                                                 exit servingman
    one, kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted with.
    where are my slippers? shall i have some water?
    come, kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.
    you whoreson villain! will you let it fall?    [strikes him]
  katherina. patience, i pray you; 'twas a fault unwilling.
  petruchio. a whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave!
    come, kate, sit down; i know you have a stomach.
    will you give thanks, sweet kate, or else shall i?
    what's this? mutton?
  first servant. ay.
  petruchio. who brought it?
  peter. i.
  petruchio. 'tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
    what dogs are these? where is the rascal cook?
    how durst you villains bring it from the dresser
    and serve it thus to me that love it not?
    there, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
all;
                                [throws the meat, etc., at them]
    you heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
    what, do you grumble? i'll be with you straight.
                                                 exeunt servants
  katherina. i pray you, husband, be not so disquiet;
    the meat was well, if you were so contented.
  petruchio. i tell thee, kate, 'twas burnt and dried away,
    and i expressly am forbid to touch it;
    for it engenders choler, planteth anger;
    and better 'twere that both of us did fast,
    since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
    than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
    be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended.
    and for this night we'll fast for company.
    come, i will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.        exeunt

                     re-enter servants severally

 
 ___________________________
 

  nathaniel. peter, didst ever see the like?
  peter. he kills her in her own humour.

                            re-enter curtis

  grumio. where is he?
  curtis. in her chamber. making a sermon of continency to her,
    and rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
    knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak.
    and sits as one new risen from a dream.
    away, away! for he is coming hither.                  exeunt

                       re-enter petruchio

  petruchio. thus have i politicly begun my reign,
    and 'tis my hope to end successfully.
    my falcon now is sharp and passing empty.
    and till she stoop she must not be full-gorg'd,
    for then she never looks upon her lure.
    another way i have to man my haggard,
    to make her come, and know her keeper's call,
    that is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
    that bate and beat, and will not be obedient.
    she eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;
    last n
 
 ___________________________
 
and have forsworn you with hortensio.
  bianca. tranio, you jest; but have you both forsworn me?
  tranio. mistress, we have.
  lucentio. then we are rid of licio.
  tranio. i' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
    that shall be woo'd and wedded in a day.
  bianca. god give him joy!
  tranio. ay, and he'll tame her.
  bianca. he says so, tranio.
  tranio. faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
  bianca. the taming-school! what, is there such a place?
  tranio. ay, mistress; and petruchio is the master,
    that teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
    to tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

                       enter biondello

  biondello. o master, master, have watch'd so long
    that i am dog-weary; but at last i spied
    an ancient angel coming down the hill
    will serve the turn.
  tranio. what is he, biondello?
  biondello. master, a mercatante or a pedant,
    i know not what; but formal in apparel,
    in gait and countenance surely like 
 
 ___________________________
 
his be court'sy, sir, accept of it.
  pedant. o, sir, i do; and will repute you ever
    the patron of my life and liberty.
  tranio. then go with me to make the matter good.
    this, by the way, i let you understand:
    my father is here look'd for every day
    to pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage
    'twixt me and one baptista's daughter here.
    in all these circumstances i'll instruct you.
    go with me to clothe you as becomes you.              exeunt




scene iii.
petruchio's house

enter katherina and grumio

  grumio. no, no, forsooth; i dare not for my life.
  katherina. the more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
    what, did he marry me to famish me?
    beggars that come unto my father's door
    upon entreaty have a present alms;
    if not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
    but i, who never knew how to entreat,
    nor never needed that i should entreat,
    am starv'd for meat, giddy for lack of sleep;
    with oaths kept waking, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i will not; you shall have the mustard,
    or else you get no beef of grumio.
  katherina. then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
  grumio. why then the mustard without the beef.
  katherina. go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
                                                     [beats him]
    that feed'st me with the very name of meat.
    sorrow on thee and all the pack of you
    that triumph thus upon my misery!
    go, get thee gone, i say.

               enter petruchio, and hortensio with meat

  petruchio. how fares my kate? what, sweeting, all amort?
  hortensio. mistress, what cheer?
  katherina. faith, as cold as can be.
  petruchio. pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me.
    here, love, thou seest how diligent i am,
    to dress thy meat myself, and bring it thee.
    i am sure, sweet kate, this kindness merits thanks.
    what, not a word? nay, then thou lov'st it not,
    and all my pains is sorted to no proof.
    here, take away th
 
 ___________________________
 
is dish.
  katherina. i pray you, let it stand.
  petruchio. the poorest service is repaid with thanks;
    and so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
  katherina. i thank you, sir.
  hortensio. signior petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
    come, mistress kate, i'll bear you company.
  petruchio.  [aside]  eat it up all, hortensio, if thou lovest
me.-
    much good do it unto thy gentle heart!
    kate, eat apace. and now, my honey love,
    will we return unto thy father's house
    and revel it as bravely as the best,
    with silken coats and caps, and golden rings,
    with ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things,
    with scarfs and fans and double change of brav'ry.
    with amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.
    what, hast thou din'd? the tailor stays th
 
 ___________________________
 
y leisure,
    to deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.

                          enter tailor

    come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;
    lay forth the gown.

                        enter haberdasher

    what news with you, sir?
  haberdasher. here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
  petruchio. why, this was moulded on a porringer;
    a velvet dish. fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy;
    why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
    a knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap.
    away with it. come, let me have a bigger.
  katherina. i'll have no bigger; this doth fit the time,
    and gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
  petruchio. when you are gentle, you shall have one too,
    and not till then.
  hortensio.  [aside]  that will not be in haste.
  katherina. why, sir, i trust i m
 
 ___________________________
 
ay have leave to speak;
    and speak i will. i am no child, no babe.
    your betters have endur'd me say my mind,
    and if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
    my tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
    or else my heart, concealing it, will break;
    and rather than it shall, i will be free
    even to the uttermost, as i please, in words.
  petruchio. why, thou say'st true; it is a paltry cap,
    a custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie;
    i love thee well in that thou lik'st it not.
  katherina. love me or love me not, i like the cap;
    and it i will have, or i will have none.    exit haberdasher
  petruchio. thy gown? why, ay. come, tailor, let us see't.
    o mercy, god! what masquing stuff is here?
    what's this? a sleeve? 'tis like a demi-cannon.
    what, up and down, carv'd like an appletart?
    here's snip and nip a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd cut and slish and slash,
    like to a censer in a barber's shop.
    why, what a devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?
  hortensio.  [aside]  i see she's like to have neither cap nor
gown.
  tailor. you bid me make it orderly and well,
    according to the fashion and the time.
  petruchio. marry, and did; but if you be rememb'red,
    i did not bid you mar it to the time.
    go, hop me over every kennel home,
    for you shall hop without my custom, sir.
    i'll none of it; hence! make your best of it.
  katherina. i never saw a better fashion'd gown,
    more quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable;
    belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
  petruchio. why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.
  tailor. she says your worship means to make a puppet of her.
 
 ___________________________
 

  petruchio. o monstrous arrogance! thou liest, thou thread, thou
      thimble,
    thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail,
    thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou-
    brav'd in mine own house with a skein of thread!
    away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
    or i shall so bemete thee with thy yard
    as thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st!
    i tell thee, i, that thou hast marr'd her gown.
  tailor. your worship is deceiv'd; the gown is made
    ju
 
 ___________________________
 

  tailor. but how did you desire it should be made?
  grumio. marry, sir, with needle and thread.
  tailor. but did you not request to have it cut?
  grumio. thou hast fac'd many things.
  tailor. i have.
  grumio. face not me. thou hast brav'd many men; brave not me. i
    will neither be fac'd nor brav'd. i say unto thee, i bid thy
    master cut out the gown; but i did not bid him cut it to
pieces.
    ergo, thou liest.
  tailor. why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
  petruchio. read it.
  grumio. the note lies in's throat, if he say i said so.
  tailor.  [reads]  'imprimis, a loose-bodied gown'-
  grumio. master, if ever i said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the
    skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown
bread; i
    said a gown.
  petruchio. proceed.
  tailor.  [reads]  'with a small compass'd cape'-
  grumio. i confess the cape.
  tailor.  [reads]  'with a trunk sleeve'-
  grumio. i confess two sleeves.
  tailor.  [reads]  'the sleeves c
 
 ___________________________
 
uriously cut.'
  petruchio. ay, there's the villainy.
  grumio. error i' th' bill, sir; error i' th' bill! i commanded
the
    sleeves should be cut out, and sew'd up again; and that i'll
    prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a
thimble.
  tailor. this is true that i say; an i had thee in place where,
thou
    shouldst know it.
  grumio. i am for thee straight; take thou the bill, give me thy
    meteyard, and spare not me.
  hortensio. god-a-mercy, grumio! then he shall have no odds.
  pet
 
 ___________________________
 
ruchio. well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
  grumio. you are i' th' right, sir; 'tis for my mistress.
  petruchio. go, take it up unto thy master's use.
  grumio. villain, not for thy life! take up my mistress' gown
for
    thy master's use!
  petruchio. why, sir, what's your conceit in that?
  grumio. o, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for.
    take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
    o fie, fie, fie!
  petruchio.  [aside]  hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor
paid.-
    go take it hence; be gone, and say no more.
  hortensio. tailor, i'll pay thee for thy gown to-morrow;
    take no unkindness of his hasty words.
    away, i say; commend me to thy master.           exit tailor
  petruchio. well, come, my kate; we will unto your father's
    even in these honest mean habiliments;
    our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;
    for 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
    and as the
 
 ___________________________
 
f thou account'st it shame, lay it on me;
    and therefore frolic; we will hence forthwith
    to feast and sport us at thy father's house.
    go call my men, and let us straight to him;
    and bring our horses unto long-lane end;
    there will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
    let's see; i think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
    and well we may come there by dinner-time.
  katherina. i dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two,
    and 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
  petruchio. it shall be seven ere i go to horse.
    look what i speak, or do, or think to do,
    you are still crossing it. sirs, let 't alone;
    i will not go to-day; and ere i do,
    it shall be what o'clock i say it is.
  hortensio. why, so this gallant will command the sun.
                                                          exeunt




scene iv.
padua. before baptista's house

enter tranio as lucentio, and the pedant dressed like vincentio

  tranio. sir, this is the house; 
 
 ___________________________
 
to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and
so
    may you, sir; and so adieu, sir. my master hath appointed me
to
    go to saint luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against
you
    come with your appendix.
 exit
  lucentio. i may and will, if she be so contented.
    she will be pleas'd; then wherefore should i doubt?
    hap what hap may, i'll roundly go about her;
    it shall go hard if cambio go without her.              exit




scene v.
a public road

enter petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and servants

  petruchio. come on, a god's name; once more toward our
father's.
    good lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
  katherina. the moon? the sun! it is not moonlight now.
  petruchio. i say it is the moon that shines so bright.
  katherina. i know it is the sun that shines so bright.
  petruchio. now by my mother's son, and that's myself,
    it shall be moon, or star, or what i list,
    or ere i journey to your father's house.
    go on a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd fetch our horses back again.
    evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!
  hortensio. say as he says, or we shall never go.
  katherina. forward, i pray, since we have come so far,
    and be it moon, or sun, or what you please;
    and if you please to call it a rush-candle,
    henceforth i vow it shall be so for me.
  petruchio. i say it is the moon.
  katherina. i know it is the moon.
  petruchio. nay, then you lie; it is the blessed sun.
  katherina. then, god be bless'd, it is the blessed sun;
    but sun it is not, when you say it is not;
    and the moon changes even as your mind.
    what you will have it nam'd, even that it is,
    and so it shall be so for katherine.
  hortensio. petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
  petruchio. well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
    and not unluckily against the bias.
    but, soft! company is coming here.

       
 
 ___________________________
 
what stars do spangle heaven with such beauty
    as those two eyes become that heavenly face?
    fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
    sweet kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
  hortensio. 'a will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
  katherina. young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
    whither away, or where is thy abode?
    happy the parents of so fair a child;
    happier the man whom favourable stars
    allots thee for his lovely bed-fellow.
  petruchio. why, how now, kate, i hope thou art not mad!
    this is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered,
    and not a maiden, as thou sayst he is.
  katherina. pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
    that have been so bedazzled with the sun
    that everything i look on seemeth green;
    now i perceive thou art a reverend father.
    pardon, i pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
  petruchio. do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
    which way thou travellest- if along with us,
    w
 
 ___________________________
 
e shall be joyful of thy company.
  vincentio. fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
    that with your strange encounter much amaz'd me,
    my name is call'd vincentio, my dwelling pisa,
    and bound i am to padua, there to visit
    a son of mine, which long i have not seen.
  petruchio. what is his name?
  vincentio. lucentio, gentle sir.
  petruchio. happily met; the happier for thy son.
    and now by law, as well as reverend age,
    i may entitle thee my loving father:
    the sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
    thy son by this hath married. wonder not,
    nor be not grieved- she is of good esteem,
    her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
    beside, so qualified as may beseem
    the spouse of any noble gentleman.
    let me embrace with old vincentio;
    and wander we to see thy honest son,
    who will of thy arr
 
 ___________________________
 
ival be full joyous.
  vincentio. but is this true; or is it else your pleasure,
    like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
    upon the company you overtake?
  hortensio. i do assure thee, father, so it is.
  petruchio. come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
    for our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
                                        exeunt all but hortensio
  hortensio. well, petruchio, this has put me in heart.
    have to my widow; and if she be froward,
    then hast thou taught hortensio to be untoward.         exit




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) ar
 
 ___________________________
 
lucentio's house

enter biondello, lucentio, and bianca; gremio is out before

  biondello. softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  lucentio. i fly, biondello; but they may chance to need thee at
    home, therefore leave us.
  biondello. nay, faith, i'll see the church a your back, and
then
    come back to my master's as soon as i can.
                          exeunt lucentio, bianca, and biondello
  gremio. i marvel cambio comes not all this while.

           enter petruchio, katherina, vincentio, grumio,
                          and attendants

  petruchio. sir, here's the door; this is lucentio's house;
    my father's bears more toward the market-place;
    thither must i, and here i leave you, sir.
  vincentio. you shall not choose but drink before you go;
    i think i shall command your welcome here,
    and by all likelihood some cheer is toward.         [knocks]
  gremio. they're busy within; you were best knock louder.
                          
 
 ___________________________
 
      [pedant looks out of the window]
  pedant. what's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
  vincentio. is signior lucentio within, sir?
  pedant. he's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
  vincentio. what if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to
make
    merry withal?
  pedant. keep your hundred pounds to yourself; he shall need
none so
    long as i live.
  petruchio. nay, i told you your son was well beloved in padua.
do
    you hear, sir? to leave frivolous circumstances, i pray you
tell
    signior lucentio that his father is come from pisa, and is
here
    at the door to speak with him.
  pedant. thou liest: his father is come from padua, and here
looking
    out at the window.
  vincentio. art thou his father?
  pedant. ay, sir; so his mother says, if i may believe her.
  petruchio.  [to vincentio]  why, how now, gentleman!
    why, this i
 
 ___________________________
 
o, sir. i could not forget you, for i
never
    saw you before in all my life.
  vincentio. what, you notorious villain, didst thou never see
thy
    master's father, vincentio?
  biondello. what, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir;
see
    where he looks out of the window.
  vincentio. is't so, indeed?               [he beats biondello]
  biondello. help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.
 exit
  pedant. help, son! help, signior baptista!     exit from above
  petruchio. prithee, kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
this
    controversy.                              [they stand aside]

       re-enter pedant below; baptista, tranio, and servants

  tranio. sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
  vincentio. what am i, sir? nay, what are you, sir? o immortal
gods!
    o fine villain! a silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet
cloak,
    and a copatain hat! o, i am undone! i am undone! while i play
the
    good husband at home, my so
 
 ___________________________
 
ot, baptista; we will content you, go to; but
i
    will in to be revenged for this villainy.               exit
  baptista. and i to sound the depth of this knavery.       exit
  lucentio. look not pale, bianca; thy father will not frown.
                                      exeunt lucentio and bianca
  gremio. my cake is dough, but i'll in among the rest;
    out of hope of all but my share of the feast.           exit
  katherina. husband, let's follow to see the end of this ado.
  petruchio. first kiss me, kate, and we will.
  katherina. what, in the midst of the street?
  petruchio. what, art thou asham'd of me?
  katherina. no, sir; god forbid; but asham'd to kiss.
  petruchio. why, then, let's home again. come, sirrah, let's
away.
  katherina. nay, i will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love,
stay.
  petruchio. is not this well? come, my sweet kate:
    better once than never, for never too late.           exeunt




scene ii.
lucentio's house

enter baptista,
 
 ___________________________
 
 vincentio, gremio, the pedant, lucentio, bianca,
petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and widow. the servingmen with
tranio,
biondello, and grumio, bringing in a banquet

  lucentio. at last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    and time it is when raging war is done
    to smile at scapes and perils overblown.
    my fair bianca, bid my father welcome,
    while i with self-same kindness welcome thine.
    brother petruchio, sister katherina,
    and thou, hortensio, with thy loving widow,
    feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
    my banquet is to close our stomachs up
    after our great good cheer. pray you, sit down;
    for now we sit to chat as well as eat.            [they sit]
  petruchio. nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
  baptista. padua affords this kindness, son petruchio.
  petruchio. padua affords nothing but what is kind.
  hortensio. for both our sakes i would that word
 
 ___________________________
 
 were true.
  petruchio. now, for my life, hortensio fears his widow.
  widow. then never trust me if i be afeard.
  petruchio. you are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
    i mean hortensio is afeard of you.
  widow. he that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
  petruchio. roundly replied.
  katherina. mistress, how mean you that?
  widow. thus i conceive by him.
  petruchio. conceives by me! how likes hortensio that?
  hortensio. my widow says thus she conceives her tale.
  petruchio. very well mended. kiss him for that, good widow.
  katherina. 'he that is giddy thinks the world turns round.'
    i pray you tell me what you meant by that.
  widow. your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
    measures my husband's sorrow by his woe;
    and now you know my meaning.
  katherina. a very mean meaning.
  widow. right, i mean you.
  katherina. and i am mean
 
 ___________________________
 
, indeed, respecting you.
  petruchio. to her, kate!
  hortensio. to her, widow!
  petruchio. a hundred marks, my kate does put her down.
  hortensio. that's my office.
  petruchio. spoke like an officer- ha' to thee, lad.
                                           [drinks to hortensio]
  baptista. how likes gremio these quick-witted folks?
  gremio. believe me, sir, they butt together well.
  bianca. head and butt! an hasty-witted body
    would say your head and butt were head and horn.
  vincentio. ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
  bianca. ay, but not frighted me; therefore i'll sleep again.
  petruchio. nay, that you shall not; since you have begun
 
 ___________________________
 
,
    have at you for a bitter jest or two.
  bianca. am i your bird? i mean to shift my bush,
    and then pursue me as you draw your bow.
    you are welcome all.
                             exeunt bianca, katherina, and widow
  petruchio. she hath prevented me. here, signior tranio,
    this bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
    therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.
  tranio. o, sir, lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
    which runs himself, and catches for his master.
  petruchio. a good swift simile, but something currish.
  tranio. 'tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself;
    'tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
  baptista. o, o, petruchio! tranio hits you now.
  lucentio. i th
 
 ___________________________
 
ank thee for that gird, good tranio.
  hortensio. confess, confess; hath he not hit you here?
  petruchio. 'a has a little gall'd me, i confess;
    and, as the jest did glance away from me,
    'tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.
  baptista. now, in good sadness, son petruchio,
    i think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
  petruchio. well, i say no; and therefore, for assurance,
    let's each one send unto his wife,
    and he whose wife is most obedient,
    to come at first when he doth send for her,
    shall win the wager which we will propose.
  hortensio. content. what's the wager?
  lucentio. twenty crowns.
  petruchio. twenty crowns?
    i'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
    but twenty times so much upon my wife.
  lucentio. a hundred then.
  hortensio. content.
  petruchio. a match! 'tis done.
 
 ___________________________
 

  hortensio. who shall begin?
  lucentio. that will i.
    go, biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
  biondello. i go.                                          exit
  baptista. son, i'll be your half bianca comes.
  lucentio. i'll have no halves; i'll bear it all myself.

                          re-enter biondello

    how now! what news?
  biondello. sir, my mistress sends you word
    that she is busy and she cannot come.
  petruchio. how! she's busy, and she cannot come!
    is that an answer?
  gremio. ay, and a kind one too.
    pray god, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
  petruchio. i hope better.
  hortensio. sirrah biondello, go and entreat my wife
    to come to me forthwith.                      exit biondello
  petruchio. o, ho! entreat her!
    nay, then she must needs come.
  hortensio. i am afraid, sir,
    do what you can, yours will not be entreated.

                            re-enter bionde
 
 ___________________________
 
llo

    now, where's my wife?
  biondello. she says you have some goodly jest in hand:
    she will not come; she bids you come to her.
  petruchio. worse and worse; she will not come! o vile,
    intolerable, not to be endur'd!
    sirrah grumio, go to your mistress;
    say i command her come to me.                    exit grumio
  hortensio. i know her answer.
  petruchio. what?
  hortensio. she will not.
  petruchio. the fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

                             re-enter katherina

  baptista. now, by my holidame, here comes katherina!
  katherina. what is your will, sir, that you send for me?
  petruchio. where is your sister, and hortensio's wife?
  katherina. they sit conferring by the parlour fire.
  petruchio. go, fetch them hither; if they deny to come.
    swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
    away, i say, and bring them hither straight.
        
 
 ___________________________
 
                                          exit katherina
  lucentio. here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
  hortensio. and so it is. i wonder what it bodes.
  petruchio. marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
    an awful rule, and right supremacy;
    and, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy.
  baptista. now fair befall thee, good petruchio!
    the wager thou hast won; and i will ad
    unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
    another dowry to another daughter,
    for she is chang'd, as she had never been.
  petruchio. nay, i will win my wager better yet,
    and show more sign of her obedience,
    her new-built virtue and obedience.

                 re-enter katherina with bianca and widow

    see where she comes, and brings your froward wives
    as prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
    katherine, that 
 
 ___________________________
 
cap of yours becomes you not:
    off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
                                            [katherina complies]
  widow. lord, let me never have a cause to sigh
    till i be brought to such a silly pass!
  bianca. fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
  lucentio. i would your duty were as foolish too;
    the wisdom of your duty, fair bianca,
    hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper-time!
  bianca. the more fool you for laying on my duty.
  petruchio. katherine, i charge thee, tell these headstrong
women
    what duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
  widow. come, come, you're mocking; we will have no telling.
  petruchio. come on, i say; and first begin with her.
  widow. she shall not.
  petruchio. i say she shall. and first begin with her.
  katherina. fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
    and dart not scornful glances from those eyes
    to wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor.
    it blots thy beauty as f
 
 ___________________________
 
le worins!
    my mind hath been as big as one of yours,
    my heart as great, my reason haply more,
    to bandy word for word and frown for frown;
    but now i see our lances are but straws,
    our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
    that seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
    then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
    and place your hands below your husband's foot;
    in token of which duty, if he please,
    my hand is ready, may it do him ease.
  petruchio. why, there's a wench! come on, and kiss me, kate.
  lucentio. well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha't.
  vincentio. 'tis a good hearing when children are toward.
  lucentio. but a harsh hearing when women are froward.
  petruchio. come, kate, we'll to bed.
    we three are married, but you two are sped.
    [to lucentio]  'twas i won the wager, though you hit the
white;
    and being a winner, god give you good night!
                                  exeunt petruchio and kath