 shrew

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

    persons in the induction
  a lord
  christopher sly, a tinker
  hostess
  page
  players
  huntsmen
  servants

  baptista minola, a gentleman of padua
  vincentio, a merchant of pisa
  lucentio, son to vincentio, in love with bianca
  petruchio, a gentleman of verona, a suitor to katherina

    suitors to bianca
  gremio
  hortensio

    servants to lucentio
  tranio
  biondello

    servants to petruchio
  grumio
  curtis

  a pedant

    daughters to baptista
  katherina, the shrew
  bianca

  a widow

  tailor, haberdasher, and servants attending on baptista and
    petruchio

                             scene:
            padua, and petruchio's house in the country

sc_1
                      induction. scene i.
                  before an alehouse on a heath

                      enter hostess and sly

  sly. i'll pheeze you, in faith.
  hostess. a pair of stocks, you rogue
 
 ___________________________
 
fficeth, my reasons are both good and weighty.      exeunt

                 the presenters above speak

  first servant. my lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
  sly. yes, by saint anne do i. a good matter, surely; comes
there
    any more of it?
  page. my lord, 'tis but begun.
  sly. 'tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady
    would 'twere done!                        [they sit and mark]




scene ii.
padua. before hortensio's house

enter petruchio and his man grumio

  petruchio. verona, for a while i take my leave,
    to see my friends in padua; but of all
    my best beloved and approved friend,
    hortensio; and i trow this is his house.
    here, sirrah grumio, knock, i say.
 grumio. knock, sir! whom should i knock?
    is there any man has rebus'd your worship?
  petruchio. villain, i say, knock me here soundly.
  grumio. knock you here, sir? why, sir, what am i, sir, that i
    should knock you here, sir?
  petruchio. villain, i say, kn
 
 ___________________________
 
ock me at this gate,
    and rap me well, or i'll knock your knave's pate.
  grumio. my master is grown quarrelsome. i should knock you
first,
    and then i know after who comes by the worst.
  petruchio. will it not be?
    faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock i'll ring it;
    i'll try how you can sol-fa, and sing it.
                                     [he wrings him by the ears]
  grumio. help, masters, help! my master is mad.
  petruchio. now knock when i bid you, sirrah villain!

                        enter hortensio

  hortensio. how now! what's the matter? my old friend grumio and
my
    good friend petruchio! how do you all at verona?
  petruchio. signior hortensio, come you to part the fray?
    'con tutto il cuore ben trovato' may i say.
  hortensio. alla nostra casa ben venuto,
    molto honorato signor mio petruchio.
    rise, grumio, rise; we will compou
 
 ___________________________
 
nd this quarrel.
  grumio. nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in latin. if
this
    be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service- look you,
sir:
    he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. well, was it
fit
    for a servant to use his master so; being, perhaps, for aught
i
    see, two and thirty, a pip out?
    whom would to god i had well knock'd at first,
    then had not grumio come by the worst.
  petruchio. a senseless villain! good hortensio,
    i bade the rascal knock upon your gate,
    and could not get him for my heart to do it.
  grumio. knock at the gate? o heavens! spake you not these words
    plain: 'sirrah knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and
    knock me soundly'? and come you now with 'knocking at the
gate'?
  petruchio. sirrah, be gone, or talk not, i advise you.
  hortensio. petruchio, patience; i am grumio's pledge;
    why, this
 
 ___________________________
 
's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
    your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant grumio.
    and tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
    blows you to padua here from old verona?
  petruchio. such wind as scatters young men through the world
    to seek their fortunes farther than at home,
    where small experience grows. but in a few,
    signior hortensio, thus it stands with me:
    antonio, my father, is deceas'd,
    and i have thrust myself into this maze,
    haply to wive and thrive as best i may;
    crowns in my purse i have, and goods at home,
    and 
 
 ___________________________
 
we
    few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
    one rich enough to be petruchio's wife,
    as wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
    be she as foul as was florentius' love,
    as old as sibyl, and as curst and shrewd
    as socrates' xanthippe or a worse-
    she moves me not, or not removes, at least,
    affection's edge in me, were she as rough
    as are the swelling adriatic seas.
    i come to wive it wealthily in padua;
    if wealthily, then happily in padua.
  grumio. nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind
is.
    why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an
    aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head,
though
    she has as many diseases as two and fifty horses. why,
nothing
    comes amiss, so money comes withal.
  hortensio. petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
    i will continue that i broach'd in jest.
    i can, petruchio, help thee to a wife
    with wealth enough, and young and beauteo
 
 ___________________________
 
 thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
  hortensio. her father is baptista minola,
    an affable and courteous gentleman;
    her name is katherina minola,
    renown'd in padua for her scolding tongue.
  petruchio. i know her father, though i know not her;
    and he knew my deceased father well.
    i will not sleep, hortensio, till i see her;
    and therefore let me be thus bold with you
    to give you over at this first encounter,
    unless you will accompany me thither.
  grumio. i pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. o'
my
    word, and she knew him as well as i do, she would think
scolding
    would do little good upon him. she may perhaps call him half
a
    score knaves or so. why, that's nothing; and he begin once,
he'll
    rail in his rope-tricks. i'll tell you what, sir: an she
stand
    him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so
    disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see
    withal than a cat. y
 
 ___________________________
 
hee,
    for in baptista's keep my treasure is.
    he hath the jewel of my life in hold,
    his youngest daughter, beautiful bianca;
    and her withholds from me, and other more,
    suitors to her and rivals in my love;
    supposing it a thing impossible-
    for those defects i have before rehears'd-
    that ever katherina will be woo'd.
    therefore this order hath baptista ta'en,
    that none shall have access unto bianca
    till katherine the curst have got a husband.
  grumio. katherine the curst!
    a title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  hortensio. now shall my friend petruchio do me grace,
    and offer me disguis'd in sober robes
    to old baptista as a schoolmaster
    well seen in music, to instruct bianca;
    that so i may by this device at least
    have leave and leisure to make love to her,
    and unsuspected court her by herself.

        enter gremio with lucentio disguised as cambio

  grumio. here's no knavery! see, to beguile the
 
 ___________________________
 
 old folks, how
the
    young folks lay their heads together! master, master, look
about
    you. who goes there, ha?
  hortensio. peace, grumio! it is the rival of my love.
petruchio,
    stand by awhile.
  grumio. a proper stripling, and an amorous!
                                              [they stand aside]
  gremio. o, very well; i have perus'd the note.
    hark you, sir; i'll have them very fairly bound-
    all books of love, see that at any hand;
    and see you read no other lectures to her.
    you understand me- over and beside
    signior baptista's liberality,
    i'll mend it with a largess. take your paper too,
    and let me have them very well perfum'd;
    for she is sweet
 
 ___________________________
 
er than perfume itself
    to whom they go to. what will you read to her?
  lucentio. whate'er i read to her, i'll plead for you
    as for my patron, stand you so assur'd,
    as firmly as yourself were still in place;
    yea, and perhaps with more successful words
    than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
  gremio. o this learning, what a thing it is!
  grumio. o this woodcock, what an ass it is!
  petruchio. peace, sirrah!
  hortensio. grumio, mum!                       [coming forward]
    god save you, signior gremio!
  gremio. and you are well met, signior hortensio.
    trow you whither i am going? to baptista minola.
    i promis'd to enquire carefully
    about a schoolmaster for the fair bianca;
    and by good fortune i have lighted well
    on this young man; for learning and behaviour
    fit for her turn, well read in poetry
    and other books- good ones, i warrant ye.
  hortensio. 'tis well; and i have met a g
 
 ___________________________
 
entleman
    hath promis'd me to help me to another,
    a fine musician to instruct our mistress;
    so shall i no whit be behind in duty
    to fair bianca, so beloved of me.
  gremio. beloved of me- and that my deeds shall prove.
  grumio. and that his bags shall prove.
  hortensio. gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love.
    listen to me, and if you speak me fair
    i'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
    here is a gentleman whom by chance i met,
    upon agreement from us to his liking,
    will undertake to woo curst katherine;
    yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
  gremio. so said, so done, is well.
    hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
  petruchio. i know she is an irksome bra
 
 ___________________________
 
wling scold;
    if that be all, masters, i hear no harm.
  gremio. no, say'st me so, friend? what countryman?
  petruchio. born in verona, old antonio's son.
    my father dead, my fortune lives for me;
    and i do hope good days and long to see.
  gremio. o sir, such a life with such a wife were strange!
    but if you have a stomach, to't a god's name;
    you shall have me assisting you in all.
    but will you woo this wild-cat?
  petruchio. will i live?
  grumio. will he woo her? ay, or i'll hang her.
  petruchio. why came i hither but to that intent?
    think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
    have i not in my time heard lions roar?
    have i not heard the sea, puff'd up with winds,
    rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
    have i not heard great ordnance in the field,
    and heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
    have i not in a pitched battle heard
    loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
    and do 
 
 ___________________________
 
you tell me of a woman's tongue,
    that gives not half so great a blow to hear
    as will a chestnut in a fariner's fire?
    tush! tush! fear boys with bugs.
  grumio. for he fears none.
  gremio. hortensio, hark:
    this gentleman is happily arriv'd,
    my mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
  hortensio. i promis'd we would be contributors
    and bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
  gremio. and so we will- provided that he win her.
  grumio. i would i were as sure of a good dinner.

    enter tranio, bravely apparelled as lucentio, and biondello

  tranio. gentlemen, god save you! if i may be bold,
    tell me, i beseech you, which is the readiest way
    to the house of signior baptista minola?
  biondello. he that has the two fair daughters; is't he you
mean?
  tranio. even he, biondello.
  gremio. hark you, sir, you mean not her to-
  tranio. perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
  petruchio. not her that c
 
 ___________________________
 
o have her
    will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
  hortensio. sir, you say well, and well you do conceive;
    and since you do profess to be a suitor,
    you must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
    to whom we all rest generally beholding.
  tranio. sir, i shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
    please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
    and quaff carouses to our mistress' health;
    and do as adversaries do in law-
    strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
  grumio, biondello. o excellent motion! fellows, let's be gone.
  hortensio. the motion's good indeed, and be it so.
    petruchio, i shall be your ben venuto.                exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or 
 
 ___________________________
 
glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
  biondello. why, sir, he comes not.
  baptista. didst thou not say he comes?
  biondello. who? that petruchio came?
  baptista. ay, that petruchio came.
  biondello. no, sir; i say his horse comes with him on his back.
  baptista. why, that's all one.
  biondello. nay, by saint jamy,
             i hold you a penny,
             a horse and a man
             is more than one,
             and yet not many.

                  enter petruchio and grumio

  petruchio. come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
  baptista. you are welcome, sir.
  petruchio. and yet i come not well.
  baptista. and yet you halt not.
  tranio. not so well apparell'd
    as i wish you were.
  petruchio. were it better, i should rush in thus.
    but where is kate? where is my lovely bride?
    how does my father? gentles, methinks you frown;
    and wherefore gaze this goodly company
    as if they saw some wondrous monument,
    some comet or unusu
 
 ___________________________
 
aptista. but thus, i trust, you will not marry her.
  petruchio. good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with
words;
    to me she's married, not unto my clothes.
    could i repair what she will wear in me
    as i can change these poor accoutrements,
    'twere well for kate and better for myself.
    but what a fool am i to chat with you,
    when i should bid good-morrow to my bride
    and seal the title with a lovely kiss!
                                  exeunt petruchio and grumio
  tranio. he hath some meaning in his mad attire.
    we will persuade him, be it possible,
    to put on better ere he go to church.
  baptista. i'll after him and see the event of this.
              exeunt baptista, gremio, biondello, and attendents
  tranio. but to her love concerneth us to ad
    her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    as i before imparted to your worship,
    i am to get a man- whate'er he be
    it skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
    and h
 
 ___________________________
 
d seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
    this done, he took the bride about the neck,
    and kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
    that at the parting all the church did echo.
    and i, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
    and after me, i know, the rout is coming.
    such a mad marriage never was before.
    hark, hark! i hear the minstrels play.         [music plays]

       enter petruchio, katherina, bianca, baptista, hortensio,
                         grumio, and train

  petruchio. gentlemen and friends, i thank you for your pains.
    i know you think to dine with me to-day,
    and have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer
    but so it is- my haste doth call me hence,
    and therefore here i mean to take my leave.
  baptista. is't possible you will away to-night?
  petruchio. i must away to-day before night come.
    make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
    you would entreat me rather go than stay.
    and, honest company, i
 
 ___________________________
 
ife.
    dine with my father, drink a health to me.
    for i must hence; and farewell to you all.
  tranio. let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
  petruchio. it may not be.
  gremio. let me entreat you.
  petruchio. it cannot be.
  katherina. let me entreat you.
  petruchio. i am content.
  katherina. are you content to stay?
  petruchio. i am content you shall entreat me stay;
    but yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
  katherina. now, if you love me, stay.
  petruchio. grumio, my horse.
  grumio. ay, sir, they be ready; the oats have eaten the horses.
  katherina. nay, then,
    do what thou canst, i will not go to-day;
    no, nor to-morrow, not till i please myself.
    the door is open, sir; there lies your way;
    you may be jogging whiles your boots are green;
    for me, i'll not be gone till i please myself.
    'tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom
    that take it on you at the first so roundly.
  petruchio. o kate, content thee; prithee be 
 
 ___________________________
 
arouse full measure to her maidenhead;
    be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves.
    but for my bonny kate, she must with me.
    nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
    i will be master of what is mine own-
    she is my goods, my chattels, she is my house,
    my household stuff, my field, my barn,
    my horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing,
    and here she stands; touch her whoever dare;
    i'll bring mine action on the proudest he
    that stops my way in padua. grumio,
    draw forth thy weapon; we are beset with thieves;
    rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
    fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, kate;
    i'll buckler thee against a million.
                         exeunt petruchio, katherina, and grumio
  baptista. nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
  gremio. went they not quickly, i should die with laughing.
  tranio. of all mad matches, never was the like.
  lucentio. mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
  
 
 ___________________________
 
speare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iv. scene i.
petruchio's country house

enter grumio

  grumio. fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and
all
    foul ways! was ever man so beaten? was ever man so ray'd? was
    ever man so weary? i am sent before to make a fire, and they
are
    coming after to warm them. now were not i a little pot and
soon
    hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the
roof
    of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere i should come by a
fire to
    thaw me. but i with blowing the fire shall warm myself; for,
    consi
 
 ___________________________
 
dering the weather, a taller man than i will take cold.
    holla, ho! curtis!

                            enter curtis

  curtis. who is that calls so coldly?
  grumio. a piece of ice. if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from
my
    shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my
    neck. a fire, good curtis.
  curtis. is my master and his wife coming, grumio?
  grumio. o, ay, curtis, ay; and therefore fire, fire; cast on no
    water.
  curtis. is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?
  grumio. she was, good curtis, before this frost; but thou
know'st
    winter tames man, woman, and beast; for it hath tam'd my old
    master, and my new mistress, and myself, fellow curtis.
  curtis. away, you three-inch fool! i am no beast.
  grumio. am i but three inches? why, thy horn is a foot, and so
long
    am i at the least. but wilt thou make a fire, or sh
 
 ___________________________
 
all i
complain
    on thee to our mistress, whose hand- she being now at hand-
thou
    shalt soon feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy
hot
    office?
  curtis. i prithee, good grumio, tell me how goes the world?
  grumio. a cold world, curtis, in every office but thine; and
    therefore fire. do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master
and
    mistress are almost frozen to death.
  curtis. there's fire ready; and therefore, good grumio, the
news?
  grumio. why, 'jack boy! ho, boy!' and as much news as thou
wilt.
  curtis. come, you are so full of cony-catching!
  grumio. why, therefore, fire; for i have caught extreme cold.
    where's the cook? is supper ready, the house trimm'd, rushes
    strew'd, cobwebs swept, the serving-men in their new fustian,
    their white stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment
on?
    be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without, the carpets
    laid, and everything in order?
  curtis. all re
 
 ___________________________
 
ady; and therefore, i pray thee, news.
  grumio. first know my horse is tired; my master and mistress
fall'n
    out.
  curtis. how?
  grumio. out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby hangs a
    tale.
  curtis. let's ha't, good grumio.
  grumio. lend thine ear.
  curtis. here.
  grumio. there.                                  [striking him]
  curtis. this 'tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
  grumio. and therefore 'tis call'd a sensible tale; and this
cuff
    was but to knock at your car and beseech list'ning. now i
begin:
    imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind
my
    mistress-
  curtis. both of one horse?
  grumio. what's that to thee?
  curtis. why, a horse.
  grumio. tell thou the tale. but hadst thou not cross'd me, thou
    shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she under her
horse;
    thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she wa
 
 ___________________________
 

    bemoil'd, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he
beat me
    because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to
    pluck him off me, how he swore, how she pray'd that never
pray'd
    before, how i cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle
was
    burst, how i lost my crupper- with many things of worthy
memory,
    which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return
unexperienc'd to
    thy grave.
  curtis. by this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.
  grumio. ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall
find
    when he comes home. but what talk i of this? call forth
    nathaniel, joseph, nicholas, philip, walter, sugarsop, and
the
    rest; let their heads be sleekly comb'd, their blue coats
brush'd
    and their garters of an indifferent knit; let them curtsy
with
    their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my
master's
    horse-tail till they kiss their hands. are they all ready?
  curtis. they are.
  grumio. cal
 
 ___________________________
 
l them forth.
  curtis. do you hear, ho? you must meet my master, to
countenance my
    mistress.
  grumio. why, she hath a face of her own.
  curtis. who knows not that?
  grumio. thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance
her.
  curtis. i call them forth to credit her.
  grumio. why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.

                     enter four or five servingmen

  nathaniel. welcome home, grumio!
  philip. how now, grumio!
  joseph. what, grumio!
  nicholas. fellow grumio!
  nathaniel. how now, old lad!
  grumio. welcome, you!- how now, you!- what, you!- fellow, you!-
and
    thus much for greeting. now, my spruce companions, is all
ready,
    and all things neat?
  nathaniel. all things is ready. how near is our master?
  grumio. e'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be not-
   cock's passion, silence! i hear my master.

                     enter petruchio and katherina

  petruchio. where be these knaves? what,
 
 ___________________________
 
 no man at door
    to hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
    where is nathaniel, gregory, philip?
  all servants. here, here, sir; here, sir.
  petruchio. here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
    you logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
    what, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
    where is the foolish knave i sent before?
  grumio. here, sir; as foolish as i was before.
  petruchio. you peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
    did i not bid thee meet me in the park
    and bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
  grumio. nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
    and gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' th' heel;
    there was no link to colour peter's hat,
    and walter's dagger was not come from sheathing;
    there were none fine but adam, ralph, and gregory;
    the rest were ragged, old, 
 
 ___________________________
 
   and better 'twere that both of us did fast,
    since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
    than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
    be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended.
    and for this night we'll fast for company.
    come, i will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.        exeunt

                     re-enter servants severally

  nathaniel. peter, didst ever see the like?
  peter. he kills her in her own humour.

                            re-enter curtis

  grumio. where is he?
  curtis. in her chamber. making a sermon of continency to her,
    and rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
    knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak.
    and sits as one new risen from a dream.
    away, away! for he is coming hither.                  exeunt

                       re-enter petruchio

  petruchio. thus have i politicly begun my reign,
    and 'tis my hope to end successfully.
    my falcon now is sharp and passing empty.
    a
 
 ___________________________
 
dant. o, sir, i do; and will repute you ever
    the patron of my life and liberty.
  tranio. then go with me to make the matter good.
    this, by the way, i let you understand:
    my father is here look'd for every day
    to pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage
    'twixt me and one baptista's daughter here.
    in all these circumstances i'll instruct you.
    go with me to clothe you as becomes you.              exeunt




scene iii.
petruchio's house

enter katherina and grumio

  grumio. no, no, forsooth; i dare not for my life.
  katherina. the more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
    what, did he marry me to famish me?
    beggars that come unto my father's door
    upon entreaty have a present alms;
    if not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
    but i, who never knew how to entreat,
    nor never needed that i should entreat,
    am starv'd for meat, giddy for lack of sleep;
    with oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed;
    and that which
 
 ___________________________
 
 spites me more than all these wants-
    he does it under name of perfect love;
    as who should say, if i should sleep or eat,
    'twere deadly sickness or else present death.
    i prithee go and get me some repast;
    i care not what, so it be wholesome food.
  grumio. what say you to a neat's foot?
  katherina. 'tis passing good; i prithee let me have it.
  grumio. i fear it is too choleric a meat.
    how say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?
  katherina. i like it well; good grumio, fetch it me.
  grumio. i cannot tell; i fear 'tis choleric.
    what say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
  katherina. a dish that i do love to feed upon.
  grumio. ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
  katherina. why then the beef, and let the mustard rest.
  grumio. nay, then i will not; you shall have the mustard,
    or else you get no beef of grumio.
 
 ___________________________
 

  katherina. then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
  grumio. why then the mustard without the beef.
  katherina. go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
                                                     [beats him]
    that feed'st me with the very name of meat.
    sorrow on thee and all the pack of you
    that triumph thus upon my misery!
    go, get thee gone, i say.

               enter petruchio, and hortensio with meat

  petruchio. how fares my kate? what, sweeting, all amort?
  hortensio. mistress, what cheer?
  katherina.
 
 ___________________________
 
 thou thread, thou
      thimble,
    thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail,
    thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou-
    brav'd in mine own house with a skein of thread!
    away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
    or i shall so bemete thee with thy yard
    as thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st!
    i tell thee, i, that thou hast marr'd her gown.
  tailor. your worship is deceiv'd; the gown is made
    just as my master had direction.
    grumio gave order how it should be done.
  grumio. i gave him no order; i gave him the stuff.
  tailor. but how did you desire it should be made?
  grumio. marry, sir, with needle and thread.
  tailor. but did you not request to have it cut?
  grumio. thou hast fac'd many things.
  tailor. i have.
  grumio. face not me. thou hast brav'd many men; brave not me. i
    will neither be fac'd nor brav'd. i say unto thee, i bid thy
    master cut out the gown; but i did not bid him cut it to
piece
 
 ___________________________
 
s.
    ergo, thou liest.
  tailor. why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
  petruchio. read it.
  grumio. the note lies in's throat, if he say i said so.
  tailor.  [reads]  'imprimis, a loose-bodied gown'-
  grumio. master, if ever i said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the
    skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown
bread; i
    said a gown.
  petruchio. proceed.
  tailor.  [reads]  'with a small compass'd cape'-
  grumio. i confess the cape.
  tailor.  [reads]  'with a trunk sleeve'-
  grumio. i confess two sleeves.
  tailor.  [reads]  'the sleeves curiously cut.'
  petruchio. ay, there's the villainy.
  grumio. error i' th' bill, sir; error i' th' bill! i commanded
the
    sleeves should be cut out, and sew'd up again; and that i'll
    prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a
thimble.
  tailor. this is true that i say; an i had thee in place where,
thou
    shouldst know it.
  grum
 
 ___________________________
 
io. i am for thee straight; take thou the bill, give me thy
    meteyard, and spare not me.
  hortensio. god-a-mercy, grumio! then he shall have no odds.
  petruchio. well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
  grumio. you are i' th' right, sir; 'tis for my mistress.
  petruchio. go, take it up unto thy master's use.
  grumio. villain, not for thy life! take up my mistress' gown
for
    thy master's use!
  petruchio. why, sir, what's your conceit in that?
  grumio. o, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for.
    take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
    o fie, fie, fie!
  petruchio.  [aside]  hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor
paid.-
    go take it hence; be gone, and say no more.
  hortensio. tailor, i'll pay thee for thy gown to-morrow;
    take no unkindness of his hasty words.
    away, i say; commend me to thy master.           exit tailor
  petruchio. well, come, my kate; we will unto your father's
    even in these ho
 
 ___________________________
 
lo, lucentio, and bianca; gremio is out before

  biondello. softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  lucentio. i fly, biondello; but they may chance to need thee at
    home, therefore leave us.
  biondello. nay, faith, i'll see the church a your back, and
then
    come back to my master's as soon as i can.
                          exeunt lucentio, bianca, and biondello
  gremio. i marvel cambio comes not all this while.

           enter petruchio, katherina, vincentio, grumio,
                          and attendants

  petruchio. sir, here's the door; this is lucentio's house;
    my father's bears more toward the market-place;
    thither must i, and here i leave you, sir.
  vincentio. you shall not choose but drink before you go;
    i think i shall command your welcome here,
    and by all likelihood some cheer is toward.         [knocks]
  gremio. they're busy within; you were best knock louder.
                                [pedant looks out of the
 
 ___________________________
 
. no, sir; god forbid; but asham'd to kiss.
  petruchio. why, then, let's home again. come, sirrah, let's
away.
  katherina. nay, i will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love,
stay.
  petruchio. is not this well? come, my sweet kate:
    better once than never, for never too late.           exeunt




scene ii.
lucentio's house

enter baptista, vincentio, gremio, the pedant, lucentio, bianca,
petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and widow. the servingmen with
tranio,
biondello, and grumio, bringing in a banquet

  lucentio. at last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    and time it is when raging war is done
    to smile at scapes and perils overblown.
    my fair bianca, bid my father welcome,
    while i with self-same kindness welcome thine.
    brother petruchio, sister katherina,
    and thou, hortensio, with thy loving widow,
    feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
    my banquet is to close our stomachs up
    after our great good cheer. pray you,
 
 ___________________________
 
to me forthwith.                      exit biondello
  petruchio. o, ho! entreat her!
    nay, then she must needs come.
  hortensio. i am afraid, sir,
    do what you can, yours will not be entreated.

                            re-enter biondello

    now, where's my wife?
  biondello. she says you have some goodly jest in hand:
    she will not come; she bids you come to her.
  petruchio. worse and worse; she will not come! o vile,
    intolerable, not to be endur'd!
    sirrah grumio, go to your mistress;
    say i command her come to me.                    exit grumio
  hortensio. i know her answer.
  petruchio. what?
  hortensio. she will not.
  petruchio. the fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

                             re-enter katherina

  baptista. now, by my holidame, here comes katherina!
  katherina. what is your will, sir, that you send for me?
  petruchio. where is your sister, and hortensio's wife?
  katherina. they sit conferring by the parlo