the taming of the shrew

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

    persons in the induction
  a lord
  christopher sly, a tinker
  hostess
  page
  players
  huntsmen
  servants

  baptista minola, a gentleman of padua
  vincentio, a merchant of pisa
  lucentio, son to vincentio, in love with bianca
  petruchio, a gentleman of verona, a suitor to katherina

    suitors to bianca
  gremio
  hortensio

    servants to lucentio
  tranio
  biondello

    servants to petruchio
  grumio
  curtis

  a pedant

    daughters to baptista
  katherina, the shrew
  bianca

  a widow

  tailor, haberdasher, and servants attending on baptista and
    petruchio

      
 
 ___________________________
 
 your common talk;
    music and poesy use to quicken you;
    the mathematics and the metaphysics,
    fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
    no profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en;
    in brief, sir, study what you most affect.
  lucentio. gramercies, tranio, well dost thou advise.
    if, biondello, thou wert come ashore,
    we could at once put us in readiness,
    and take a lodging fit to entertain
    such friends as time in padua shall beget.

      enter baptista with his two daughters, katherina
        and bianca; gremio, a pantaloon; hortensio,
        suitor to bianca. lucentio and tranio stand by

    but stay awhile; what company is this?
  tranio. master, some show to welcome us to town.
  baptista. gentlemen, importune me no farther,
    for how i firmly am resolv'd you know;
    that is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
    before i have a husband for the elder.
    if either of you both love katherina,
    because i know you well 
 
 ___________________________
 
and love you well,
    leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
  gremio. to cart her rather. she's too rough for me.
    there, there, hortensio, will you any wife?
  katherina.  [to baptista]  i pray you, sir, is it your will
    to make a stale of me amongst these mates?
  hortensio. mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates for you,
    unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
  katherina. i' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear;
    iwis it is not halfway to her heart;
    but if it were, doubt not her care should be
    to comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool,
    and paint your face, and use you like a fool.
  hortensio. from all such devils, good lord deliv
 
 ___________________________
 
er us!
  gremio. and me, too, good lord!
  tranio. husht, master! here's some good pastime toward;
    that wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
  lucentio. but in the other's silence do i see
    maid's mild behaviour and sobriety.
    peace, tranio!
  tranio. well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.
  baptista. gentlemen, that i may soon make good
    what i have said- bianca, get you in;
    and let it not displease thee, good bianca,
    for i will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
  katherina. a pretty peat! it is best
    put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
  bianca. sister, content you in my discontent.
    sir, to your pleasure humbly i subscribe;
    my books and instruments shall be my company,
    on them to look, and practise by myself.
  lucentio. hark, tranio, thou mayst he
 
 ___________________________
 
ar minerva speak!
  hortensio. signior baptista, will you be so strange?
    sorry am i that our good will effects
    bianca's grief.
  gremio. why will you mew her up,
    signior baptista, for this fiend of hell,
    and make her bear the penance of her tongue?
  baptista. gentlemen, content ye; i am resolv'd.
    go in, bianca.                                   exit bianca
    and for i know she taketh most delight
    in music, instruments, and poetry,
    schoolmasters will i keep within my house
    fit to instruct her youth. if you, hortensio,
    or, signior gremio, you, know any such,
    prefer them hither; for to cunning men
    i will be very kind, and liberal
    to mine own children in good bringing-up;
    and so, farewell. katherina, you 
 
 ___________________________
 

    endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in
the
    world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all
    faults, and money enough.
  gremio. i cannot tell; but i had as lief take her dowry with
this
    condition: to be whipp'd at the high cross every morning.
  hortensio. faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
    apples. but, come; since this bar in law makes us friends, it
    shall be so far forth friendly maintain'd till by helping
    baptista's eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest
free
    for a husband, and then have to't afresh. sweet bianca! happy
man
    be his dole! he that runs fastest gets the ring. how say you,
    signior gremio?
  gremio. i am agreed; and would i had given him the best horse
in
    padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed
her,
    and bed her, and rid the house of her! come on.
                                     exeunt gremio and hortensio
  tranio. i pray, sir
 
 ___________________________
 
ve put on his;
    for in a quarrel since i came ashore
    i kill'd a man, and fear i was descried.
    wait you on him, i charge you, as becomes,
    while i make way from hence to save my life.
    you understand me?
  biondello. i, sir? ne'er a whit.
  lucentio. and not a jot of tranio in your mouth:
    tranio is chang'd into lucentio.
  biondello. the better for him; would i were so too!
  tranio. so could i, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
    that lucentio indeed had baptista's youngest daughter.
    but, sirrah, not for my sake but your master's, i advise
    you use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.
    when i am alone, why, then i am tranio;
    but in all places else your master lucentio.
  lucentio. tranio, let's go.
    one thing more rests, that thyself execute-
    to make one among these wooers. if thou ask me why-
    sufficeth, my reasons are both good and weighty.      exeunt

                 the presenters above speak

  fir
 
 ___________________________
 
best becomes a gentlewoman;
    her only fault, and that is faults enough,
    is- that she is intolerable curst,
    and shrewd and froward so beyond all measure
    that, were my state far worser than it is,
    i would not wed her for a mine of gold.
  petruchio. hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect.
    tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough;
    for i will board her though she chide as loud
    as thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
  hortensio. her father is baptista minola,
    an affable and courteous gentleman;
    her name is katherina minola,
    renown'd in padua for her scolding tongue.
  petruchio. i know her father, though i know not her;
    and he knew my deceased father well.
    i will not sleep, hortensio, till i see her;
    and therefore let me be thus bold with you
    to give you over at this first encounter,
    unless you will accompany me thither.
  grumio. i pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. o'
my
    word, 
 
 ___________________________
 
m as well as i do, she would think
scolding
    would do little good upon him. she may perhaps call him half
a
    score knaves or so. why, that's nothing; and he begin once,
he'll
    rail in his rope-tricks. i'll tell you what, sir: an she
stand
    him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so
    disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see
    withal than a cat. you know him not, sir.
  hortensio. tarry, petruchio, i must go with thee,
    for in baptista's keep my treasure is.
    he hath the jewel of my life in hold,
    his youngest daughter, beautiful bianca;
    and her withholds from me, and other more,
    suitors to her and rivals in my love;
    supposing it a thing impossible-
    for those defects i have before rehears'd-
    that ever katherina will be woo'd.
    therefore this order hath baptista ta'en,
    that none shall have access unto bianca
    till katherine the curst have got a husband.
  grumio. katherine the cur
 
 ___________________________
 
st!
    a title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  hortensio. now shall my friend petruchio do me grace,
    and offer me disguis'd in sober robes
    to old baptista as a schoolmaster
    well seen in music, to instruct bianca;
    that so i may by this device at least
    have leave and leisure to make love to her,
    and unsuspected court her by herself.

        enter gremio with lucentio disguised as cambio

  grumio. here's no knavery! see, to beguile the old folks, how
the
    young folks lay their heads together! master, master, look
about
    you. who goes there, ha?
  hortensio. peace, grumio! it is the rival of my love.
petruchio,

 
 ___________________________
 
    stand by awhile.
  grumio. a proper stripling, and an amorous!
                                              [they stand aside]
  gremio. o, very well; i have perus'd the note.
    hark you, sir; i'll have them very fairly bound-
    all books of love, see that at any hand;
    and see you read no other lectures to her.
    you understand me- over and beside
    signior baptista's liberality,
    i'll mend it with a largess. take your paper too,
    and let me have them very well perfum'd;
    for she is sweeter than perfume itself
    to whom they go to. what will you read to her?
  lucentio. whate'er i read to her, i'll plead for you
    as for my patron, stand you so assur'd,
    as firmly as yourself were still in place;
    yea, and perhaps with more successful words
    than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
  gremio. o this learning, what a thing it
 
 ___________________________
 
 is!
  grumio. o this woodcock, what an ass it is!
  petruchio. peace, sirrah!
  hortensio. grumio, mum!                       [coming forward]
    god save you, signior gremio!
  gremio. and you are well met, signior hortensio.
    trow you whither i am going? to baptista minola.
    i promis'd to enquire carefully
    about a schoolmaster for the fair bianca;
    and by good fortune i have lighted well
    on this young man; for learning and behaviour
    fit for her turn, well read in poetry
    and other books- good ones, i warrant ye.
  hortensio. 'tis well; and i have met a gentleman
    hath promis'd me to help me to another,
    a fine musician to instruct our mistress;
    so shall i no whit be behind in duty
    to fair bianca, so beloved of 
 
 ___________________________
 

    this gentleman is happily arriv'd,
    my mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
  hortensio. i promis'd we would be contributors
    and bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
  gremio. and so we will- provided that he win her.
  grumio. i would i were as sure of a good dinner.

    enter tranio, bravely apparelled as lucentio, and biondello

  tranio. gentlemen, god save you! if i may be bold,
    tell me, i beseech you, which is the readiest way
    to the house of signior baptista minola?
  biondello. he that has the two fair daughters; is't he you
mean?
  tranio. even he, biondello.
  gremio. hark you, sir, you mean not her to-
  tranio. perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
  petruchio. not her that chides, sir, at any hand, i pray.
  tranio. i love no chiders, sir. biondello, let's away.
  lucentio.  [aside]  well begun, tranio.
  hortensio. sir, a word ere you go.
    are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
  tranio. and if i be, sir,
 
 ___________________________
 
 is it any offence?
  gremio. no; if without more words you will get you hence.
  tranio. why, sir, i pray, are not the streets as free
    for me as for you?
  gremio. but so is not she.

  tranio. for what reason, i beseech you?
  gremio. for this reason, if you'll know,
    that she's the choice love of signior gremio.
  hortensio. that she's the chosen of signior hortensio.
  tranio. softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
    do me this right- hear me with patience.
    baptista is a noble gentleman,
    to whom my father is not all unknown,
    and, were his daughter fairer than she is,
    she may more suitors have, and me for one.
    fair leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
    then well one more may fair bianca have;
    and so she shall: lucentio shall make one,
    though paris came in hope to speed alone.
  gremio. what, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
  lucentio. sir, give him head; i know he'll prove a jade.
  petruchio. hortensio, to what e
 
 ___________________________
 
nd are all these words?
  hortensio. sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
    did you yet ever see baptista's daughter?
  tranio. no, sir, but hear i do that he hath two:
    the one as famous for a scolding tongue
    as is the other for beauteous modesty.
  petruchio. sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.
  gremio. yea, leave that labour to great hercules,
    and let it be more than alcides' twelve.
  petruchio. sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
    the youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
    her father keeps from all access of suitors,
    and will not promise her to
 
 ___________________________
 
lete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
padua. baptista's house

enter katherina and bianca

  bianca. good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
    to make a bondmaid and a slave of me-
    that i disdain; but for these other gawds,
    unbind my hands, i'll pull them off myself,
    yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
    or what you will command me will i do,
    so well i know my duty to my elders.
  katherina. of all thy suitors here i charge thee tell
    whom thou lov'st best. see thou dissemble not.
  bianca. believe me, 
 
 ___________________________
 

  bianca. if you affect him, sister, here i swear
    i'll plead for you myself but you shall have him.
  katherina. o then, belike, you fancy riches more:
    you will have gremio to keep you fair.
  bianca. is it for him you do envy me so?
    nay, then you jest; and now i well perceive
    you have but jested with me all this while.
    i prithee, sister kate, untie my hands.
  katherina. [strikes her]  if that be jest, then an the rest was
so.

                            enter baptista

  baptista. why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?
    bianca, stand aside- poor girl! she weeps.
                                                [he unbinds her]
    go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
    for shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit,
    why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
    when did she cross thee with a bitter word?
  katherina. her silence flouts me, and i'll be reveng'd.
                                            [flies after bia
 
 ___________________________
 
nca]
  baptista. what, in my sight? bianca, get thee in.
                                                     exit bianca
  katherina. what, will you not suffer me? nay, now i see
    she is your treasure, she must have a husband;
    i must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day,
    and for your love to her lead apes in hell.
    talk not to me; i will go sit and weep,
    till i can find occasion of revenge.          exit katherina
  baptista. was ever gentleman thus griev'd as i?
    but who comes here?

        enter gremio, with lucentio in the habit of a mean man;
         petruchio, with hortensio as a musician; and tranio,
    as lucentio, with his boy, biondello, bearing a lute and
books

  gremio. good morrow, neighbour baptista.
  baptista. good morrow, neighbour gremio.
    god save you, gentlemen!
  petruchio. and you, good sir! pray, have you not a daughter
    call'd katherina, fair and virtuous?
  baptista
 
 ___________________________
 
how myself a forward guest
    within your house, to make mine eye the witness
    of that report which i so oft have heard.
    and, for an entrance to my entertainment,
    i do present you with a man of mine,
                                          [presenting hortensio]
    cunning in music and the mathematics,
    to instruct her fully in those sciences,
    whereof i know she is not ignorant.
    accept of him, or else you do me wrong-
    his name is licio, born in mantua.
  baptista. y'are welcome, sir, and he for your good sake;
    but for my daughter katherine, this i know,
    she is not for your turn, the more my grief.
  petruchio. i see you do not mean to part with her;
    or else you like not of my company.
  baptista. mistake me not; i speak but as i find.
    whence are you, sir? what may i call your name?
  petruchio. petruchio is my name, antonio's son,
    a man well known throughout all italy.
  baptista. i know him well; you are welcome for his sak
 
 ___________________________
 
 doing.
  gremio. i doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing.
    neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, i am sure of it. to
    express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly
    beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young
    scholar  [presenting lucentio]  that hath been long studying
at
    rheims; as cunning in greek, latin, and other languages, as
the
    other in music and mathematics. his name is cambio. pray
accept
    his service.
  baptista. a thousand thanks, signior gremio. welcome, good
cambio.
    [to tranio]  but, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a
stranger.
    may i be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
  tranio. pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own
    that, being a stranger in this city here,
    do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
    unto bianca, fair and virtuous.
    nor is your firm resolve unknown to me
    in the preferment of the eldest sister.
    this liberty is all that i request-
 
 ___________________________
 

    that, upon knowledge of my parentage,
    i may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
    and free access and favour as the rest.
    and toward the education of your daughters
    i here bestow a simple instrument,
    and this small packet of greek and latin books.
    if you accept them, then their worth is great.
  baptista. lucentio is your name? of whence, i pray?
  tranio. of pisa, sir; son to vincentio.
  baptista. a mighty man of pisa. by report
    i know him well. you are very welcome, sir.
    take you the lute, and you the set of books;
    you shall go see your pupils presently.
    holla, within!

                         enter a servant

    sirrah, lead these gentlemen
    to my daughters; and tell them both
    these are their tutors. bid them use them well.

                exit servant leading hortensio carrying the lute
                                     and lucentio with the 
 
 ___________________________
 
books

    we will go walk a little in the orchard,
    and then to dinner. you are passing welcome,
    and so i pray you all to think yourselves.
  petruchio. signior baptista, my business asketh haste,
    and every day i cannot come to woo.
    you knew my father well, and in him me,
    left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
    which i have bettered rather than decreas'd.
    then tell me, if i get your daughter's love,
    what dowry shall i have with her to wife?
  baptista. after my death, the one half of my lands
    and, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
  petruchio. and for that dowry, i'll assure her of
    her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
    in all my lands and leases whatsoever.
    let specialities be therefore drawn between us,
    that covenants may be kept on either hand.
  baptista. ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
    that is, her love; for that is all in all.
  petruchio. why, that is nothing; for i tell you, fathe
 
 ___________________________
 
r,
    i am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
    and where two raging fires meet together,
    they do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
    though little fire grows great with little wind,
    yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all.
    so i to her, and so she yields to me;
    for i am rough, and woo not like a babe.
  baptista. well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed
    but be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.
  petruchio. ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,
    that shake not though they blow perpetually.

             re-enter hortensio, with his head broke

  baptista. how now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale?
  hortensio. for fear, i promise you, if i look pale.
  baptista. what, will my daughter prove a good musician?
  hortensio. i think she'll sooner prove a soldier:
    iron m
 
 ___________________________
 
ay hold with her, but never lutes.
  baptista. why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
  hortensio. why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
    i did but tell her she mistook her frets,
    and bow'd her hand to teach her fingering,
    when, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
    'frets, call you these?' quoth she 'i'll fume with them.'
    and with that word she struck me on the head,
    and through the instrument my pate made way;
    and there i stood amazed for a while,
    as on a pillory, looking through th
 
 ___________________________
 
e lute,
    while she did call me rascal fiddler
    and twangling jack, with twenty such vile terms,
    as she had studied to misuse me so.
  petruchio. now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
    i love her ten times more than e'er i did.
    o, how i long to have some chat with her!
  baptista. well, go with me, and be not so discomfited;
    proceed in practice with my younger daughter;
    she's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
    signior petruchio, will you go with us,
    or shall i send my daughter kate to you?
  petruchio. i pray you do.             exeunt all but petruchio
    i'll attend her here,
    and woo her with some spirit when she comes.
    say that she rail; why, then i'll tell her plain
    she sings as sweetly as a nightingale.
    say that sh
 
 ___________________________
 
  thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
    that you shall be my wife your dowry greed on;
    and will you, nill you, i will marry you.
    now, kate, i am a husband for your turn;
    for, by this light, whereby i see thy beauty,
    thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
    thou must be married to no man but me;
    for i am he am born to tame you, kate,
    and bring you from a wild kate to a kate
    conformable as other household kates.

               re-enter baptista, gremio, and tranio

    here comes your father. never make denial;
    i must and will have katherine to my wife.
  baptista. now, signior petruchio, how speed you with my
daughter?
  petruchio. how but well, sir? how but well?
    it were impossible i should speed amiss.
  baptista. why, how now, daughter katherine, in your dumps?
  katherina. call you me daughter? now i promise you
    you have show'd a tender fatherly regard
    to wish me wed to one half lunatic,
    a mad-cap 
 
 ___________________________
 
 o, the kindest kate!
    she hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
    she vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
    that in a twink she won me to her love.
    o, you are novices! 'tis a world to see,
    how tame, when men and women are alone,
    a meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
    give me thy hand, kate; i will unto venice,
    to buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
    provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
    i will be sure my katherine shall be fine.
  baptista. i know not what to say; but give me your hands.
    god send you joy, petruchio! 'tis a match.
  gremio, tranio. amen, say we; we will be witnesses.
  petruchio. father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
    i will to venice; sunday comes apace;
    we will have rings and things, and fine array;
    and kiss me, kate; we will be married a sunday.
                        exeunt petruchio and katherina severally
  gremio. was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?
  baptista. faith, gentlemen
 
 ___________________________
 
, now i play a merchant's part,
    and venture madly on a desperate mart.
  tranio. 'twas a commodity lay fretting by you;
    'twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
  baptista. the gain i seek is quiet in the match.
  gremio. no doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
    but now, baptista, to your younger daughter:
    now is the day we long have looked for;
    i am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
  tranio. and i am one that love bianca more
    than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
  gremio. youngling, thou canst not love so dear as i.
  tranio. greybeard, thy love doth freeze.
  gremio. but thine doth fry.
    skipper, stand back; 'tis age that nourisheth.
  tranio. but youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
  baptista. content you, gentlemen; i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 chok'd you with an argosy?
  tranio. gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
    than three great argosies, besides two galliasses,
    and twelve tight galleys. these i will assure her,
    and twice as much whate'er thou off'rest next.
  gremio. nay, i have off'red all; i have no more;
    and she can have no more than all i have;
    if you like me, she shall have me and mine.
  tranio. why, then the maid is mine from all the world
    by your firm promise; gremio is out-vied.
  baptista. i must confess your offer is the best;
    and let your father make her the assurance,
    she is your own. else, you must pardon me;
    if you should die before him, where's her dower?
  tranio. that's but a cavil; he is old, i young.
  gremio. and may not young men die as well as old?
  baptista. well, gentlemen,
    i am thus resolv'd: on sunday next you know
    my daughter katherine is to be married;
    now, on the sunday following shall bianca
    be bride to you, if you make
 
 ___________________________
 
 this assurance;
    if not, to signior gremio.
    and so i take my leave, and thank you both.
  gremio. adieu, good neighbour.                   exit baptista
    now, i fear thee not.
    sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
    to give thee all, and in his waning age
    set foot under thy table. tut, a toy!
    an old italian fox is not so kind, my boy.              exit
  tranio. a vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
    yet i have fac'd it with a card of ten.
    'tis in my head to do my master good:
    i see no reason but suppos'd lucentio
    must get a father, call'd suppos'd vincentio;
    and that's a wonder- fathe
 
 ___________________________
 
ete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
padua. baptista's house

enter lucentio as cambio, hortensio as licio, and bianca

  lucentio. fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir.
    have you so soon forgot the entertainment
    her sister katherine welcome'd you withal?
  hortensio. but, wrangling pedant, this is
    the patroness of heavenly harmony.
    then give me leave to have prerogative;
    and when in music we have spent an hour,
    your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
  lucentio. preposterous ass, that never read so 
 
 ___________________________
 
 be gone.
                                       exeunt bianca and servant
  lucentio. faith, mistress, then i have no cause to stay.
 exit
  hortensio. but i have cause to pry into this pedant;
    methinks he looks as though he were in love.
    yet if thy thoughts, bianca, be so humble
    to cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale-
    seize thee that list. if once i find thee ranging,
  hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.             exit




scene ii.
padua. before baptista's house

enter baptista, gremio, tranio as lucentio, katherina, bianca,
lucentio as cambio, and attendants

  baptista.  [to tranio]  signior lucentio, this is the 'pointed
day
    that katherine and petruchio should be married,
    and yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
    what will be said? what mockery will it be
    to want the bridegroom when the priest attends
    to speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
    what says lucentio to this shame of ours?
  katherina. no shame b
 
 ___________________________
 
 means to wed at leisure.
    i told you, i, he was a frantic fool,
    hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour;
    and, to be noted for a merry man,
    he'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
    make friends invited, and proclaim the banns;
    yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
    now must the world point at poor katherine,
    and say 'lo, there is mad petruchio's wife,
    if it would please him come and marry her!'
  tranio. patience, good katherine, and baptista too.
    upon my life, petruchio means but well,
    whatever fortune stays him from his word.
    though he be blunt, i know him passing wise;
    though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
  katherina. would katherine had never seen him though!
                    exit, weeping, followed by bianca and others
  baptista. go, girl, i cannot blame thee now to weep,
    for such an injury would vex a very saint;
    much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

                         
 
 ___________________________
 
  enter biondello

    master, master! news, and such old news as you never heard
of!
  baptista. is it new and old too? how may that be?
  biondello. why, is it not news to hear of petruchio's coming?
  baptista. is he come?
  biondello. why, no, sir.
  baptista. what then?
  biondello. he is coming.
  baptista. when will he be here?
  biondello. when he stands where i am and sees you there.
  tranio. but, say, what to thine old news?
  biondello. why, petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old
    jerkin; a pair of old breeches thrice turn'd; a pair of boots
    that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another lac'd; an
old
    rusty sword ta'en out of the town armoury, with a broken
hilt,
    and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipp'd, with
an
    old motley saddle and sti
 
 ___________________________
 

    stark spoil'd with the staggers, begnawn with the bots,
sway'd in
    the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legg'd before, and with a
    half-cheek'd bit, and a head-stall of sheep's leather which,
    being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often
    burst, and now repaired with knots; one girth six times
piec'd,
    and a woman's crupper of velure, which hath two letters for
her
    name fairly set down in studs, and here and there piec'd with
    pack-thread.
  baptista. who comes with him?
  biondello. o, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparison'd
like
    the horse- with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey
boot-hose
    on the other, gart'red with a red and blue list; an old hat,
and
    the humour of forty fancies prick'd in't for a feather; a
    monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a christian
    footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
  tranio. 'tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
    yet oftentimes lie goes but mean-ap
 
 ___________________________
 
parell'd.
  baptista. i am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
  biondello. why, sir, he comes not.
  baptista. didst thou not say he comes?
  biondello. who? that petruchio came?
  baptista. ay, that petruchio came.
  biondello. no, sir; i say his horse comes with him on his back.
  baptista. why, that's all one.
  biondello. nay, by saint jamy,
             i hold you a penny,
             a horse and a man
             is more than one,
             and yet not many.

                  enter petruchio and grumio

  petruchio. come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
  baptista. you are welcome, sir.
  petruchio. and yet i come not well.
  baptista. and yet you halt not.
  tranio. not so well apparell'd
    as i wish you were.
  petruchio. were it better, i sho
 
 ___________________________
 
uld rush in thus.
    but where is kate? where is my lovely bride?
    how does my father? gentles, methinks you frown;
    and wherefore gaze this goodly company
    as if they saw some wondrous monument,
    some comet or unusual prodigy?
  baptista. why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day.
    first were we sad, fearing you would not come;
    now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
    fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
    an eye-sore to our solemn festival!
  tranio. and tell us what occasion of import
    hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
    and sent you hither so unlike yourself?
  petruchio. tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear;
    sufficeth i am come to keep my word,
    though in some pa
 
 ___________________________
 
rt enforced to digress,
    which at more leisure i will so excuse
    as you shall well be satisfied withal.
    but where is kate? i stay too long from her;
    the morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.
  tranio. see not your bride in these unreverent robes;
    go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
  petruchio. not i, believe me; thus i'll visit her.
  baptista. but thus, i trust, you will not marry her.
  petruchio. good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with
words;
    to me she's married, not unto my clothes.
    could i repair what she will wear in me
    as i can change these poor accoutrements,
    'twere well for kate and better for myself.
    but what a fool am i to chat with you,
    when i should bid good-morrow to my bride
    and seal the title with a lovely kiss!
                                  exeunt petruchio and grumio
 
 ___________________________
 

  tranio. he hath some meaning in his mad attire.
    we will persuade him, be it possible,
    to put on better ere he go to church.
  baptista. i'll after him and see the event of this.
              exeunt baptista, gremio, biondello, and attendents
  tranio. but to her love concerneth us to ad
    her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    as i before imparted to your worship,
    i am to get a man- whate'er he be
    it skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
    and he shall be vincentio of pisa,
    and make assurance here in padua
    of greater sums than i have promised.
    so shall you quietly enjoy your hope
    and marry sweet bianca with consent.
  lucentio. were it not tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t that his beard grew thin and hungerly
    and seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
    this done, he took the bride about the neck,
    and kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
    that at the parting all the church did echo.
    and i, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
    and after me, i know, the rout is coming.
    such a mad marriage never was before.
    hark, hark! i hear the minstrels play.         [music plays]

       enter petruchio, katherina, bianca, baptista, hortensio,
                         grumio, and train

  petruchio. gentlemen and friends, i thank you for your pains.
    i know you think to dine with me to-day,
    and have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer
    but so it is- my haste doth call me hence,
    and therefore here i mean to take my leave.
  baptista. is't possible you will away to-night?
  petruchio. i must away to-day before night come.
    make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
    you would entreat me rat
 
 ___________________________
 
e,
    my household stuff, my field, my barn,
    my horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing,
    and here she stands; touch her whoever dare;
    i'll bring mine action on the proudest he
    that stops my way in padua. grumio,
    draw forth thy weapon; we are beset with thieves;
    rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
    fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, kate;
    i'll buckler thee against a million.
                         exeunt petruchio, katherina, and grumio
  baptista. nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
  gremio. went they not quickly, i should die with laughing.
  tranio. of all mad matches, never was the like.
  lucentio. mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
  bianca. that, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
  gremio. i warrant him, petruchio is kated.
  baptista. neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom
wants
    for to supply the places at the table,
    you know there wants no junkets at the feast.
    lucentio, y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou shall supply the bridegroom's place;
    and let bianca take her sister's room.
  tranio. shall sweet bianca practise how to bride it?
  baptista. she shall, lucentio. come, gentlemen, let's go.
                                                          exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or use
 
 ___________________________
 
y the sheets;
    ay, and amid this hurly i intend
    that all is done in reverend care of her-
    and, in conclusion, she shall watch all night;
    and if she chance to nod i'll rail and brawl
    and with the clamour keep her still awake.
    this is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
    and thus i'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
    he that knows better how to tame a shrew,
    now let him speak; 'tis charity to show.                exit




scene ii.
padua. before baptista's house

enter tranio as lucentio, and hortensio as licio

  tranio. is 't possible, friend licio, that mistress bianca
    doth fancy any other but lucentio?
    i tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
  hortensio. sir, to satisfy you in what i have said,
    stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
                                              [they stand aside]

               enter bianca, and lucentio as cambio

  lucentio. now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
 
 ___________________________
 
biondello. o master, master, have watch'd so long
    that i am dog-weary; but at last i spied
    an ancient angel coming down the hill
    will serve the turn.
  tranio. what is he, biondello?
  biondello. master, a mercatante or a pedant,
    i know not what; but formal in apparel,
    in gait and countenance surely like a father.
  lucentio. and what of him, tranio?
  tranio. if he be credulous and trust my tale,
    i'll make him glad to seem vincentio,
    and give assurance to baptista minola
    as if he were the right vincentio.
    take in your love, and then let me alone.
                                      exeunt lucentio and bianca

                         enter a pedant

  pedant. god save you, sir!
  tranio. and you, sir; you are welcome.
    travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
  pedant. sir, at the farthest for a week or two;
    but then up farther, and as far as rome;
    and so to tripoli, if god lend me life.
  tranio. what countryman, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 lodg'd;
    look that you take upon you as you should.
    you understand me, sir. so shall you stay
    till you have done your business in the city.
    if this be court'sy, sir, accept of it.
  pedant. o, sir, i do; and will repute you ever
    the patron of my life and liberty.
  tranio. then go with me to make the matter good.
    this, by the way, i let you understand:
    my father is here look'd for every day
    to pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage
    'twixt me and one baptista's daughter here.
    in all these circumstances i'll instruct you.
    go with me to clothe you as becomes you.              exeunt




scene iii.
petruchio's house

enter katherina and grumio

  grumio. no, no, forsooth; i dare not for my life.
  katherina. the more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
    what, did he marry me to famish me?
    beggars that come unto my father's door
    upon entreaty have a present alms;
    if not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
    bu
 
 ___________________________
 
e.
  katherina. i dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two,
    and 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
  petruchio. it shall be seven ere i go to horse.
    look what i speak, or do, or think to do,
    you are still crossing it. sirs, let 't alone;
    i will not go to-day; and ere i do,
    it shall be what o'clock i say it is.
  hortensio. why, so this gallant will command the sun.
                                                          exeunt




scene iv.
padua. before baptista's house

enter tranio as lucentio, and the pedant dressed like vincentio

  tranio. sir, this is the house; please it you that i call?
  pedant. ay, what else? and, but i be deceived,
    signior baptista may remember me
    near twenty years ago in genoa,
    where we were lodgers at the pegasus.
  tranio. 'tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
    with such austerity as longeth to a father.

                       enter biondello

  pedant. i warrant you. but, sir, here come
 
 ___________________________
 
s your boy;
    'twere good he were school'd.
  tranio. fear you not him. sirrah biondello,
    now do your duty throughly, i advise you.
    imagine 'twere the right vincentio.
  biondello. tut, fear not me.
  tranio. but hast thou done thy errand to baptista?
  biondello. i told him that your father was at venice,
    and that you look'd for him this day in padua.
  tranio. th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
    here comes baptista. set your countenance, sir.

                 enter baptista, and lucentio as cambio

    signior baptista, you are happily met.
    [to the pedant] sir, this is the gentleman i told you of;
    i pray you stand good father to me now;
    give me bianca for my patrimony.
  pedant. soft, son!
    sir, by your leave: having come to padua
    to gather in some debts, my son lucentio
    made me acquainted with a weighty cause
    of love between your daughter and himself;
    and- for
 
 ___________________________
 
 the good report i hear of you,
    and for the love he beareth to your daughter,
    and she to him- to stay him not too long,
    i am content, in a good father's care,
    to have him match'd; and, if you please to like
    no worse than i, upon some agreement
    me shall you find ready and willing
    with one consent to have her so bestow'd;
    for curious i cannot be with you,
    signior baptista, of whom i hear so well.
  baptista. sir, pardon me in what i have to say.
    your plainness and your shortness please me well.
    right true it is your son lucentio here
    doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
    or both dissemble deeply their affections;
    and therefore, if you say no more than this,
    that like a father you will deal with him,
    and pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
    the match is made, and all is done-
    your son shall have my daughter with consent.
  tranio. i thank you, sir.
 
 ___________________________
 
 where then do you know best
    we be affied, and such assurance ta'en
    as shall with either part's agreement stand?
  baptista. not in my house, lucentio, for you know
    pitchers have ears, and i have many servants;
    besides, old gremio is heark'ning still,
    and happily we might be interrupted.
  tranio. then at my lodging, an it like you.
    there doth my father lie; and there this night
    we'll pass the business privately and well.
    send for your daughter by your servant here;
    my boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
    the worst is this, that at so slender warning
    you are like to 
 
 ___________________________
 
have a thin and slender pittance.
  baptista. it likes me well. cambio, hie you home,
    and bid bianca make her ready straight;
    and, if you will, tell what hath happened-
    lucentio's father is arriv'd in padua,
    and how she's like to be lucentio's wife.      exit lucentio
  biondello. i pray the gods she may, with all my heart.
  tranio. dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
                                                  exit biondello
    signior baptista, shall i lead the way?
    welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer;
    come, sir; we will better it in pisa.
  baptista. i follow you.                                 exeunt

            re-enter lucentio as cambio, and biondello

  biondello. cambio.
  lucentio. what say'st thou, biondello?
  biondello. you saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
  lucentio. biondello, what of that?
  biondello. faith, nothing; but has left me here behind to
expound
    the meaning or moral of 
 
 ___________________________
 
his signs and tokens.
  lucentio. i pray thee moralize them.
  biondello. then thus: baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving
    father of a deceitful son.
  lucentio. and what of him?
  biondello. his daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
  lucentio. and then?
  biondello. the old priest at saint luke's church is at your
command
    at all hours.
  lucentio. and what of all this?
  biondello. i cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    counterfeit assurance. take your assurance of her, cum
privilegio
    ad imprimendum solum; to th' church take the pri
 
 ___________________________
 
t me?
  biondello. forgot you! no, sir. i could not forget you, for i
never
    saw you before in all my life.
  vincentio. what, you notorious villain, didst thou never see
thy
    master's father, vincentio?
  biondello. what, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir;
see
    where he looks out of the window.
  vincentio. is't so, indeed?               [he beats biondello]
  biondello. help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.
 exit
  pedant. help, son! help, signior baptista!     exit from above
  petruchio. prithee, kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
this
    controversy.                              [they stand aside]

       re-enter pedant below; baptista, tranio, and servants

  tranio. sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
  vincentio. what am i, sir? nay, what are you, sir? o immortal
gods!
    o fine villain! a silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet
cloak,
    and a copatain hat! o, i am undone! i am undone! while i play
th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
    good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the
    university.
  tranio. how now! what's the matter?
  baptista. what, is the man lunatic?
  tranio. sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit,
but
    your words show you a madman. why, sir, what 'cerns it you if
i
    wear pearl and gold? i thank my good father, i am able to
    maintain it.
  vincentio. thy father! o villain! he is a sailmaker in bergamo.
  baptista. you mistake, sir; you mistake, sir. pray, what do you

    think is his name?
  vincentio. his name! as if i knew not his name! i have brought
him
    up ever since he was three years old, and his name is tranio.
  pedant. away, away, mad ass! his name is lucentio; and he is
mine
    only son, and heir to the lands of me, signior vicentio.
  vincentio. lucentio! o, he hath murd'red his master! lay hold
on
    him, i charge you, in the duke's name. o, my son, my son!
tell
    me, t
 
 ___________________________
 
hou villain, where is my son, lucentio?
  tranio. call forth an officer.

                      enter one with an officer

    carry this mad knave to the gaol. father baptista, i charge
you
    see that he be forthcoming.
  vincentio. carry me to the gaol!
  gremio. stay, officer; he shall not go to prison.
  baptista. talk not, signior gremio; i say he shall go to
prison.
  gremio. take heed, signior baptista, lest you be cony-catch'd
in
    this business; i dare swear this is the right vincentio.
  pedant. swear if thou dar'st.
  gremio. nay, i dare not swear it.
  tranio. then thou wert best say that i am not lucentio.
  gremio. yes, i know thee to be signior lucentio.
  baptista. away with the dotard; to the gaol with him!
  vincentio. thus strangers may be hal'd and abus'd. o monstrous
    villain!

          re-enter biondello, with lucentio and bianca

  biondello. o, we are spoil
 
 ___________________________
 
'd; and yonder he is! deny him,
forswear
    him, or else we are all undone.
         exeunt biondello, tranio, and pedant, as fast as may be
  lucentio.  [kneeling]  pardon, sweet father.
  vincentio. lives my sweet son?
  bianca. pardon, dear father.
  baptista. how hast thou offended?
    where is lucentio?
  lucentio. here's lucentio,
    right son to the right vincentio,
    that have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
    while counterfeit supposes blear'd thine eyne.
  gremio. here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
  vincentio. where is that damned villain, tranio,
    that fac'd and brav'd me in this matter so?
  baptista. why, tell me, is not this my cambio?
  bianca. cambio is chang'd into lucentio.
  lucentio. love wro
 
 ___________________________
 
ught these miracles. bianca's love
    made me exchange my state with tranio,
    while he did bear my countenance in the town;
    and happily i have arrived at the last
    unto the wished haven of my bliss.
    what tranio did, myself enforc'd him to;
    then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
  vincentio. i'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me
to
    the gaol.
  baptista.  [to lucentio]  but do you hear, sir? have you
married my
    daughter without asking my good will?
  vincentio. fear not, baptista; we will content you, go to; but
i
    will in to be revenged for this villainy.               exit
  baptista. and i to sound the depth of this knavery.       exit
  lucentio. look not pale, bianca; thy father will not frown.
                                      exeunt lucentio and bianca
  gremio. my cake is dough, but i'll in among the rest;
    out 
 
 ___________________________
 
petruchio. first kiss me, kate, and we will.
  katherina. what, in the midst of the street?
  petruchio. what, art thou asham'd of me?
  katherina. no, sir; god forbid; but asham'd to kiss.
  petruchio. why, then, let's home again. come, sirrah, let's
away.
  katherina. nay, i will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love,
stay.
  petruchio. is not this well? come, my sweet kate:
    better once than never, for never too late.           exeunt




scene ii.
lucentio's house

enter baptista, vincentio, gremio, the pedant, lucentio, bianca,
petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and widow. the servingmen with
tranio,
biondello, and grumio, bringing in a banquet

  lucentio. at last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    and time it is when raging war is done
    to smile at scapes and perils overblown.
    my fair bianca, bid my father welcome,
    while i with self-same kindness welcome thine.
    brother petruchio, sister katherina,
    and thou, hortensio, with thy lovi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng widow,
    feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
    my banquet is to close our stomachs up
    after our great good cheer. pray you, sit down;
    for now we sit to chat as well as eat.            [they sit]
  petruchio. nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
  baptista. padua affords this kindness, son petruchio.
  petruchio. padua affords nothing but what is kind.
  hortensio. for both our sakes i would that word were true.
  petruchio. now, for my life, hortensio fears his widow.
  widow. then never trust me if i be afeard.
  petruchio. you are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
    i mean hortensio is afeard of you.
  widow. he that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
  petruchio. roundly replied.
  katherina. mistress, how mean you that
 
 ___________________________
 
d, being troubled with a shrew,
    measures my husband's sorrow by his woe;
    and now you know my meaning.
  katherina. a very mean meaning.
  widow. right, i mean you.
  katherina. and i am mean, indeed, respecting you.
  petruchio. to her, kate!
  hortensio. to her, widow!
  petruchio. a hundred marks, my kate does put her down.
  hortensio. that's my office.
  petruchio. spoke like an officer- ha' to thee, lad.
                                           [drinks to hortensio]
  baptista. how likes gremio these quick-witted folks?
  gremio. believe me, sir, they butt together well.
  bianca. head and butt! an hasty-witted body
    would say your head and butt were head and horn.
  vincentio. ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
  bianca. ay, but not frighted me; therefore i'll sleep again.
  petruchio. nay, that you shall not; since you have begun,
    have at you for a bitter jest or two.
  bianca. am i your bird? i mean to shift my bush,
    and then pursue me
 
 ___________________________
 
                 exeunt bianca, katherina, and widow
  petruchio. she hath prevented me. here, signior tranio,
    this bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
    therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.
  tranio. o, sir, lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
    which runs himself, and catches for his master.
  petruchio. a good swift simile, but something currish.
  tranio. 'tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself;
    'tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
  baptista. o, o, petruchio! tranio hits you now.
  lucentio. i thank thee for that gird, good tranio.
  hortensio. confess, confess; hath he not hit you here?
  petruchio. 'a has a little gall'd me, i confess;
    and, as the jest did glance away from me,
    'tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.
  baptista. now, in good sadness, son petruchio,
    i think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
  petruchio. well, i say no; and therefore, for assurance,
    let's each one send unto his wife,

 
 ___________________________
 

    shall win the wager which we will propose.
  hortensio. content. what's the wager?
  lucentio. twenty crowns.
  petruchio. twenty crowns?
    i'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
    but twenty times so much upon my wife.
  lucentio. a hundred then.
  hortensio. content.
  petruchio. a match! 'tis done.
  hortensio. who shall begin?
  lucentio. that will i.
    go, biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
  biondello. i go.                                          exit
  baptista. son, i'll be your half bianca comes.
  lucentio. i'll have no halves; i'll bear it all myself.

                          re-enter biondello

    how now! what news?
  biondello. sir, my mistress sends you word
    that she is busy and she cannot come.
  petruchio. how! she's busy, and she cannot come!
    is that an answer?
  gremio. ay, and a kind one too.
    pray god, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
  petruchio. i hope better.
  hortensio. sirrah biondello, go and entreat
 
 ___________________________
 
iondello. she says you have some goodly jest in hand:
    she will not come; she bids you come to her.
  petruchio. worse and worse; she will not come! o vile,
    intolerable, not to be endur'd!
    sirrah grumio, go to your mistress;
    say i command her come to me.                    exit grumio
  hortensio. i know her answer.
  petruchio. what?
  hortensio. she will not.
  petruchio. the fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

                             re-enter katherina

  baptista. now, by my holidame, here comes katherina!
  katherina. what is your will, sir, that you send for me?
  petruchio. where is your sister, and hortensio's wife?
  katherina. they sit conferring by the parlour fire.
  petruchio. go, fetch them hither; if they deny to come.
    swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
    away, i say, and bring them hither straight.
                                                  exit katherina
  lucentio. here is a wonder, if you talk of a wond
 
 ___________________________
 
er.
  hortensio. and so it is. i wonder what it bodes.
  petruchio. marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
    an awful rule, and right supremacy;
    and, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy.
  baptista. now fair befall thee, good petruchio!
    the wager thou hast won; and i will ad
    unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
    another dowry to another daughter,
    for she is chang'd, as she had never been.
  petruchio. nay, i will win my wager better yet,
    and show more sign of her obedience,
    her new-built virtue and obedience.

                 re-enter katherina with bianca and widow

    see where she comes, and brings your froward wives
    as prisoners to her wom