the taming of the shrew

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

    persons in the induction
  a lord
  christopher sly, a tinker
  hostess
  page
  players
  huntsmen
  servants

  baptista minola, a gentleman of padua
  vincentio, a merchant of pisa
  lucentio, son to vincentio, in love with bianca
  petruchio, a gentleman of verona, a suitor to katherina

    suitors to bianca
  gremio
  hortensio

    servants to lucentio
  tranio
  biondello

    servants to petruchio
  grumio
  curtis

  a pedant

    daughters to baptista
  katherina, the shrew
  bianca

  a widow

  tailor, haberdasher, and servants attending on baptista and
    petruchio

                             scene:
            padua, and petruchio's house in the country

sc_1
                      induction. scene i.
                  before an alehouse on a heath

       
 
 ___________________________
 
ou;
    the mathematics and the metaphysics,
    fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
    no profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en;
    in brief, sir, study what you most affect.
  lucentio. gramercies, tranio, well dost thou advise.
    if, biondello, thou wert come ashore,
    we could at once put us in readiness,
    and take a lodging fit to entertain
    such friends as time in padua shall beget.

      enter baptista with his two daughters, katherina
        and bianca; gremio, a pantaloon; hortensio,
        suitor to bianca. lucentio and tranio stand by

    but stay awhile; what company is this?
  tranio. master, some show to welcome us to town.
  baptista. gentlemen, importune me no farther,
    for how i firmly am resolv'd you know;
    that is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
    before i have a husband for the elder.
    if either of you both love katherina,
    because i know you well and love you well,
    leave shall you have to court 
 
 ___________________________
 
 stool,
    and paint your face, and use you like a fool.
  hortensio. from all such devils, good lord deliver us!
  gremio. and me, too, good lord!
  tranio. husht, master! here's some good pastime toward;
    that wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
  lucentio. but in the other's silence do i see
    maid's mild behaviour and sobriety.
    peace, tranio!
  tranio. well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.
  baptista. gentlemen, that i may soon make good
    what i have said- bianca, get you in;
    and let it not displease thee, good bianca,
    for i will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
  katherina. a pretty peat! it is best
    put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
  bianca. sister, content you in my discontent.
    sir, to your pleasure humbly i subscribe;
    my books and instruments shall be my company,
    on them to look, and practise by myself.
  lucentio. hark, tranio, thou mayst hear minerva speak!
  hortensio. signior baptista, will you be so str
 
 ___________________________
 
ange?
    sorry am i that our good will effects
    bianca's grief.
  gremio. why will you mew her up,
    signior baptista, for this fiend of hell,
    and make her bear the penance of her tongue?
  baptista. gentlemen, content ye; i am resolv'd.
    go in, bianca.                                   exit bianca
    and for i know she taketh most delight
    in music, instruments, and poetry,
    schoolmasters will i keep within my house
    fit to instruct her youth. if you, hortensio,
    or, signior gremio, you, know any such,
    prefer them hither; for to cunning men
    i will be very kind, and liberal
    to mine own children in good bringing-up;
    and so, farewell. katherina, you may stay;
    for i have more to commune with bianca.                 exit
  katherina. why, and i trus
 
 ___________________________
 
t i may go too, may i not?
    what! shall i be appointed hours, as though, belike,
    i knew not what to take and what to leave? ha!          exit
  gremio. you may go to the devil's dam; your gifts are so good
    here's none will hold you. there! love is not so great,
    hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it
fairly
    out; our cake's dough on both sides. farewell; yet, for the
love
    i bear my sweet bianca, if i can by any means light on a fit
man
    to teach her that wherein she delights, i will wish him to
her
    father.
  hortensio. so will i, signior gremio; but a word, i pray.
though
    the nature of our quarrel yet never brook'd parle, know now,
upon
    advice, it toucheth us both- that we may yet again have
access to
    our fair mistress, and be happy rivals in bianca's love- to
    labour and effect one thing specially.
  gremio. what's that, i pray?
  hortensio. marry,
 
 ___________________________
 
take her with all
    faults, and money enough.
  gremio. i cannot tell; but i had as lief take her dowry with
this
    condition: to be whipp'd at the high cross every morning.
  hortensio. faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
    apples. but, come; since this bar in law makes us friends, it
    shall be so far forth friendly maintain'd till by helping
    baptista's eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest
free
    for a husband, and then have to't afresh. sweet bianca! happy
man
    be his dole! he that runs fastest gets the ring. how say you,
    signior gremio?
  gremio. i am agreed; and would i had given him the best horse
in
    padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed
her,
    and bed her, and rid the house of her! come on.
                                     exeunt gremio and hortensio
  tranio. i pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
    that love should of a sudden take such hold?
  lucentio. o tranio, till i found it to
 
 ___________________________
 

    score knaves or so. why, that's nothing; and he begin once,
he'll
    rail in his rope-tricks. i'll tell you what, sir: an she
stand
    him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so
    disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see
    withal than a cat. you know him not, sir.
  hortensio. tarry, petruchio, i must go with thee,
    for in baptista's keep my treasure is.
    he hath the jewel of my life in hold,
    his youngest daughter, beautiful bianca;
    and her withholds from me, and other more,
    suitors to her and rivals in my love;
    supposing it a thing impossible-
    for those defects i have before rehears'd-
    that ever katherina will be woo'd.
    therefore this order hath baptista ta'en,
    that none shall have access unto bianca
    till katherine the curst have got a husband.
  grumio. katherine the curst!
    a title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  hortensio. now shall my friend petruchio do me grace,

 
 ___________________________
 
    and offer me disguis'd in sober robes
    to old baptista as a schoolmaster
    well seen in music, to instruct bianca;
    that so i may by this device at least
    have leave and leisure to make love to her,
    and unsuspected court her by herself.

        enter gremio with lucentio disguised as cambio

  grumio. here's no knavery! see, to beguile the old folks, how
the
    young folks lay their heads together! master, master, look
about
    you. who goes there, ha?
  hortensio. peace, grumio! it is the rival of my love.
petruchio,
    stand by awhile.
  grumio. a proper stripling, and an amo
 
 ___________________________
 
  yea, and perhaps with more successful words
    than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
  gremio. o this learning, what a thing it is!
  grumio. o this woodcock, what an ass it is!
  petruchio. peace, sirrah!
  hortensio. grumio, mum!                       [coming forward]
    god save you, signior gremio!
  gremio. and you are well met, signior hortensio.
    trow you whither i am going? to baptista minola.
    i promis'd to enquire carefully
    about a schoolmaster for the fair bianca;
    and by good fortune i have lighted well
    on this young man; for learning and behaviour
    fit for her turn, well read in poetry
    and other books- good ones, i warrant ye.
  hortensio. 'tis well; and i have met a gentleman
    hath promis'd me to help me to another,
    a fine musician to instruct our mistress;
    so shall i no whit be behind in duty
    to fair bianca, so beloved of me.
  gremio. beloved of me- and that my deeds shall prove.
  grumio. and that his bags s
 
 ___________________________
 
o. for this reason, if you'll know,
    that she's the choice love of signior gremio.
  hortensio. that she's the chosen of signior hortensio.
  tranio. softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
    do me this right- hear me with patience.
    baptista is a noble gentleman,
    to whom my father is not all unknown,
    and, were his daughter fairer than she is,
    she may more suitors have, and me for one.
    fair leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
    then well one more may fair bianca have;
    and so she shall: lucentio shall make one,
    though paris came in hope to speed alone.
  gremio. what, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
  lucentio. sir, give him head; i know he'll prove a jade.
  petruchio. hortensio, to what end are all these words?
  hortensio. sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
    did you yet ever see baptista's daughter?
  tranio. no, sir, but hear i do that he hath two:
    the one as famous for a scolding tongue
    as is the other for beauteou
 
 ___________________________
 
pyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
padua. baptista's house

enter katherina and bianca

  bianca. good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
    to make a bondmaid and a slave of me-
    that i disdain; but for these other gawds,
    unbind my hands, i'll pull them off myself,
    yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
    or what you will command me will i do,
    so well i know my duty to my elders.
  katherina. of all thy suitors here i charge thee tell
    whom thou lov'st best. see thou dissemble not.
  bianca. believe me, sister, of all the men alive
    i ne
 
 ___________________________
 
ver yet beheld that special face
    which i could fancy more than any other.
  katherina. minion, thou liest. is't not hortensio?
  bianca. if you affect him, sister, here i swear
    i'll plead for you myself but you shall have him.
  katherina. o then, belike, you fancy riches more:
    you will have gremio to keep you fair.
  bianca. is it for him you do envy me so?
    nay, then you jest; and now i well perceive
    you have but jested with me all this while.
    i prithee, sister kate, untie my hands.
  katherina. [strikes her]  if that be jest, then an the rest was
so.

                            enter baptista

  baptista. why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?
    bianca, stand aside- poor girl! she weeps.
                                                [he unbinds her]
    go ply thy needle; me
 
 ___________________________
 
ddle not with her.
    for shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit,
    why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
    when did she cross thee with a bitter word?
  katherina. her silence flouts me, and i'll be reveng'd.
                                            [flies after bianca]
  baptista. what, in my sight? bianca, get thee in.
                                                     exit bianca
  katherina. what, will you not suffer me? nay, now i see
    she is your treasure, she must have a husband;
    i must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day,
    and for your love to her lead apes in hell.
    talk not to me; i will go sit and weep,
    till i can find occasion of revenge.          exit katherina
  baptista. was ever gentleman thus griev'd as i?
    but who comes here?

        enter gremio, with lucentio in the habit of a mean man;
         petruchio, with hortensio a
 
 ___________________________
 
 as cunning in greek, latin, and other languages, as
the
    other in music and mathematics. his name is cambio. pray
accept
    his service.
  baptista. a thousand thanks, signior gremio. welcome, good
cambio.
    [to tranio]  but, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a
stranger.
    may i be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
  tranio. pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own
    that, being a stranger in this city here,
    do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
    unto bianca, fair and virtuous.
    nor is your firm resolve unknown to me
    in the preferment of the eldest sister.
    this liberty is all that i request-
    that, upon knowledge of my parentage,
    i may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
    and free access and favour as the rest.
    and toward the education of your daughters
    i here bestow a simple instrument,
    and this small packet of greek and latin books.
    if you accept them, then their worth is great.
  baptista. luce
 
 ___________________________
 
 so suddenly?
  baptista. faith, gentlemen, now i play a merchant's part,
    and venture madly on a desperate mart.
  tranio. 'twas a commodity lay fretting by you;
    'twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
  baptista. the gain i seek is quiet in the match.
  gremio. no doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
    but now, baptista, to your younger daughter:
    now is the day we long have looked for;
    i am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
  tranio. and i am one that love bianca more
    than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
  gremio. youngling, thou canst not love so dear as i.
  tranio. greybeard, thy love doth freeze.
  gremio. but thine doth fry.
    skipper, stand back; 'tis age that nourisheth.
  tranio. but youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
  baptista. content you, gentlemen; i will compound this strife.
    'tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
    that can assure my daughter greatest dower
    shall have my bianca's love.

 
 ___________________________
 
promise; gremio is out-vied.
  baptista. i must confess your offer is the best;
    and let your father make her the assurance,
    she is your own. else, you must pardon me;
    if you should die before him, where's her dower?
  tranio. that's but a cavil; he is old, i young.
  gremio. and may not young men die as well as old?
  baptista. well, gentlemen,
    i am thus resolv'd: on sunday next you know
    my daughter katherine is to be married;
    now, on the sunday following shall bianca
    be bride to you, if you make this assurance;
    if not, to signior gremio.
    and so i take my leave, and thank you both.
  gremio. adieu, good neighbour.                   exit baptista
    now, i fear thee not.
    sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
    to give thee all, and in his waning age
    set foot under thy table. tut, a toy!
    an old italian fox is not so kind, my boy.              exit
  tranio. a vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
    yet i have 
 
 ___________________________
 
ary, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
padua. baptista's house

enter lucentio as cambio, hortensio as licio, and bianca

  lucentio. fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir.
    have you so soon forgot the entertainment
    her sister katherine welcome'd you withal?
  hortensio. but, wrangling pedant, this is
    the patroness of heavenly harmony.
    then give me leave to have prerogative;
    and when in music we have spent an hour,
    your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
  lucentio. preposterous ass, that never read so far
    to know the cause why music was ordain'd!
    was it not t
 
 ___________________________
 
o refresh the mind of man
    after his studies or his usual pain?
    then give me leave to read philosophy,
    and while i pause serve in your harmony.
  hortensio. sirrah, i will not bear these braves of thine.
  bianca. why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
    to strive for that which resteth in my choice.
    i arn no breeching scholar in the schools,
    i'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
    but learn my lessons as i please myself.
    and to cut off all strife: here sit we down;
    take you your instrument, play you the whiles!
    his lecture will be done ere you have tun'd.
  hortensio. you'll leave his lecture when i am in tune?
  lucentio. that will be never- tune your instrumen
 
 ___________________________
 
t.
  bianca. where left we last?
  lucentio. here, madam:
    'hic ibat simois, hic est sigeia tellus,
    hic steterat priami regia celsa senis.'
  bianca. construe them.
  lucentio. 'hic ibat' as i told you before- 'simois' i am
lucentio-
    'hic est' son unto vincentio of pisa- 'sigeia tellus'
disguised
    thus to get your love- 'hic steterat' and that lucentio that
    comes a-wooing- 'priami' is my man tranio- 'regia' bearing my
    port- 'celsa senis' that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
  hortensio. madam, my instrument's in tune.
  bianca. let's hear. o fie! the treble jars.
  lucentio. spit in the hole, man, and tune again
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  bianca. now let me see if i can construe it: 'hic ibat simois'
i
    know you not- 'hic est sigeia tellus' i trust you not- 'hic
    steterat priami' take heed he hear us not- 'regia' presume
not-
   'celsa senis' despair not.
  hortensio. madam, 'tis now in tune.
  lucentio. all but the bass.
  hortensio. the bass is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
    [aside]  how fiery and forward our pedant is!
    now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.
    pedascule, i'll watch you bette
 
 ___________________________
 
r yet.
  bianca. in time i may believe, yet i mistrust.
  lucentio. mistrust it not- for sure, aeacides
    was ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.
  bianca. i must believe my master; else, i promise you,
    i should be arguing still upon that doubt;
    but let it rest. now, licio, to you.
    good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
    that i have been thus pleasant with you both.
  hortensio.  [to lucentio]  you may go walk and give me leave
      awhile;
    my lessons make no music in three parts.
  lucentio. are you so formal, sir? well, i must wait,
    [aside]  and watch withal; for, but i be deceiv'd,
    our fine musician grow
 
 ___________________________
 
eth amorous.
  hortensio. madam, before you touch the instrument
    to learn the order of my fingering,
    i must begin with rudiments of art,
    to teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
    more pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
    than hath been taught by any of my trade;
    and there it is in writing fairly drawn.
  bianca. why, i am past my gamut long ago.
  hortensio. yet read the gamut of hortensio.
  bianca.  [reads]
         '"gamut" i am, the ground of all accord-
         "a re" to plead hortensio's passion-
         "b mi" bianca, take him for thy lord-
         "c fa ut" that loves with all affection-
         "d sol re" one clef, two notes have i-
         "e la mi" show pity or i die.'
    call you this gamut? tut, i like it not!
    old fashions please me best; i am not so nice
    to change true rules for odd inventions.

                       enter a servant

  servant. mis
 
 ___________________________
 
tress, your father prays you leave your books
    and help to dress your sister's chamber up.
    you know to-morrow is the wedding-day.
  bianca. farewell, sweet masters, both; i must be gone.
                                       exeunt bianca and servant
  lucentio. faith, mistress, then i have no cause to stay.
 exit
  hortensio. but i have cause to pry into this pedant;
    methinks he looks as though he were in love.
    yet if thy thoughts, bianca, be so humble
    to cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale-
    seize thee that list. if once i find thee ranging,
  hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.             exit




scene ii.
padua. before baptista's house

enter baptista, gremio, tranio as lucentio, katherina, bianca,
lucentio as cambio, and attendants

  baptista.  [to tranio]  signior lucentio, this is the 'pointed
day
    that katherine and petruchio should be married,
    and yet we hear not of our son-
 
 ___________________________
 
.
    now must the world point at poor katherine,
    and say 'lo, there is mad petruchio's wife,
    if it would please him come and marry her!'
  tranio. patience, good katherine, and baptista too.
    upon my life, petruchio means but well,
    whatever fortune stays him from his word.
    though he be blunt, i know him passing wise;
    though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
  katherina. would katherine had never seen him though!
                    exit, weeping, followed by bianca and others
  baptista. go, girl, i cannot blame thee now to weep,
    for such an injury would vex a very saint;
    much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

                           enter biondello

    master, master! news, and such old news as you never heard
of!
  baptista. is it new and old too? how may that be?
  biondello. why, is it not news to hear of petruchio's coming?
  baptista. is he come?
  biondello. why, no, sir.
  baptista. what then?
  biondello. he is comi
 
 ___________________________
 
the event of this.
              exeunt baptista, gremio, biondello, and attendents
  tranio. but to her love concerneth us to ad
    her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    as i before imparted to your worship,
    i am to get a man- whate'er he be
    it skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
    and he shall be vincentio of pisa,
    and make assurance here in padua
    of greater sums than i have promised.
    so shall you quietly enjoy your hope
    and marry sweet bianca with consent.
  lucentio. were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
    doth watch bianca's steps so narrowly,
    'twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
    which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
    i'll keep mine own despite of all the world.
  tranio. that by degrees we mean to look into
    and watch our vantage in this business;
    we'll over-reach the greybeard, gremio,
    the narrow-prying father, minola,
    the quaint musician, amorous licio-
    all for my 
 
 ___________________________
 

    but that his beard grew thin and hungerly
    and seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
    this done, he took the bride about the neck,
    and kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
    that at the parting all the church did echo.
    and i, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
    and after me, i know, the rout is coming.
    such a mad marriage never was before.
    hark, hark! i hear the minstrels play.         [music plays]

       enter petruchio, katherina, bianca, baptista, hortensio,
                         grumio, and train

  petruchio. gentlemen and friends, i thank you for your pains.
    i know you think to dine with me to-day,
    and have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer
    but so it is- my haste doth call me hence,
    and therefore here i mean to take my leave.
  baptista. is't possible you will away to-night?
  petruchio. i must away to-day before night come.
    make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
    you would entr
 
 ___________________________
 
,
    draw forth thy weapon; we are beset with thieves;
    rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
    fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, kate;
    i'll buckler thee against a million.
                         exeunt petruchio, katherina, and grumio
  baptista. nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
  gremio. went they not quickly, i should die with laughing.
  tranio. of all mad matches, never was the like.
  lucentio. mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
  bianca. that, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
  gremio. i warrant him, petruchio is kated.
  baptista. neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom
wants
    for to supply the places at the table,
    you know there wants no junkets at the feast.
    lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place;
    and let bianca take her sister's room.
  tranio. shall sweet bianca practise how to bride it?
  baptista. she shall, lucentio. come, gentlemen, let's go.
                       
 
 ___________________________
 
e shall watch all night;
    and if she chance to nod i'll rail and brawl
    and with the clamour keep her still awake.
    this is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
    and thus i'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
    he that knows better how to tame a shrew,
    now let him speak; 'tis charity to show.                exit




scene ii.
padua. before baptista's house

enter tranio as lucentio, and hortensio as licio

  tranio. is 't possible, friend licio, that mistress bianca
    doth fancy any other but lucentio?
    i tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
  hortensio. sir, to satisfy you in what i have said,
    stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
                                              [they stand aside]

               enter bianca, and lucentio as cambio

  lucentio. now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
  bianca. what, master, read you, first resolve me that.
  lucentio. i read that i profess, 'the art to love.'
  bianca. 
 
 ___________________________
 
tress blanca
    lov'd none in the world so well as lucentio.
  tranio. o despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
    i tell thee, licio, this is wonderful.
  hortensio. mistake no more; i am not licio.
    nor a musician as i seem to be;
    but one that scorn to live in this disguise
    for such a one as leaves a gentleman
    and makes a god of such a cullion.
    know, sir, that i am call'd hortensio.
  tranio. signior hortensio, i have often heard
    of your entire affection to bianca;
    and since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
    i will with you, if you be so contented,
    forswear bianca and her love for ever.
  hortensio. see, how they kiss and court! signior lucentio,
    here is my hand, and here i firmly vow
    never to woo her more, but do forswear her,
    as one unworthy all the former favours
    that i have fondly flatter'd her withal.
  tranio. and here i take the like unfeigned oath,
    never to marry with her though she would entreat;

 
 ___________________________
 
he doth court him!
  hortensio. would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
    for me, that i may surely keep mine oath,
    i will be married to a wealthy widow
    ere three days pass, which hath as long lov'd me
    as i have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard.
    and so farewell, signior lucentio.
    kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
    shall win my love; and so i take my leave,
    in resolution as i swore before.                        exit
  tranio. mistress bianca, bless you with such grace
    as 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
    nay, i have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
    and have forsworn you with hortensio.
  bianca. tranio, you jest; but have you both forsworn me?
  tranio. mistress, we have.
  lucentio. then we are rid of licio.
  tranio. i' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
    that shall be woo'd and wedded in a day.
  bianca. god give him joy!
  tranio. ay, and he'll tame her.
  bianca. he says so, tranio.
  tranio. fait
 
 ___________________________
 
h, he is gone unto the taming-school.
  bianca. the taming-school! what, is there such a place?
  tranio. ay, mistress; and petruchio is the master,
    that teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
    to tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

                       enter biondello

  biondello. o master, master, have watch'd so long
    that i am dog-weary; but at last i spied
    an ancient angel coming down the hill
    will serve the turn.
  tranio. what is he, biondello?
  biondello. master, a mercatante or a pedant
 
 ___________________________
 
,
    i know not what; but formal in apparel,
    in gait and countenance surely like a father.
  lucentio. and what of him, tranio?
  tranio. if he be credulous and trust my tale,
    i'll make him glad to seem vincentio,
    and give assurance to baptista minola
    as if he were the right vincentio.
    take in your love, and then let me alone.
                                      exeunt lucentio and bianca

                         enter a pedant

  pedant. god save you, sir!
  tranio. and you, sir; you are welcome.
    travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
  pedant. sir, at the farthest for a week or two;
    but then up farther, and as far as rome;
    and so to tripoli, if god lend me life.
  tranio. what countryman, i pray?
  pedant. of mantua.
  tranio. of mantua, sir? marry, god forbid,
    and come to padua, careless of your life!
  pedant. my life, sir! how, i pray?
 
 ___________________________
 

  tranio. but hast thou done thy errand to baptista?
  biondello. i told him that your father was at venice,
    and that you look'd for him this day in padua.
  tranio. th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
    here comes baptista. set your countenance, sir.

                 enter baptista, and lucentio as cambio

    signior baptista, you are happily met.
    [to the pedant] sir, this is the gentleman i told you of;
    i pray you stand good father to me now;
    give me bianca for my patrimony.
  pedant. soft, son!
    sir, by your leave: having come to padua
    to gather in some debts, my son lucentio
    made me acquainted with a weighty cause
    of love between your daughter and himself;
    and- for the good report i hear of you,
    and for the love he beareth to your daughter,
    and she to him- to stay him not too long,
    i am content, in a good father's care,
    to have him match'd; and, if you please to like
    no worse than i, upon some ag
 
 ___________________________
 
sides, old gremio is heark'ning still,
    and happily we might be interrupted.
  tranio. then at my lodging, an it like you.
    there doth my father lie; and there this night
    we'll pass the business privately and well.
    send for your daughter by your servant here;
    my boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
    the worst is this, that at so slender warning
    you are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
  baptista. it likes me well. cambio, hie you home,
    and bid bianca make her ready straight;
    and, if you will, tell what hath happened-
    lucentio's father is arriv'd in padua,
    and how she's like to be lucentio's wife.      exit lucentio
  biondello. i pray the gods she may, with all my heart.
  tranio. dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
                                                  exit biondello
    signior baptista, shall i lead the way?
    welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer;
    come, sir; we will better it in pisa.
 
 ___________________________
 
s to be brought by you to the supper.
  lucentio. and then?
  biondello. the old priest at saint luke's church is at your
command
    at all hours.
  lucentio. and what of all this?
  biondello. i cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    counterfeit assurance. take your assurance of her, cum
privilegio
    ad imprimendum solum; to th' church take the priest, clerk,
and
    some sufficient honest witnesses.
    if this be not that you look for, i have more to say,
    but bid bianca farewell for ever and a day.
  lucentio. hear'st thou, biondello?
  biondello. i cannot tarry. i knew a wench married in an
afternoon
    as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and
so
    may you, sir; and so adieu, sir. my master hath appointed me
to
    go to saint luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against
you
    come with your appendix.
 exit
  lucentio. i may and will, if she be so contented.
    she will be pleas'd; then wherefore should i doubt?
  
 
 ___________________________
 
 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
padua. before lucentio's house

enter biondello, lucentio, and bianca; gremio is out before

  biondello. softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  lucentio. i fly, biondello; but they may chance to need thee at
    home, therefore leave us.
  biondello. nay, faith, i'll see the church a your back, and
then
    come back to my master's as soon as i can.
                          exeunt lucentio, bianca, and biondello
  gremio. i marvel cambio comes not all this while.

           enter petruchio, katherina, vincentio, grumio,
               
 
 ___________________________
 

  gremio. take heed, signior baptista, lest you be cony-catch'd
in
    this business; i dare swear this is the right vincentio.
  pedant. swear if thou dar'st.
  gremio. nay, i dare not swear it.
  tranio. then thou wert best say that i am not lucentio.
  gremio. yes, i know thee to be signior lucentio.
  baptista. away with the dotard; to the gaol with him!
  vincentio. thus strangers may be hal'd and abus'd. o monstrous
    villain!

          re-enter biondello, with lucentio and bianca

  biondello. o, we are spoil'd; and yonder he is! deny him,
forswear
    him, or else we are all undone.
         exeunt biondello, tranio, and pedant, as fast as may be
  lucentio.  [kneeling]  pardon, sweet father.
  vincentio. lives my sweet son?
  bianca. pardon, dear father.
  baptista. how hast thou offended?
    where is lucentio?
  lucentio. here's lucentio,
    right son to the right vincentio,
    that have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
    while counterfeit suppo
 
 ___________________________
 
ses blear'd thine eyne.
  gremio. here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
  vincentio. where is that damned villain, tranio,
    that fac'd and brav'd me in this matter so?
  baptista. why, tell me, is not this my cambio?
  bianca. cambio is chang'd into lucentio.
  lucentio. love wrought these miracles. bianca's love
    made me exchange my state with tranio,
    while he did bear my countenance in the town;
    and happily i have arrived at the last
    unto the wished haven of my bliss.
    what tranio did, myself enforc'd him to;
    then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
  vincentio. i'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me
to
    the gaol.
  baptista.  [to lucentio]  but do you hear, sir? have you
married my
    daughter without asking my good will?
  vincentio. fea
 
 ___________________________
 
r not, baptista; we will content you, go to; but
i
    will in to be revenged for this villainy.               exit
  baptista. and i to sound the depth of this knavery.       exit
  lucentio. look not pale, bianca; thy father will not frown.
                                      exeunt lucentio and bianca
  gremio. my cake is dough, but i'll in among the rest;
    out of hope of all but my share of the feast.           exit
  katherina. husband, let's follow to see the end of this ado.
  petruchio. first kiss me, kate, and we will.
  katherina. what, in the midst of the street?
  petruchio. what, art thou asham'd of me?
  katherina. no, sir; god forbid; but asham'd to kiss.
  petruchio. why, then, let's home again. come, sirrah, let's
away.
  katherina. nay, i will give thee a kiss; no
 
 ___________________________
 
w pray thee, love,
stay.
  petruchio. is not this well? come, my sweet kate:
    better once than never, for never too late.           exeunt




scene ii.
lucentio's house

enter baptista, vincentio, gremio, the pedant, lucentio, bianca,
petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and widow. the servingmen with
tranio,
biondello, and grumio, bringing in a banquet

  lucentio. at last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    and time it is when raging war is done
    to smile at scapes and perils overblown.
    my fair bianca, bid my father welcome,
    while i with self-same kindness welcome thine.
    brother petruchio, sister katherina,
    and thou, hortensio, with thy loving widow,
    feast with the best, and welcome t
 
 ___________________________
 
g.
  katherina. a very mean meaning.
  widow. right, i mean you.
  katherina. and i am mean, indeed, respecting you.
  petruchio. to her, kate!
  hortensio. to her, widow!
  petruchio. a hundred marks, my kate does put her down.
  hortensio. that's my office.
  petruchio. spoke like an officer- ha' to thee, lad.
                                           [drinks to hortensio]
  baptista. how likes gremio these quick-witted folks?
  gremio. believe me, sir, they butt together well.
  bianca. head and butt! an hasty-witted body
    would say your head and butt were head and horn.
  vincentio. ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
  bianca. ay, but not frighted me; therefore i'll sleep again.
  petruchio. nay, that you shall not; since you have begun,
    have at you for a bitter jest or two.
  bianca. am i your bird? i mean to shift my bush,
    and then pursue me as you draw your bow.
    you are welcome all.
                             exeunt bianca, katherina, an
 
 ___________________________
 
e will propose.
  hortensio. content. what's the wager?
  lucentio. twenty crowns.
  petruchio. twenty crowns?
    i'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
    but twenty times so much upon my wife.
  lucentio. a hundred then.
  hortensio. content.
  petruchio. a match! 'tis done.
  hortensio. who shall begin?
  lucentio. that will i.
    go, biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
  biondello. i go.                                          exit
  baptista. son, i'll be your half bianca comes.
  lucentio. i'll have no halves; i'll bear it all myself.

                          re-enter biondello

    how now! what news?
  biondello. sir, my mistress sends you word
    that she is busy and she cannot come.
  petruchio. how! she's busy, and she cannot come!
    is that an answer?
  gremio. ay, and a kind one too.
    pray god, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
  petruchio. i hope better.
  hortensio. sirrah biondello, go and entreat my wife
    to come to me for
 
 ___________________________
 
an awful rule, and right supremacy;
    and, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy.
  baptista. now fair befall thee, good petruchio!
    the wager thou hast won; and i will ad
    unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
    another dowry to another daughter,
    for she is chang'd, as she had never been.
  petruchio. nay, i will win my wager better yet,
    and show more sign of her obedience,
    her new-built virtue and obedience.

                 re-enter katherina with bianca and widow

    see where she comes, and brings your froward wives
    as prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
    katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not:
    off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
                                            [katherina complies]
  widow. lord, let me never have a cause to sigh
    till i be brought to such a silly pass!
  bianca. fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
  lucentio. i would your duty were as foolish too;
    the wisdom of your 
 
 ___________________________
 
duty, fair bianca,
    hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper-time!
  bianca. the more fool you for laying on my duty.
  petruchio. katherine, i charge thee, tell these headstrong
women
    what duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
  widow. come, come, you're mocking; we will have no telling.
  petruchio. come on, i say; and first begin with her.
  widow. she shall not.
  petruchio. i say she shall. and first begin with her.
  katherina. fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
    and dart not scornful glances from those eyes
    to wound thy lord