the taming of the shrew

by william shakespeare



dramatis personae

    persons in the induction
  a lord
  christopher sly, a tinker
  hostess
  page
  players
  huntsmen
  servants

  baptista minola, a gentleman of padua
  vincentio, a merchant of pisa
  lucentio, son to vincentio, in love with bianca
  petruchio, a gentleman of verona, a suitor to katherina

    suitors to bianca
  gremio
  hortensio

    servants to lucentio
  tranio
  biondello

    servants to petruchio
  grumio
  curtis

  a pedant

    daughters to baptista
  katherina, the shrew
  bianca

  a widow

  tailor, haberdasher, and servants attending on baptista and
    petruchio

                             scene:
            padua, and petruchio's house in the country

sc_1
                      induction. scene i.
                  before an alehouse on a heath

                      enter hostess and sly

  sly. i'll pheeze you, in faith.
 
 ___________________________
 
r no stocks, i pray,
    or so devote to aristotle's checks
    as ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd.
    balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
    and practise rhetoric in your common talk;
    music and poesy use to quicken you;
    the mathematics and the metaphysics,
    fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
    no profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en;
    in brief, sir, study what you most affect.
  lucentio. gramercies, tranio, well dost thou advise.
    if, biondello, thou wert come ashore,
    we could at once put us in readiness,
    and take a lodging fit to entertain
    such friends as time in padua shall beget.

      enter baptista with his two daughters, katherina
        and bianca; gremio, a pantaloon; hortensio,
        suitor to bianca. lucentio and tranio stand by

    but stay awhile; what company is this?
  tranio. master, some show to welcome us to town.
  baptista. gentlemen, importune me no farther,
    for how i firmly am reso
 
 ___________________________
 
t them?
  lucentio. basta, content thee, for i have it full.
    we have not yet been seen in any house,
    nor can we be distinguish'd by our faces
    for man or master. then it follows thus:
    thou shalt be master, tranio, in my stead,
    keep house and port and servants, as i should;
    i will some other be- some florentine,
    some neapolitan, or meaner man of pisa.
    'tis hatch'd, and shall be so. tranio, at once
    uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak.
    when biondello comes, he waits on thee;
    but i will charm him first to keep his tongue.
  tranio. so had you need.                [they exchange habits]
    in brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
    and i am tied to be obedient-
    for so your father charg'd me at our parting:
    'be serviceable to my son' quoth he,
    although i think 'twas in another sense-
    i am content to be lucentio,
    because so well i love lucentio.
  lucentio. tranio, be so because lucentio loves;
    and let 
 
 ___________________________
 
me be a slave t' achieve that maid
    whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.

                       enter biondello.

    here comes the rogue. sirrah, where have you been?
  biondello. where have i been! nay, how now! where are you?
    master, has my fellow tranio stol'n your clothes?
    or you stol'n his? or both? pray, what's the news?
  lucentio. sirrah, come hither; 'tis no time to jest,
    and therefore frame your manners to the time.
    your fellow tranio here, to save my life,
    puts my apparel and my count'nance on,
    and i for my escape have put on his;
    for in a quarrel since i came ashore
    i kill'd a man, and fear i was descried.
    wait y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou on him, i charge you, as becomes,
    while i make way from hence to save my life.
    you understand me?
  biondello. i, sir? ne'er a whit.
  lucentio. and not a jot of tranio in your mouth:
    tranio is chang'd into lucentio.
  biondello. the better for him; would i were so too!
  tranio. so could i, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
    that lucentio indeed had baptista's youngest daughter.
    but, sirrah, not for my sake but your master's, i advise
    you use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.
    when i am alone, why, then i am tranio;
    but in all places else your master lucentio.
  lucentio. tranio, let's go.
    one thing more rests, that thyself execute-
    to make one among these wooe
 
 ___________________________
 
 to hear
    as will a chestnut in a fariner's fire?
    tush! tush! fear boys with bugs.
  grumio. for he fears none.
  gremio. hortensio, hark:
    this gentleman is happily arriv'd,
    my mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
  hortensio. i promis'd we would be contributors
    and bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
  gremio. and so we will- provided that he win her.
  grumio. i would i were as sure of a good dinner.

    enter tranio, bravely apparelled as lucentio, and biondello

  tranio. gentlemen, god save you! if i may be bold,
    tell me, i beseech you, which is the readiest way
    to the house of signior baptista minola?
  biondello. he that has the two fair daughters; is't he you
mean?
  tranio. even he, biondello.
  gremio. hark you, sir, you mean not her to-
  tranio. perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
  petruchio. not her that chides, sir, at any hand, i pray.
  tranio. i love no chiders, sir. biondello, let's away.
  lucentio.  [asi
 
 ___________________________
 
er
    will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
  hortensio. sir, you say well, and well you do conceive;
    and since you do profess to be a suitor,
    you must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
    to whom we all rest generally beholding.
  tranio. sir, i shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
    please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
    and quaff carouses to our mistress' health;
    and do as adversaries do in law-
    strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
  grumio, biondello. o excellent motion! fellows, let's be gone.
  hortensio. the motion's good indeed, and be it so.
    petruchio, i shall be your ben venuto.                exeunt




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
per
 
 ___________________________
 
e
    she is your treasure, she must have a husband;
    i must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day,
    and for your love to her lead apes in hell.
    talk not to me; i will go sit and weep,
    till i can find occasion of revenge.          exit katherina
  baptista. was ever gentleman thus griev'd as i?
    but who comes here?

        enter gremio, with lucentio in the habit of a mean man;
         petruchio, with hortensio as a musician; and tranio,
    as lucentio, with his boy, biondello, bearing a lute and
books

  gremio. good morrow, neighbour baptista.
  baptista. good morrow, neighbour gremio.
    god save you, gentlemen!
  petruchio. and you, good sir! pray, have you not a daughter
    call'd katherina, fair and virtuous?
  baptista. i have a daughter, sir, call'd katherina.
  gremio. you are too blunt; go to it orderly.
  petruchio. you wrong me, signior gremio; give me leave.
    i am a gentleman of verona, sir,
    that, hearing of her beauty and her wit,

 
 ___________________________
 
   upon my life, petruchio means but well,
    whatever fortune stays him from his word.
    though he be blunt, i know him passing wise;
    though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
  katherina. would katherine had never seen him though!
                    exit, weeping, followed by bianca and others
  baptista. go, girl, i cannot blame thee now to weep,
    for such an injury would vex a very saint;
    much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

                           enter biondello

    master, master! news, and such old news as you never heard
of!
  baptista. is it new and old too? how may that be?
  biondello. why, is it not news to hear of petruchio's coming?
  baptista. is he come?
  biondello. why, no, sir.
  baptista. what then?
  biondello. he is coming.
  baptista. when will he be here?
  biondello. when he stands where i am and sees you there.
  tranio. but, say, what to thine old news?
  biondello. why, petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old

 
 ___________________________
 
gers, begnawn with the bots,
sway'd in
    the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legg'd before, and with a
    half-cheek'd bit, and a head-stall of sheep's leather which,
    being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often
    burst, and now repaired with knots; one girth six times
piec'd,
    and a woman's crupper of velure, which hath two letters for
her
    name fairly set down in studs, and here and there piec'd with
    pack-thread.
  baptista. who comes with him?
  biondello. o, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparison'd
like
    the horse- with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey
boot-hose
    on the other, gart'red with a red and blue list; an old hat,
and
    the humour of forty fancies prick'd in't for a feather; a
    monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a christian
    footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
  tranio. 'tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
    yet oftentimes lie goes but mean-apparell'd.
  baptista. i am glad h
 
 ___________________________
 
e's come, howsoe'er he comes.
  biondello. why, sir, he comes not.
  baptista. didst thou not say he comes?
  biondello. who? that petruchio came?
  baptista. ay, that petruchio came.
  biondello. no, sir; i say his horse comes with him on his back.
  baptista. why, that's all one.
  biondello. nay, by saint jamy,
             i hold you a penny,
             a horse and a man
             is more than one,
             and yet not many.

                  enter petruchio and grumio

  petruchio. come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
  baptista. you are welcome, sir.
  petruchio. and yet i come not well.
  baptista. and yet you halt not.
  tranio. not so well apparell'd
    as i wish you were.
  petruchio. were it better, i should rush in thus.
    but where is
 
 ___________________________
 
 poor accoutrements,
    'twere well for kate and better for myself.
    but what a fool am i to chat with you,
    when i should bid good-morrow to my bride
    and seal the title with a lovely kiss!
                                  exeunt petruchio and grumio
  tranio. he hath some meaning in his mad attire.
    we will persuade him, be it possible,
    to put on better ere he go to church.
  baptista. i'll after him and see the event of this.
              exeunt baptista, gremio, biondello, and attendents
  tranio. but to her love concerneth us to ad
    her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    as i before imparted to your worship,
    i am to get a man- whate'er he be
    it skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
    and he shall be vincentio of pisa,
    and make assurance here in padua
    of greater sums than i have promised.
    so shall you quietly enjoy your hope
    and marry sweet bianca with consent.
  lucentio. were it not that my fellow schoolm
 
 ___________________________
 
icio.
  tranio. i' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
    that shall be woo'd and wedded in a day.
  bianca. god give him joy!
  tranio. ay, and he'll tame her.
  bianca. he says so, tranio.
  tranio. faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
  bianca. the taming-school! what, is there such a place?
  tranio. ay, mistress; and petruchio is the master,
    that teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
    to tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

                       enter biondello

  biondello. o master, master, have watch'd so long
    that i am dog-weary; but at last i spied
    an ancient angel coming down the hill
    will serve the turn.
  tranio. what is he, biondello?
  biondello. master, a mercatante or a pedant,
    i know not what; but formal in apparel,
    in gait and countenance surely like a father.
  lucentio. and what of him, tranio?
  tranio. if he be credulous and trust my tale,
    i'll make him glad to seem vincentio,
    and give assuran
 
 ___________________________
 
nce, and must here deliver them.
  tranio. well, sir, to do you courtesy,
    this will i do, and this i will advise you-
    first, tell me, have you ever been at pisa?
  pedant. ay, sir, in pisa have i often been,
    pisa renowned for grave citizens.
  tranio. among them know you one vincentio?
  pedant. i know him not, but i have heard of him,
    a merchant of incomparable wealth.
  tranio. he is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
    in count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
  biondello.  [aside]  as much as an apple doth an oyster, and
all
    one.
  tranio. to save your life in this extremity,
    this favour will i do you for his sake;
    and think it not the worst of all your fortunes
    that you are like to sir vincentio.
    his name and credit shall you undertake,
    and in my house you shall be friendly lodg'd;
    look that you take upon you as you should.
    you understand me, sir. so shall you stay
    till you have done your business in the city.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
        exeunt




scene iv.
padua. before baptista's house

enter tranio as lucentio, and the pedant dressed like vincentio

  tranio. sir, this is the house; please it you that i call?
  pedant. ay, what else? and, but i be deceived,
    signior baptista may remember me
    near twenty years ago in genoa,
    where we were lodgers at the pegasus.
  tranio. 'tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
    with such austerity as longeth to a father.

                       enter biondello

  pedant. i warrant you. but, sir, here comes your boy;
    'twere good he were school'd.
  tranio. fear you not him. sirrah biondello,
    now do your duty throughly, i advise you.
    imagine 'twere the right vincentio.
  biondello. tut, fear not me.
  tranio. but hast thou done thy errand to baptista?
  biondello. i told him that your father was at venice,
    and that you look'd for him this day in padua.
  tranio. th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
    here comes b
 
 ___________________________
 
ss the business privately and well.
    send for your daughter by your servant here;
    my boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
    the worst is this, that at so slender warning
    you are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
  baptista. it likes me well. cambio, hie you home,
    and bid bianca make her ready straight;
    and, if you will, tell what hath happened-
    lucentio's father is arriv'd in padua,
    and how she's like to be lucentio's wife.      exit lucentio
  biondello. i pray the gods she may, with all my heart.
  tranio. dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
                                                  exit biondello
    signior baptista, shall i lead the way?
    welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer;
    come, sir; we will better it in pisa.
  baptista. i follow you.                                 exeunt

            re-enter lucentio as cambio, and biondello

  biondello. cambio.
  lucentio. what say'st thou, biondello?
  bio
 
 ___________________________
 
ndello. you saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
  lucentio. biondello, what of that?
  biondello. faith, nothing; but has left me here behind to
expound
    the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
  lucentio. i pray thee moralize them.
  biondello. then thus: baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving
    father of a deceitful son.
  lucentio. and what of him?
  biondello. his daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
  lucentio. and then?
  biondello. the old priest at saint luke's church is at your
command
    at all hours.
  lucentio. and what of all this?
  biondello. i cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    counterfeit assurance. take your assurance of her, cum
privilegio
    ad imprimendum solum; to th' church take the priest, clerk,
and
    some sufficient honest witnesses.
    if this be not that you look for, i have more to say,
    but bid bianca farewell for ever and a day.
  lucentio. hear'st thou, biondello?
 
 ___________________________
 

  biondello. i cannot tarry. i knew a wench married in an
afternoon
    as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and
so
    may you, sir; and so adieu, sir. my master hath appointed me
to
    go to saint luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against
you
    come with your appendix.
 exit
  lucentio. i may and will, if she be so contented.
    she will be pleas'd; then wherefore should i doubt?
    hap what hap may, i'll roundly go about her;
    it shall go hard if cambio g
 
 ___________________________
 
re is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
padua. before lucentio's house

enter biondello, lucentio, and bianca; gremio is out before

  biondello. softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  lucentio. i fly, biondello; but they may chance to need thee at
    home, therefore leave us.
  biondello. nay, faith, i'll see the church a your back, and
then
    come back to my master's as soon as i can.
                          exeunt lucentio, bianca, and biondello
  gremio. i marvel cambio comes not all this while.

           enter petruchio, katherina, vincentio, gr
 
 ___________________________
 
  at the door to speak with him.
  pedant. thou liest: his father is come from padua, and here
looking
    out at the window.
  vincentio. art thou his father?
  pedant. ay, sir; so his mother says, if i may believe her.
  petruchio.  [to vincentio]  why, how now, gentleman!
    why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another man's
name.
  pedant. lay hands on the villain; i believe 'a means to cozen
    somebody in this city under my countenance.

                       re-enter biondello

  biondello. i have seen them in the church together. god send
'em
    good shipping! but who is here? mine old master, vicentio!
now we
    are undone and brought to nothing.
  vincentio.  [seeing biondello]  come hither, crack-hemp.
  biondello. i hope i may choose, sir.
  vincentio. come hither, you rogue. what, have you forgot me?
  biondello. forgot you! no, sir. i could not forget you, for i
never
    saw you before in all my life.
  vincentio. what, you notorious villain, d
 
 ___________________________
 
idst thou never see
thy
    master's father, vincentio?
  biondello. what, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir;
see
    where he looks out of the window.
  vincentio. is't so, indeed?               [he beats biondello]
  biondello. help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.
 exit
  pedant. help, son! help, signior baptista!     exit from above
  petruchio. prithee, kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
this
    controversy.                              [they stand aside]

       re-enter pedant below; baptista, tranio, and servants

  tranio. sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
  vincentio. what am i, sir? nay, what are you, sir? o immortal
gods!
    o fine villain! a silken doublet, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 say he shall go to
prison.
  gremio. take heed, signior baptista, lest you be cony-catch'd
in
    this business; i dare swear this is the right vincentio.
  pedant. swear if thou dar'st.
  gremio. nay, i dare not swear it.
  tranio. then thou wert best say that i am not lucentio.
  gremio. yes, i know thee to be signior lucentio.
  baptista. away with the dotard; to the gaol with him!
  vincentio. thus strangers may be hal'd and abus'd. o monstrous
    villain!

          re-enter biondello, with lucentio and bianca

  biondello. o, we are spoil'd; and yonder he is! deny him,
forswear
    him, or else we are all undone.
         exeunt biondello, tranio, and pedant, as fast as may be
  lucentio.  [kneeling]  pardon, sweet father.
  vincentio. lives my sweet son?
  bianca. pardon, dear father.
  baptista. how hast thou offended?
    where is lucentio?
  lucentio. here's lucentio,
    right son to the right vincentio,
    that have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
e?
  katherina. no, sir; god forbid; but asham'd to kiss.
  petruchio. why, then, let's home again. come, sirrah, let's
away.
  katherina. nay, i will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love,
stay.
  petruchio. is not this well? come, my sweet kate:
    better once than never, for never too late.           exeunt




scene ii.
lucentio's house

enter baptista, vincentio, gremio, the pedant, lucentio, bianca,
petruchio, katherina, hortensio, and widow. the servingmen with
tranio,
biondello, and grumio, bringing in a banquet

  lucentio. at last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    and time it is when raging war is done
    to smile at scapes and perils overblown.
    my fair bianca, bid my father welcome,
    while i with self-same kindness welcome thine.
    brother petruchio, sister katherina,
    and thou, hortensio, with thy loving widow,
    feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
    my banquet is to close our stomachs up
    after our great good chee
 
 ___________________________
 
 send unto his wife,
    and he whose wife is most obedient,
    to come at first when he doth send for her,
    shall win the wager which we will propose.
  hortensio. content. what's the wager?
  lucentio. twenty crowns.
  petruchio. twenty crowns?
    i'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
    but twenty times so much upon my wife.
  lucentio. a hundred then.
  hortensio. content.
  petruchio. a match! 'tis done.
  hortensio. who shall begin?
  lucentio. that will i.
    go, biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
  biondello. i go.                                          exit
  baptista. son, i'll be your half bianca comes.
  lucentio. i'll have no halves; i'll bear it all myself.

                          re-enter biondello

    how now! what news?
  biondello. sir, my mistress sends you word
    that she is busy and she cannot come.
  petruchio. how! she's busy, and she cannot come!
    is that an answer?
  gremio. ay, and a kind one too.
    pray god, sir
 
 ___________________________
 
, your wife send you not a worse.
  petruchio. i hope better.
  hortensio. sirrah biondello, go and entreat my wife
    to come to me forthwith.                      exit biondello
  petruchio. o, ho! entreat her!
    nay, then she must needs come.
  hortensio. i am afraid, sir,
    do what you can, yours will not be entreated.

                            re-enter biondello

    now, where's my wife?
  biondello. she says you have some goodly jest in hand:
    she will not come; she bids you come to her.
  petruchio. worse and worse; she will not come! o vile,
    intolerable, not to be endur'd!
    sirrah grumio, go to your mistress;
    say i command her come to me.                    exit grumio
  hortensio. i know her answer.
  petruchio. what?
  hortensio. she will not.
  petruchio. the fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

                             re-enter katherina

  baptista