he purpose
of taking the order; but the moment he extended his hand to search for
it, the wounded man, who had not dropped his sword, plunged the point
into d’artagnan’s breast, crying, "one for you!"

"and one for me--the best for last!" cried d’artagnan, furious, nailing
him to the earth with a fourth thrust through his body.

this time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted. d’artagnan searched
his pockets, and took from one of them the order for the passage. it was
in the name of comte de wardes.

then, casting a glance on the handsome young man, who was scarcely
twenty-five years of age, and whom he was leaving in his gore, deprived
of sense and perhaps dead, he gave a sigh for that unaccountable destiny
which leads men to destroy each other for the interests of people who
are strangers to them and who often do not even know that they exist.
but he was soon aroused from these reflections by lubin, who uttered
loud cries and screamed for help with all his might.

planchet grasped him b
 
 ___________________________
 
y the throat, and pressed as hard as he could.
"monsieur," said he, "as long as i hold him in this manner, he can’t
cry, i’ll be bound; but as soon as i let go he will howl again. i know
him for a norman, and normans are obstinate."

in fact, tightly held as he was, lubin endeavored still to cry out.

"stay!" said d’artagnan; and taking out his handkerchief, he gagged him.

"now," said planchet, "let us bind him to a tree."

this being properly done, they drew the comte de wardes close to his
servant; and as night was approaching, and as the wounded man and the
bound man were at some little distance within the wood, it was evident
they were likely to remain there till the next day.

"and now," said d’artagnan, "to the governor’s."

"but you are wounded, it seems," said planchet.

"oh, that’s nothing! let us attend to what is more pressing first, and
then we will attend to my wound; besides, it does not seem very
dangerous."

and they both set forward as fast as th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey could toward the country house
of the worthy functionary.

the comte de wardes was announced, and d’artagnan was introduced.

"you have an order signed by the cardinal?" said the governor.

"yes, monsieur," replied d’artagnan; "here it is."

"ah, ah! it is quite regular and explicit," said the governor.

"most likely," said d’artagnan; "i am one of his most faithful
servants."

"it appears that his eminence is anxious to prevent someone from
crossing to england?"

"yes; a certain d’artagnan, a bearnese gentleman who left paris in
company with three of his friends,
 
 ___________________________
 
" cried buckingham. "what is it? i should be too happy to be of any
service to her. speak, speak!"

"take this letter," said d’artagnan.

"this letter! from whom comes this letter?"

"from her majesty, as i think."

"from her majesty!" said buckingham, becoming so pale that d’artagnan
feared he would faint as he broke the seal.

"what is this rent?" said he, showing d’artagnan a place where it had
been pierced through.

"ah," said d’artagnan, "i did not see that; it was the sword of the
comte de wardes which made that hole, when he gave me a good thrust in
the breast."

"you are wounded?" asked buckingham, as he opened the letter.

"oh, nothing but a scratch," said d’artagnan.

"just heaven, what have i read?" cried the duke. "patrick, remain here,
or rather join the king, wherever he may be, and tell his majesty that i
humbly beg him to excuse me, but an affair of the greatest importance
recalls me to london. come, monsieur, come!" and both set off towards
the capital at full gallop.




2
 
 ___________________________
 
treville, "what has become of your three
companions?"

"i was about to ask you if you had heard any news of them?"

"none, monsieur."

"well, i left them on my road--porthos at chantilly, with a duel on his
hands; aramis at crevecoeur, with a ball in his shoulder; and athos at
amiens, detained by an accusation of coining."

"see there, now!" said m. de treville; "and how the devil did you
escape?"

"by a miracle, monsieur, i must acknowledge, with a sword thrust in my
breast, and by nailing the comte de wardes on the byroad to calais, like
a butterfly on a tapestry."

"there again! de wardes, one of the cardinal’s men, a cousin of
rochefort! stop, my friend, i have an idea."

"speak, monsieur."

"in your place, i would do one thing."

"what?"

"while his eminence was seeking for me in paris, i would take, without
sound of drum or trumpet, the road to picardy, and would go and make
some inquiries concerning my three companions. what the devil! they
merit richly that piece of attention on your part."
 
 ___________________________
 
had no window toward the street,
he saw a face peep out with which he thought he was acquainted. this
person walked along the terrace, which was ornamented with flowers.
planchet recognized him first.

"eh, monsieur!" said he, addressing d’artagnan, "don’t you remember that
face which is blinking yonder?"

"no," said d’artagnan, "and yet i am certain it is not the first time i
have seen that visage."

"parbleu, i believe it is not," said planchet. "why, it is poor lubin,
the lackey of the comte de wardes--he whom you took such good care of a
month ago at calais, on the road to the governor’s country house!"

"so it is!" said d’artagnan; "i know him now. do you think he would
recollect you?"

"my faith, monsieur, he was in such trouble that i doubt if he can have
retained a very clear recollection of me."

"well, go and talk with the boy," said d’artagnan, "and make out if you
can from his conversation whether his master is dead."

planchet dismounted and went straight up to lubin, who did
 
 ___________________________
 
ve what i have told you; is it not so?"

"we have always some difficulty in believing such things, my pretty
dear, were it only from self-love."

"then you don’t believe me?"

"i confess that unless you deign to give me some proof of what you
advance--"

"what do you think of this?"

kitty drew a little note from her bosom.

"for me?" said d’artagnan, seizing the letter.

"no; for another."

"for another?"

"yes."

"his name; his name!" cried d’artagnan.

"read the address."

"monsieur el comte de wardes."

the remembrance of the scene at st. germain presented itself to the mind
of the presumptuous gascon. as quick as thought, he tore open the
letter, in spite of the cry which kitty uttered on seeing what he was
going to do, or rather, what he was doing.

"oh, good lord, monsieur chevalier," said she, "what are you doing?"

"i?" said d’artagnan; "nothing," and he read,

"you have not answered my first note. are you indisposed, or have you
forgotten the glances you favored me with at the ball 
 
 ___________________________
 
ances of kitty, her
constantly meeting him in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, those touches of the hand every time she met him, and her deep
sighs; but absorbed by his desire to please the great lady, he had
disdained the soubrette. he whose game is the eagle takes no heed of the
sparrow.

but this time our gascon saw at a glance all the advantage to be derived
from the love which kitty had just confessed so innocently, or so
boldly: the interception of letters addressed to the comte de wardes,
news on the spot, entrance at all hours into kitty’s chamber, which was
contiguous to her mistress’s. the perfidious deceiver was, as may
plainly be perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poor girl
in order to obtain milady, willy-nilly.

"well," said he to the young girl, "are you willing, my dear kitty, that
i should give you a proof of that love which you doubt?"

"what love?" asked the young girl.

"of that which i am ready to feel toward you."

"and what is that proof?"

"a
 
 ___________________________
 
der; she smilingly listened to the soft speeches of d’artagnan, and
even gave him her hand to kiss.

d’artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but as he was a
youth who did not easily lose his head, while continuing to pay his
court to milady, he had framed a little plan in his mind.

he found kitty at the gate, and, as on the preceding evening, went up to
her chamber. kitty had been accused of negligence and severely scolded.
milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the comte de wardes,
and she ordered kitty to come at nine o’clock in the morning to take a
third letter.

d’artagnan made kitty promise to bring him that letter on the following
morning. the poor girl promised all her lover desired; she was mad.

things passed as on the night before. d’artagnan concealed himself in
his closet; milady called, undressed, sent away kitty, and shut the
door. as the night before, d’artagnan did not return home till five
o’clock in the morning.

at eleven o’clock kitty came
 
 ___________________________
 
that i could not
in any case have replied to them.

but now i am forced to believe in the excess of your kindness, since not
only your letter but your servant assures me that i have the good
fortune to be beloved by you.

she has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of spirit may
obtain his pardon. i will come and ask mine at eleven o’clock this
evening.

to delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit a fresh
offense.

from him whom you have rendered the happiest of men, comte de wardes

this note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewise an
indelicacy. it was even, according to our present manners, something
like an infamous action; but at that period people did not manage
affairs as they do today. besides, d’artagnan from her own admission
knew milady culpable of treachery in matters more important, and could
entertain no respect for her. and yet, notwithstanding this want of
respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for this woman boiling in his
veins--passion dr
 
 ___________________________
 
proached, milady
had everything about her darkened, and ordered kitty to return to her
own chamber, and introduce de wardes whenever he presented himself.

kitty’s detention was not long. hardly had d’artagnan seen, through a
crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than
he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when kitty
reclosed the door of communication.

"what is that noise?" demanded milady.

"it is i," said d’artagnan in a subdued voice, "i, the comte de wardes."

"oh, my god, my god!" murmured kitty, "he has not even waited for the
hour he himself named!"

"well," said milady, in a trembling voice, "why do you not enter? count,
count," added she, "you know that i wait for you."

at this appeal d’artagnan drew kitty quietly away, and slipped into the
chamber.

if rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives
under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to his
happy rival. d’artagnan was in a dolorous situa
 
 ___________________________
 
ling,
awaited d’artagnan’s reply. the counsels of his friend, joined to the
cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and
his vengeance satisfied, not to see milady again. as a reply, he wrote
the following letter:

do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting. since my
convalescence i have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that i am
forced to regulate them a little. when your turn comes, i shall have the
honor to inform you of it. i kiss your hands.

comte de wardes

not a word about the sapphire. was the gascon determined to keep it as a
weapon against milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve the
sapphire as a last resource for his outfit? it would be wrong to judge
the actions of one period from the point of view of another. that which
would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that time
quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the best
families were frequently supported by their mistresses. d’artagnan ga
 
 ___________________________
 
addressed
to m. d’artagnan, and not to m. de wardes.

he opened it and read as follows:

dear m. d’artagnan, it is wrong thus to neglect your friends,
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
time. my brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day
before, but in vain. will it be the same this evening?

your very grateful, milady clarik

"that’s all very simple," said d’artagnan; "i expected this letter. my
credit rises by the fall of that of the comte de wardes."

"and will you go?" asked kitty.

"listen to me, my dear girl," said the gascon, who sought for an excuse
in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made athos; "you must
understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive
invitation. milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman
would go?"

"oh, my god!" said kitty, "you know how
 
 ___________________________
 
deavoring, if
possible, to fathom those of this woman.

what was most clear in the matter was that d’artagnan loved milady like
a madman, and that she did not love him at all. in an instant d’artagnan
perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home
and write milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he
and de wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same, and
that consequently he could not undertake, without committing suicide, to
kill the comte de wardes. but he also was spurred on by a ferocious
desire of vengeance. he wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and
as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it, he
could not make up his mind to renounce it.

he walked six or seven times round the place royale, turning at every
ten steps to look at the light in milady’s apartment, which was to be
seen through the blinds. it was evident that this time the young woman
was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as sh
 
 ___________________________
 
ept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her
irresistible spirit and her iron will.

d’artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising milady to
renounce, by pardoning de wardes, the furious projects she had formed.

but at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed in a sharp,
bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the darkness, "are you
afraid, dear monsieur d’artagnan?"

"you cannot think so, dear love!" replied d’artagnan; "but now, suppose
this poor comte de wardes were less guilty than you think him?"

"at all events," said milady, seriously, "he has deceived me, and from
the moment he deceived me, he merited death."

"he shall die, then, since you condemn him!" said d’artagnan, in so firm
a tone that it appeared to milady an undoubted proof of devotion. this
reassured her.

we cannot say how long the night seemed to milady, but d’artagnan
believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through
the window blinds, and invaded the chamber
 
 ___________________________
 
 with its paleness. seeing
d’artagnan about to leave her, milady recalled his promise to avenge her
on the comte de wardes.

"i am quite ready," said d’artagnan; "but in the first place i should
like to be certain of one thing."

"and what is that?" asked milady.

"that is, whether you really love me?"

"i have given you proof of that, it seems to me."

"and i am yours, body and soul!"

"thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must,
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. is it not so?"

"certainly; but if you love me as much as you say," replied d’artagnan,
"do you not entertain a little fe
 
 ___________________________
 
ously wounded--killed even."

"impossible!" cried milady, "you are such a valiant man, and such an
expert swordsman."

"you would not, then, prefer a method," resumed d’artagnan, "which would
equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless?"

milady looked at her lover in silence. the pale light of the first rays
of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.

"really," said she, "i believe you now begin to hesitate."

"no, i do not hesitate; but i really pity this poor comte de wardes,
since you have ceased to love him. i think that a man must be so
severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no
other chastisement."

"who told you that i loved him?" asked milady, sharply.

"at least, i am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity,
that you love another," said the young man, in a caressing tone, "and i
repeat that i am really interested for the count."

"you?" asked milady.

"yes, i."

"and why you?"

"because i alone know--"

"what?"

"that
 
 ___________________________
 
a tone of voice so firm, and
with a countenance so unchanged, that if d’artagnan had not been in such
perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.

"do not lie, my angel," said d’artagnan, smiling; "that would be
useless."

"what do you mean? speak! you kill me."

"be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and i have already pardoned
you."

"what next? what next?"

"de wardes cannot boast of anything."

"how is that? you told me yourself that that ring--"

"that ring i have! the comte de wardes of thursday and the d’artagnan of
today are the same person."

the imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame--a slight
storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely
deceived, and his error was not of long duration.

pale and trembling, milady repulsed d’artagnan’s attempted embrace by a
violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.

it was almost broad daylight.

d’artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine india linen, to
implore her par