ts of which he repaired his own
long abstinence; but when in the evening he made his master’s bed, the
chimeras of planchet faded away. the bed was the only one in the
apartment, which consisted of an antechamber and a bedroom. planchet
slept in the antechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of
d’artagnan, and which d’artagnan from that time made shift to do
without.

athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in his service in a
thoroughly peculiar fashion, and who was named grimaud. he was very
taciturn, this worthy signor. be it understood we are speaking of athos.
during the five or six years that he had lived in the strictest intimacy
with his companions, porthos and aramis, they could remember having
often seen him smile, but had never heard him laugh. his words were
brief and expressive, conveying all that was meant, and no more; no
embellishments, no embroidery, no arabesques. his conversation was a
matter of fact, without a single romance.

although athos was scarc
 
 ___________________________
 
and was of great personal
beauty and intelligence of mind, no one knew whether he had ever had a
mistress. he never spoke of women. he certainly did not prevent others
from speaking of them before him, although it was easy to perceive that
this kind of conversation, in which he only mingled by bitter words and
misanthropic remarks, was very disagreeable to him. his reserve, his
roughness, and his silence made almost an old man of him. he had, then,
in order not to disturb his habits, accustomed grimaud to obey him upon
a simple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips. he never spoke
to him, except under the most extraordinary occasions.

sometimes, grimaud, who feared his master as he did fire, while
entertaining a strong attachment to his person and a great veneration
for his talents, believed he perfectly understood what he wanted, flew
to execute the order received, and did precisely the contrary. athos
then shrugged his shoulders, and, without putting himself in a passion,
thrashed 
 
 ___________________________
 
grimaud. on these days he spoke a little.

porthos, as we have seen, had a character exactly opposite to that of
athos. he not only talked much, but he talked loudly, little caring, we
must render him that justice, whether anybody listened to him or not. he
talked for the pleasure of talking and for the pleasure of hearing
himself talk. he spoke upon all subjects except the sciences, alleging
in this respect the inveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his
childhood. he had not so noble an air a
 
 ___________________________
 
orthos to the second rank.
porthos consoled himself by filling the antechamber of m. de treville
and the guardroom of the louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes,
after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies, from
the lawyer’s dame to the baroness, there was question of nothing less
with porthos than a foreign princess, who was enormously fond of him.

an old proverb says, "like master, like man." let us pass, then, from
the valet of athos to the valet of porthos, from grimaud to mousqueton.

mousqueton was a norman, whose pacific name of boniface his master had
changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of mousqueton. he had
entered the service of porthos upon condition that he should only be
clothed and lodged, though in a handsome manner; but he claimed two
hours a day to himself, consecrated to an employment which would provide
for his other wants. porthos agreed to the bargain; the thing suited him
wonderfully well. he had doublets cut out of his old clothes
 
 ___________________________
 
en the forty pistoles of king louis xiii
were consumed or nearly so--he commenced complaints which athos thought
nauseous, porthos indecent, and aramis ridiculous. athos counseled
d’artagnan to dismiss the fellow; porthos was of the opinion that he
should give him a good thrashing first; and aramis contended that a
master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.

"this is all very easy for you to say," replied d’artagnan, "for you,
athos, who live like a dumb man with grimaud, who forbid him to speak,
and consequently never exchange ill words with him; for you, porthos,
who carry matters in such a magnificent style, and are a god to your
valet, mousqueton; and for you, aramis, who, always abstracted by your
theological studies, inspire your servant, bazin, a mild, religious man,
with a profound respect; but for me, who am without any settled means
and without resources--for me, who am neither a musketeer nor even a
guardsman, what am i to do to inspire either the af
 
 ___________________________
 
on’t know where. so let us go and get killed
where we are told to go. is life worth the trouble of so many questions?
d’artagnan, i am ready to follow you."

"and i also," said porthos.

"and i also," said aramis. "and, indeed, i am not sorry to quit paris; i
had need of distraction."

"well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured," said
d’artagnan.

"and, now, when are we to go?" asked athos.

"immediately," replied d’artagnan; "we have not a minute to lose."

"hello, grimaud! planchet! mousqueton! bazin!" cried the four young men,
calling their lackeys, "clean my boots, and fetch the horses from the
hotel."

each musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel, as at a
barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey. planchet, grimaud,
mousqueton, and bazin set off at full speed.

"now let us lay down the plan of campaign," said porthos. "where do we
go first?"

"to calais," said d’artagnan; "that is the most direct line to london."

"well," said porthos, "t
 
 ___________________________
 
oceed no farther. in fact, it required all the courage which he
concealed beneath his elegant form and polished manners to bear him so
far. he grew more pale every minute, and they were obliged to support
him on his horse. they lifted him off at the door of a cabaret, left
bazin with him, who, besides, in a skirmish was more embarrassing than
useful, and set forward again in the hope of sleeping at amiens.

"morbleu," said athos, as soon as they were again in motion, "reduced to
two masters and grimaud and planchet! morbleu! i won’t be their dupe, i
will answer for it. i will neither open my mouth nor draw my sword
between this and calais. i swear by--"

"don’t waste time in swearing," said d’artagnan; "let us gallop, if our
horses will consent."

and the travelers buried their rowels in their horses’ flanks, who thus
vigorously stimulated recovered their energies. they arrived at amiens
at midnight, and alighted at the auberge of the golden lily.

the host had the appearance of as ho
 
 ___________________________
 
ed that he had no other worthy of their excellencies; but
the travelers declared they would sleep in the common chamber, each on a
mattress which might be thrown upon the ground. the host insisted; but
the travelers were firm, and he was obliged to do as they wished.

they had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door within, when
someone knocked at the yard shutter; they demanded who was there, and
recognizing the voices of their lackeys, opened the shutter. it was
indeed planchet and grimaud.

"grimaud can take care of the horses," said planchet. "if you are
willing, gentlemen, i will sleep across your doorway, and you will then
be certain that nobody can reach you."

"and on what will you sleep?" said d’artagnan.

"here is my bed," replied planchet, producing a bundle of straw.

"come, then," said d’artagnan, "you are right. mine host’s face does not
please me at all; it is too gracious."

"nor me either," said athos.

planchet mounted by the window and installed himself acr
 
 ___________________________
 
oss the doorway,
while grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable, undertaking that
by five o’clock in the morning he and the four horses should be ready.

the night was quiet enough. toward two o’clock in the morning somebody
endeavored to open the door; but as planchet awoke in an instant and
cried, "who goes there?" somebody replied that he was mistaken, and went
away.

at four o’clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in the
stables. grimaud had tried to waken the stable boys, and the stable boys
had beaten him. when they opened the window, they saw the poor lad lying
senseless, with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork.

planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle the horses; but
the horses were all used up. mousqueton’s horse which had traveled for
five or six hours without a rider the day before, might have been able
to pursue the journey; but by an inconceivable error the veterinary
surgeon, who had been sent 
 
 ___________________________
 
ontradict me by saying you were
not yet gone. the falsehood would then lie at my door, and as i am not a
gentleman, i may be allowed to lie."

"be of good heart, planchet, you shall preserve your reputation as a
veracious man. in a quarter of an hour we set off."

"that’s the advice i was about to give monsieur; and where are we going,
may i ask, without being too curious?"

"pardieu! in the opposite direction to that which you said i was gone.
besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of grimaud, mousqueton,
and bazin as i am to know what has become of athos, porthos, and
aramis?"

"yes, monsieur," said planchet, "and i will go as soon as you please.
indeed, i think provincial air will suit us much better just now than
the air of paris. so then--"

"so then, pack up our luggage, planchet, and let us be off. on my part,
i will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothing may be
suspected. you may join me at the hotel des gardes. by the way,
planchet, i think you are right with respe
 
 ___________________________
 

essence so fine, was seen to turn insensibly toward material life, as
old men turn toward physical and moral imbecility. athos, in his hours
of gloom--and these hours were frequent--was extinguished as to the
whole of the luminous portion of him, and his brilliant side disappeared
as into profound darkness.

then the demigod vanished; he remained scarcely a man. his head hanging
down, his eye dull, his speech slow and painful, athos would look for
hours together at his bottle, his glass, or at grimaud, who, accustomed
to obey him by signs, read in the faint glance of his master his least
desire, and satisfied it immediately. if the four friends were assembled
at one of these moments, a word, thrown forth occasionally with a
violent effort, was the share athos furnished to the conversation. in
exchange for his silence athos drank enough for four, and without
appearing to be otherwise affected by wine than by a more marked
constriction of the brow and by a deeper sadness.

d’artagnan, whose 
 
 ___________________________
 
 that
before he came out he intended to impose his own conditions. i told him
very humbly--for i could not conceal from myself the scrape i had got
into by laying hands on one of his majesty’s musketeers--i told him i
was quite ready to submit to his conditions.

"’in the first place,’ said he, ’i wish my lackey placed with me, fully
armed.’ we hastened to obey this order; for you will please to
understand, monsieur, we were disposed to do everything your friend
could desire. monsieur grimaud (he told us his name, although he does
not talk much)--monsieur grimaud, then, went down to the cellar, wounded
as he was; then his master, having admitted him, barricaded the door
afresh, and ordered us to remain quietly in our own bar."

"but where is athos now?" cried d’artagnan. "where is athos?"

"in the cellar, monsieur."

"what, you scoundrel! have you kept him in the cellar all this time?"

"merciful heaven! no, monsieur! we keep him in the cellar! you do not
know what he is about in 
 
 ___________________________
 
artagnan threw himself on his neck and embraced him tenderly. he then
tried to draw him from his moist abode, but to his surprise he perceived
that athos staggered.

"you are wounded," said he.

"i! not at all. i am dead drunk, that’s all, and never did a man more
strongly set about getting so. by the lord, my good host! i must at
least have drunk for my part a hundred and fifty bottles."

"mercy!" cried the host, "if the lackey has drunk only half as much as
the master, i am a ruined man."

"grimaud is a well-bred lackey. he would never think of faring in the
same manner as his master; he only drank from the cask. hark! i don’t
think he put the faucet in again. do you hear it? it is running now."

d’artagnan burst into a laugh which changed the shiver of the host into
a burning fever.

in the meantime, grimaud appeared in his turn behind his master, with
the musketoon on his shoulder, and his head shaking. like one of those
drunken satyrs in the pictures of rubens. he was moistened bef
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by the two friends.

"some wine!" said athos, on perceiving the host.

"some wine!" cried the stupefied host, "some wine? why you have drunk
more than a hundred pistoles’ worth! i am a ruined man, lost,
destroyed!"

"bah," said athos, "we were always dry."

"if you had been contented with drinking, well and good; but you have
broken all the bottles."

"you pushed me upon a heap which rolled down. that was your fault."

"all my oil is lost!"

"oil is a sovereign balm for wounds; and my poor grimaud here was
obliged to dress those you had inflicted on him."

"all my sausages are gnawed!"

"there is an enormous quantity of rats in that cellar."

"you shall pay me for all this," cried the exasperated host.

"triple ass!" said athos, rising; but he sank down again immediately. he
had tried his strength to the utmost. d’artagnan came to his relief with
his whip in his hand.

the host drew back and burst into tears.

"this will teach you," said d’artagnan, "to treat the guests god sends
you
 
 ___________________________
 
hopes;
but unfortunately, those were all good pieces."

"manage the matter as well as you can, my good man; it does not concern
me, the more so as i have not a livre left."

"come," said d’artagnan, "let us inquire further. athos’s horse, where
is that?"

"in the stable."

"how much is it worth?"

"fifty pistoles at most."

"it’s worth eighty. take it, and there ends the matter."

"what," cried athos, "are you selling my horse--my bajazet? and pray
upon what shall i make my campaign; upon grimaud?"

"i have brought you another," said d’artagnan.

"another?"

"and a magnificent one!" cried the host.

"well, since there is another finer and younger, why, you may take the
old one; and let us drink."

"what?" asked the host, quite cheerful again.

"some of that at the bottom, near the laths. there are twenty-five
bottles of it left; all the rest were broken by my fall. bring six of
them."

"why, this man is a cask!" said the host, aside. "if he only remains
here a fortnight, and pays for 
 
 ___________________________
 
and with a nervous spasm.

"hear the end. ten parts of a hundred pistoles each, in ten throws,
without revenge; in thirteen throws i had lost all--in thirteen throws.
the number thirteen was always fatal to me; it was on the thirteenth of
july that--"

"ventrebleu!" cried d’artagnan, rising from the table, the story of the
present day making him forget that of the preceding one.

"patience!" said athos; "i had a plan. the englishman was an original; i
had seen him conversing that morning with grimaud, and grimaud had told
me that he had made him proposals to enter into his service. i staked
grimaud, the silent grimaud, divided into ten portions."

"well, what next?" said d’artagnan, laughing in spite of himself.

"grimaud himself, understand; and with the ten parts of grimaud, which
are not worth a ducatoon, i regained the diamond. tell me, now, if
persistence is not a virtue?"

"my faith! but this is droll," cried d’artagnan, consoled, and holding
his sides with laughter.

"you may gue
 
 ___________________________
 
stoles, my friend; take the hundred pistoles!"

d’artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied. this last reason
appeared convincing. besides, he feared that by resisting longer he
should appear selfish in the eyes of athos. he acquiesced, therefore,
and chose the hundred pistoles, which the englishman paid down on the
spot.

they then determined to depart. peace with the landlord, in addition to
athos’s old horse, cost six pistoles. d’artagnan and athos took the nags
of planchet and grimaud, and the two lackeys started on foot, carrying
the saddles on their heads.

however ill our two friends were mounted, they were soon far in advance
of their servants, and arrived at creveccoeur. from a distance they
perceived aramis, seated in a melancholy manner at his window, looking
out, like sister anne, at the dust in the horizon.

"hola, aramis! what the devil are you doing there?" cried the two
friends.

"ah, is that you, d’artagnan, and you, athos?" said the young man. "i
was reflecti
 
 ___________________________
 
ghed aloud.

"my dear d’artagnan," said aramis, "don’t be too angry with me, i beg.
necessity has no law; besides, i am the person punished, as that
rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis, at least. ah, you
fellows are good managers! you ride on our lackey’s horses, and have
your own gallant steeds led along carefully by hand, at short stages."

at the same instant a market cart, which some minutes before had
appeared upon the amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and planchet and
grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads. the cart was
returning empty to paris, and the two lackeys had agreed, for their
transport, to slake the wagoner’s thirst along the route.

"what is this?" said aramis, on seeing them arrive. "nothing but
saddles?"

"now do you understand?" said athos.

"my friends, that’s exactly like me! i retained my harness by instinct.
hola, bazin! bring my new saddle and carry it along with those of these
gentlemen."

"and what have you done with your ec
 
 ___________________________
 
 two for the
masters, for which we will draw lots. with the four hundred livres we
will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and then we will
give the turnings out of our pockets to d’artagnan, who has a steady
hand, and will go and play in the first gaming house we come to. there!"

"let us dine, then," said porthos; "it is getting cold."

the friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the repast,
the remains of which were abandoned to mousqueton, bazin, planchet, and
grimaud.

on arriving in paris, d’artagnan found a letter from m. de treville,
which informed him that, at his request, the king had promised that he
should enter the company of the musketeers.

as this was the height of d’artagnan’s worldly ambition--apart, be it
well understood, from his desire of finding mme. bonacieux--he ran, full
of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had left only half an hour before,
but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied. they were assembled
in council at the r
 
 ___________________________
 
o walk about with his hands behind him, tossing his
head and repeating, "i shall follow up on my idea."

aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.

it may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in
the community.

the lackeys on their part, like the coursers of hippolytus, shared the
sadness of their masters. mousqueton collected a store of crusts; bazin,
who had always been inclined to devotion, never quit the churches;
planchet watched the flight of flies; and grimaud, whom the general
distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master,
heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.

the three friends--for, as we have said, athos had sworn not to stir a
foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, and returned late
at night. they wandered about the streets, looking at the pavement as if
to see whether the passengers had not left a purse behind them. they
might have been supposed to be following tracks, so observant were they
wherever th
 
 ___________________________
 
st
appetizing appearance.

he ordered him to go and saddle two horses in m. de treville’s
stables--one for himself, d’artagnan, and one for planchet--and bring
them to athos’s place. once for all, treville had placed his stable at
d’artagnan’s service.

planchet proceeded toward the rue du colombier, and d’artagnan toward
the rue ferou. athos was at home, emptying sadly a bottle of the famous
spanish wine he had brought back with him from his journey into picardy.
he made a sign for grimaud to bring a glass for d’artagnan, and grimaud
obeyed as usual.

d’artagnan related to athos all that had passed at the church between
porthos and the procurator’s wife, and how their comrade was probably by
that time in a fair way to be equipped.

"as for me," replied athos to this recital, "i am quite at my ease; it
will not be women that will defray the expense of my outfit."

"handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear athos, neither
princesses nor queens would be secure from y
 
 ___________________________
 
our amorous solicitations."

"how young this d’artagnan is!" said athos, shrugging his shoulders; and
he made a sign to grimaud to bring another bottle.

at that moment planchet put his head modestly in at the half-open door,
and told his master that the horses were ready.

"what horses?" asked athos.

"two horses that monsieur de treville lends me at my pleasure, and with
which i am now going to take a ride to st. germain."

"well, and what are you going to do at st. germain?" then demanded
athos.

then d’artagnan described the meeting which he had at the church, and
how he had found that lady who, with the seigneur 
 
 ___________________________
 
thos," said d’artagnan. "instead of shutting yourself up here
as if you were under arrest, get on horseback and come and take a ride
with me to st. germain."

"my dear fellow," said athos, "i ride horses when i have any; when i
have none, i go afoot."

"well," said d’artagnan, smiling at the misanthropy of athos, which from
any other person would have offended him, "i ride what i can get; i am
not so proud as you. so au revoir, dear athos."

"au revoir," said the musketeer, making a sign to grimaud to uncork the
bottle he had just brought.

d’artagnan and planchet mounted, and took the road to st. germain.

all along the road, what athos had said respecting mme. bonacieux
recurred to the mind of the young man. although d’artagnan was not of a
very sentimental character, the mercer’s pretty wife had made a real
impression upon his heart. as he said, he was ready to go to the end of
the world to seek her; but the world, being round, has many ends, so
that he did not know which way to 
 
 ___________________________
 
ight an englishman. we
might say that was his dream.

they immediately sent their lackeys for porthos and aramis, and on their
arrival made them acquainted with the situation.

porthos drew his sword from the scabbard, and made passes at the wall,
springing back from time to time, and making contortions like a dancer.

aramis, who was constantly at work at his poem, shut himself up in
athos’s closet, and begged not to be disturbed before the moment of
drawing swords.

athos, by signs, desired grimaud to bring another bottle of wine.

d’artagnan employed himself in arranging a little plan, of which we
shall hereafter see the execution, and which promised him some agreeable
adventure, as might be seen by the smiles which from time to time passed
over his countenance, whose thoughtfulness they animated.




31 english and french


the hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to a spot behind
the luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats. athos threw a piece of
money to the goatk
 
 ___________________________
 
en," said d’artagnan, "let us give the money to the lackeys, as lord
de winter desired us to do."

"yes," said athos; "let us give the money to the lackeys--not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the englishmen."

athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. "for
you and your comrades."

this greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
porthos; and this french generosity, repeated by lord de winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by mm grimaud, bazin, mousqueton
and planchet.

lord de winter, on quitting d’artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
she lived in the place royale--then the fashionable quarter--at number
6, and he undertook to call and take d’artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. d’artagnan appointed eight o’clock at athos’s residence.

this introduction to milady clarik occupied the head of our gascon
greatly. he remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto
been mixed up in his destiny. 
 
 ___________________________
 
y heed of
what might become of kitty he ran at full speed across half paris, and
did not stop till he came to athos’s door. the confusion of his mind,
the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who
started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him
precipitate his course.

he crossed the court, ran up the two flights to athos’s apartment, and
knocked at the door enough to break it down.

grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons,
and d’artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to
overturn the astonished lackey.

in spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his
speech.

"holloa, there!" cried he; "what do you want, you strumpet? what’s your
business here, you hussy?"

d’artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds
of the cloak. at sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor
devil perce
 
 ___________________________
 
ived he had to deal with a man. he then concluded it must be
an assassin.

"help! murder! help!" cried he.

"hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!" said the young man; "i am
d’artagnan; don’t you know me? where is your master?"

"you, monsieur d’artagnan!" cried grimaud, "impossible."

"grimaud," said athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown,
"grimaud, i thought i heard you permitting yourself to speak?"

"ah, monsieur, it is--"

"silence!"

grimaud contented himself with pointing d’artagnan out to his master
with his finger.

athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a
laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his
eyes--petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and
mustaches stiff with agitation.

"don’t laugh, my friend!" cried d’artagnan; "for heaven’s sake, don’t
laugh, for upon my soul, it’s no laughing matter!"

and he pronounced these words with such a solemn a
 
 ___________________________
 
r own
shadow."

"fortunately," said d’artagnan, "all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, i
hope, only men to dread."

"in the meantime," said athos, "i renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, i will go with you. you must return to the rue des
fossoyeurs; i will accompany you."

"but however near it may be," replied d’artagnan, "i cannot go thither
in this guise."

"that’s true," said athos, and he rang the bell.

grimaud entered.

athos made him a sign to go to d’artagnan’s residence, and bring back
some clothes. grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

"all this will not advance your outfit," said athos; "for if i am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you. fortunately,
you have the sapphire."

"the jewel is yours, my dear athos! did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?"

"yes, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ment, but even a great danger. it is not only a
valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman."

"i don’t at all understand you, but i believe all you say to be true.
let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. you shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or i will throw it into the seine;
and i doubt, as was the case with polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us."

"well, i will take it, then," said d’artagnan.

at this moment grimaud returned, accompanied by planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.

d'artagnan dressed himself, and athos did the same. when the two were
ready to go out, the latter made grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

they arrived without accident at the rue des fossoyeurs. bonacieux was
standin
 
 ___________________________
 
well for
such a little gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain, but not
for a man who had the bearing of a prince. the musketeer met with a
superb andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean and
elegant, rising six years. he examined him, and found him sound and
without blemish. they asked a thousand livres for him.

he might perhaps have been bought for less; but while d’artagnan was
discussing the price with the dealer, athos was counting out the money
on the table.

grimaud had a stout, short picard cob, which cost three hundred livres.

but when the saddle and arms for grimaud were purchased, athos had not a
sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles. d’artagnan offered his
friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.

but athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.

"how much did the jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased
it?" said athos.

"five hundred pistoles."

"that is to say, two hundred more--a h
 
 ___________________________
 
y friend; let us go back to the jew’s again."

"what! will you--"

"this ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then we
shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that
we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain. go and tell
him the ring is his, d’artagnan, and bring back the two hundred pistoles
with you."

"reflect, athos!"

"ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
make sacrifices. go, d’artagnan, go; grimaud will accompany you with his
musketoon."

a half hour afterward, d’artagnan returned with the two thousand livres,
and without having met with any accident.

it was thus athos found at home resources which he did not expect.




39 a vision


at four o’clock the four friends were all assembled with athos. their
anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared, and each countenance
only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet--for behind all
present happiness is concealed a fear fo
 
 ___________________________
 
 roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous mecklenburg horse; this was
d’artagnan’s mount.

the two musketeers met at the gate. athos and d’artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

"the devil!" cried aramis, "you have a magnificent horse there,
porthos."

"yes," replied porthos, "it is the one that ought to have been sent to
me at first. a bad joke of the husband’s substituted the other; but the
husband has been punished since, and i have obtained full satisfaction."

planchet and grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their masters’
steeds. d’artagnan and athos put themselves into saddle with their
companions, and all four set forward; athos upon a horse he owed to a
woman, aramis on a horse he owed to his mistress, porthos on a horse he
owed to his procurator’s wife, and d’artagnan on a horse he owed to his
good fortune--the best mistress possible.

the lackeys followed.

as porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good effect; and if
mme. coquenard had met port
 
 ___________________________
 
 i think there were not many intruders. yes, athos, i know what you
mean: we shall do very well at the parpaillot."

"let us go to the parpaillot, then, for here the walls are like sheets
of paper."

d’artagnan, who was accustomed to his friend’s manner of acting, and who
perceived immediately, by a word, a gesture, or a sign from him, that
the circumstances were serious, took athos’s arm, and went out without
saying anything. porthos followed, chatting with aramis.

on their way they met grimaud. athos made him a sign to come with them.
grimaud, according to custom, obeyed in silence; the poor lad had nearly
come to the pass of forgetting how to speak.

they arrived at the drinking room of the parpaillot. it was seven
o’clock in the morning, and daylight began to appear. the three friends
ordered breakfast, and went into a room in which the host said they
would not be disturbed.

unfortunately, the hour was badly chosen for a private conference. the
morning drum had just been beaten;
 
 ___________________________
 
us fix the stake."

"you are four gentlemen," said athos, "and we are four; an unlimited
dinner for eight. will that do?"

"capitally," replied m. de busigny.

"perfectly," said the dragoon.

"that shoots me," said the swiss.

the fourth auditor, who during all this conversation had played a mute
part, made a sign of the head in proof that he acquiesced in the
proposition.

"the breakfast for these gentlemen is ready," said the host.

"well, bring it," said athos.

the host obeyed. athos called grimaud, pointed to a large basket which
lay in a corner, and made a sign to him to wrap the viands up in the
napkins.

grimaud understood that it was to be a breakfast on the grass, took the
basket, packed up the viands, added the bottles, and then took the
basket on his arm.

"but where are you going to eat my breakfast?" asked the host.

"what matter, if you are paid for it?" said athos, and he threw two
pistoles majestically on the table.

"shall i give you the change, my officer?" said the host.


 
 ___________________________
 
.

"monsieur de busigny," said athos, "will you be so kind as to set your
watch with mine, or permit me to regulate mine by yours?"

"which you please, monsieur!" said the light-horseman, drawing from his
fob a very handsome watch, studded with diamonds; "half past seven."

"thirty-five minutes after seven," said athos, "by which you perceive i
am five minutes faster than you."

and bowing to all the astonished persons present, the young men took the
road to the bastion st. gervais, followed by grimaud, who carried the
basket, ignorant of where he was going but in the passive obedience
which athos had taught him not even thinking of asking.

as long as they were within the circle of the camp, the four friends did
not exchange one word; besides, they were followed by the curious, who,
hearing of the wager, were anxious to know how they would come out of
it. but when once they passed the line of circumvallation and found
themselves in the open plain, d’artagnan, who was completely ignorant of
 
 ___________________________
 
eight or ten frenchmen
were killed, and as many rochellais."

"what then?"

"the bodies were not plundered, were they? it appears the conquerors had
something else to do."

"well?"

"well, we shall find their muskets, their cartridges, and their flasks;
and instead of four musketoons and twelve balls, we shall have fifteen
guns and a hundred charges to fire."

"oh, athos!" said aramis, "truly you are a great man."

porthos nodded in sign of agreement. d’artagnan alone did not seem
convinced.

grimaud no doubt shared the misgivings of the young man, for seeing that
they continued to advance toward the bastion--something he had till then
doubted--he pulled his master by the skirt of his coat.

"where are we going?" asked he, by a gesture.

athos pointed to the bastion.

"but," said grimaud, in the same silent dialect, "we shall leave our
skins there."

athos raised his eyes and his finger toward heaven.

grimaud put his basket on the ground and sat down with a shake of the
head.

athos took a
 
 ___________________________
 
 pistol from his belt, looked to see if it was properly
primed, cocked it, and placed the muzzle close to grimaud’s ear.

grimaud was on his legs again as if by a spring. athos then made him a
sign to take up his basket and to walk on first. grimaud obeyed. all
that grimaud gained by this momentary pantomime was to pass from the
rear guard to the vanguard.

arrived at the bastion, the four friends turned round.

more than three hundred soldiers of all kinds were assembled at the gate
of the camp; and in a separate group might be distinguished m. de
busigny, the dragoon, the swiss, and the fourth bettor.

athos took off his hat, placed it on the end of his sword, and waved it
in the air.

all the spectators returned him his salute, accompanying this courtesy
with a
 
 ___________________________
 
 loud hurrah which was audible to the four; after which all four
disappeared in the bastion, whither grimaud had preceded them.




47 the council of the musketeers


as athos had foreseen, the bastion was only occupied by a dozen corpses,
french and rochellais.

"gentlemen," said athos, who had assumed the command of the expedition,
"while grimaud spreads the table, let us begin by collecting the guns
and cartridges together. we can talk while performing that necessary
task. these gentlemen," added he, pointing to the bodies, "cannot hear
us."

"but we could throw them into the ditch," said porthos, "after having
assured ourselves they have nothing in their pockets."

"yes," said athos, "that’s grimaud’s business."

"well, then," cried d’artagnan, "pray let grimaud search them and throw
them over the walls."

"heaven forfend!" said
 
 ___________________________
 
 athos; "they may serve us."

"these bodies serve us?" said porthos. "you are mad, dear friend."

"judge not rashly, say the gospel and the cardinal," replied athos. "how
many guns, gentlemen?"

"twelve," replied aramis.

"how many shots?"

"a hundred."

"that’s quite as many as we shall want. let us load the guns."

the four musketeers went to work; and as they were loading the last
musket grimaud announced that the breakfast was ready.

athos replied, always by gestures, that that was well, and indicated to
grimaud, by pointing to a turret that resembled a pepper caster, that he
was to stand as sentinel. only, to alleviate the tediousness of the
duty, athos allowed him to take a loaf, two cutlets, and a bottle of
wine.

"and now to table," said athos.

the four friends seated themselves on the ground with their legs crossed
like turks, or even tailors.

"and now," said d’artagnan, "as
 
 ___________________________
 
and all
will be over."

"that’s the last folly to be committed," said athos, "seeing it is the
only one for which there is no remedy."

"but i can never escape," said d’artagnan, "with such enemies. first, my
stranger of meung; then de wardes, to whom i have given three sword
wounds; next milady, whose secret i have discovered; finally, the
cardinal, whose vengeance i have balked."

"well," said athos, "that only makes four; and we are four--one for one.
pardieu! if we may believe the signs grimaud is making, we are about to
have to do with a very different number of people. what is it, grimaud?
considering the gravity of the occasion, i permit you to speak, my
friend; but be laconic, i beg. what do you see?"

"a troop."

"of how many persons?"

"twenty men."

"what sort of men?"

"sixteen pioneers, four soldiers."

"how far distant?"

"five hundred paces."

"good! we have just time to finish this fowl and to drink one glass of
wine to your health, d’artagnan."

"to your health!" repeat
 
 ___________________________
 
ed porthos and aramis.

"well, then, to my health! although i am very much afraid that your good
wishes will not be of great service to me."

"bah!" said athos, "god is great, as say the followers of mohammed, and
the future is in his hands."

then, swallowing the contents of his glass, which he put down close to
him, athos arose carelessly, took the musket next to him, and drew near
to one of the loopholes.

porthos, aramis and d’artagnan followed his example. as to grimaud, he
received orders to place himself behind the four friends in order to
reload their weapons.

"pardieu!" said athos, "it was hardly worth while to distribute
ourselves for twenty fellows armed with pickaxes, mattocks, and shovels.
grimaud had only to make them a sign to go away, and i am convinced they
would have left us in peace."

"i doubt that," replied d’artagnan, "for they are advancing very
resolutely. besides, in addition to the pioneers, there are four
soldiers and a brigadier, arme
 
 ___________________________
 
 france."

"take care, athos!" cried d’artagnan; "don’t you see they are aiming?"

"yes, yes," said athos; "but they are only civilians--very bad marksmen,
who will be sure not to hit me."

in fact, at the same instant four shots were fired, and the balls were
flattened against the wall around athos, but not one touched him.

four shots replied to them almost instantaneously, but much better aimed
than those of the aggressors; three soldiers fell dead, and one of the
pioneers was wounded.

"grimaud," said athos, still on the breach, "another musket!"

grimaud immediately obeyed. on their part, the three friends had
reloaded their arms; a second discharge followed the first. the
brigadier and two pioneers fell dead; the rest of the troop took to
flight.

"now, gentlemen, a sortie!" cried athos.

and the four friends rushed out of the fort, gained the field of battle,
picked up the four muskets of the privates and the half-pike of the
brigadier, and convinced that the fugitives would not st
 
 ___________________________
 
op till they
reached the city, turned again toward the bastion, bearing with them the
trophies of their victory.

"reload the muskets, grimaud," said athos, "and we, gentlemen, will go
on with our breakfast, and resume our conversation. where were we?"

"i recollect you were saying," said d’artagnan, "that after having
demanded my head of the cardinal, milady had quit the shores of france.
whither goes she?" added he, strongly interested in the route milady
followed.

"she goes into england," said athos.

"with what view?"

"with the view of assassinating, or causing to be assassinated, the duke
of buckingham."

d’artagnan uttered
 
 ___________________________
 
 an exclamation of surprise and indignation.

"but this is infamous!" cried he.

"as to that," said athos, "i beg you to believe that i care very little
about it. now you have done, grimaud, take our brigadier’s half-pike,
tie a napkin to it, and plant it on top of our bastion, that these
rebels of rochellais may see that they have to deal with brave and loyal
soldiers of the king."

grimaud obeyed without replying. an instant afterward, the white flag
was floating over the heads of the four friends. a thunder of applause
saluted its appearance; half the camp was at the barrier.

"how?" replied d’artagnan, "you care little if she kills buckingham or
causes him to be killed? but the duke is our friend."

"the duke is english; the duke fights against us. let her do what she
likes with the duke; i care no more about him than an empty bottle." and
athos threw fifteen paces from him a
 
 ___________________________
 
 confess she would
worry me if she were here."

"she worries me in england as well as in france," said athos.

"she worries me everywhere," said d’artagnan.

"but when you held her in your power, why did you not drown her,
strangle her, hang her?" said porthos. "it is only the dead who do not
return."

"you think so, porthos?" replied the musketeer, with a sad smile which
d’artagnan alone understood.

"i have an idea," said d’artagnan.

"what is it?" said the musketeers.

"to arms!" cried grimaud.

the young men sprang up, and seized their muskets.

this time a small troop advanced, consisting of from twenty to
twenty-five men; but they were not pioneers, they were soldiers of the
garrison.

"shall we return to the camp?" said porthos. "i don’t think the sides
are equal."

"impossible, for three reasons," replied athos. "the first, that we have
not finished breakfast; the second, that we still have some very
important things to say; and the third, that it yet wants ten minutes
before 
 
 ___________________________
 
 weakness of the friends, the rochellais continued to advance
in quick time.

with every three shots at least two men fell; but the march of those who
remained was not slackened.

arrived at the foot of the bastion, there were still more than a dozen
of the enemy. a last discharge welcomed them, but did not stop them;
they jumped into the ditch, and prepared to scale the breach.

"now, my friends," said athos, "finish them at a blow. to the wall; to
the wall!"

and the four friends, seconded by grimaud, pushed with the barrels of
their muskets an enormous sheet of the wall, which bent as if pushed by
the wind, and detaching itself from its base, fell with a horrible crash
into the ditch. then a fearful crash was heard; a cloud of dust mounted
toward the sky--and all was over!

"can we have destroyed them all, from the first to the last?" said
athos.

"my faith, it appears so!" said d’artagnan.

"no," cried porthos; "there go three or four, limping away."

in fact, three or four of these unf
 
 ___________________________
 
 the precaution to
bring a dozen more bottles of wine."

"upon my word, the drum draws near," said d’artagnan.

"let it come," said athos. "it is a quarter of an hour’s journey from
here to the city, consequently a quarter of an hour’s journey from the
city to hither. that is more than time enough for us to devise a plan.
if we go from this place we shall never find another so suitable. ah,
stop! i have it, gentlemen; the right idea has just occurred to me."

"tell us."

"allow me to give grimaud some indispensable orders."

athos made a sign for his lackey to approach.

"grimaud," said athos, pointing to the bodies which lay under the wall
of the bastion, "take those gentlemen, set them up against the wall, put
their hats upon their heads, and their guns in their hands."

"oh, the great man!" cried d’artagnan. "i comprehend now."

"you comprehend?" said porthos.

"and do you comprehend, grimaud?" said aramis.

grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.

"that’s all that is necessary,"
 
 ___________________________
 
ss."

"yes, yes! athos’s idea!" cried aramis and d’artagnan, at the same time.

"this milady, this woman, this creature, this demon, has a
brother-in-law, as i think you told me, d’artagnan?"

"yes, i know him very well; and i also believe that he has not a very
warm affection for his sister-in-law."

"there is no harm in that. if he detested her, it would be all the
better," replied athos.

"in that case we are as well off as we wish."

"and yet," said porthos, "i would like to know what grimaud is about."

"silence, porthos!" said aramis.

"what is her brother-in-law’s name?"

"lord de winter."

"where is he now?"

"he returned to london at the first sound of war."

"well, there’s just the man we want," said athos. "it is he whom we must
warn. we will have him informed that his sister-in-law is on the point
of having someone assassinated, and beg him not to lose sight of her.
there is in london, i hope, some establishment like that of the
magdalens, or of the repentant daughters. 
 
 ___________________________
 

aramis. "give the lackeys money, and they will start."

"we will give them money?" replied athos. "have you any money?"

the four friends looked at one another, and a cloud came over the brows
which but lately had been so cheerful.

"look out!" cried d’artagnan, "i see black points and red points moving
yonder. why did you talk of a regiment, athos? it is a veritable army!"

"my faith, yes," said athos; "there they are. see the sneaks come,
without drum or trumpet. ah, ah! have you finished, grimaud?"

grimaud made a sign in the affirmative, and pointed to a dozen bodies
which he had set up in the most picturesque attitudes. some carried
arms, others seemed to be taking aim, and the remainder appeared merely
to be sword in hand.

"bravo!" said athos; "that does honor to your imagination."

"all very well," said porthos, "but i should like to understand."

"let us decamp first, and you will understand afterward."

"a moment, gentlemen, a moment; give grimaud time to clear away the
breakfast
 
 ___________________________
 
."

"ah, ah!" said aramis, "the black points and the red points are visibly
enlarging. i am of d’artagnan’s opinion; we have no time to lose in
regaining our camp."

"my faith," said athos, "i have nothing to say against a retreat. we bet
upon one hour, and we have stayed an hour and a half. nothing can be
said; let us be off, gentlemen, let us be off!"

grimaud was already ahead, with the basket and the dessert. the four
friends followed, ten paces behind him.

"what the devil shall we do now, gentlemen?" cried athos.

"have you forgotten anything?" said aramis.

"the white flag, morbleu! we must not leave a flag in the hands of the
enemy, even if that flag be but a napkin."

and athos ran back to the bastion, mounted the platform, and bore off
the flag; but as the rochellais had arrived within musket range, they
opened a terrible fire upon this man, 
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and three balls, by passing
through it, made the napkin really a flag. cries were heard from the
camp, "come down! come down!"

athos came down; his friends, who anxiously awaited him, saw him
returned with joy.

"come along, athos, come along!" cried d’artagnan; "now we have found
everything except money, it would be stupid to be killed."

but athos continued to march majestically, whatever remarks his
companions made; and they, finding their remarks useless, regulated
their pace by his.

grimaud and his basket were far in advance, out of the range of the
balls.

at the end of an instant they heard a furious fusillade.

"what’s that?" asked porthos, "what are they firing at now? i hear no
balls whistle, and i see nobody!"

"they are firing at the corpses," replied athos.

"but the dead cannot return their fire."

"certainly not! they will then fancy it is an ambuscade, they will
deliberate; and by the time they have found out the pleasantry, we shall
be out of the range of their balls
 
 ___________________________
 
ld meet again in the
evening at athos’s lodging, and there finish their plans.

d’artagnan passed the day in exhibiting his musketeer’s uniform in every
street of the camp.

in the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met. there only
remained three things to decide--what they should write to milady’s
brother; what they should write to the clever person at tours; and which
should be the lackeys to carry the letters.

everyone offered his own. athos talked of the discretion of grimaud, who
never spoke a word but when his master unlocked his mouth. porthos
boasted of the strength of mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four
men of ordinary size. aramis, confiding in the address of bazin, made a
pompous eulogium on his candidate. finally, d’artagnan had entire faith
in the bravery of planchet, and reminded them of the manner in which he
had conducted himself in the ticklish affair of boulogne.

these four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time, and gave
birth to
 
 ___________________________
 
 magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they
should be deemed too long.

"unfortunately," said athos, "he whom we send must possess in himself
alone the four qualities united."

"but where is such a lackey to be found?"

"not to be found!" cried athos. "i know it well, so take grimaud."

"take mousqueton."

"take bazin."

"take planchet. planchet is brave and shrewd; they are two qualities out
of the four."

"gentlemen," said aramis, "the principal question is not to know which
of our four lackeys is the most discreet, the most strong, the most
clever, or the most brave; the principal thing is to know which loves
money the best."

"what aramis says is very sensible," replied athos; "we must speculate
upon the faults of people, and not upon their virtues. monsieur abbe,
you a
 
 ___________________________
 
that
will reduce the sum to five thousand livres. we will each take a
thousand livres to be employed as seems good, and we will leave a fund
of a thousand livres under the guardianship of monsieur abbe here, for
extraordinary occasions or common wants. will that do?"

"my dear athos," said aramis, "you speak like nestor, who was, as
everyone knows, the wisest among the greeks."

"well, then," said athos, "it is agreed. planchet and bazin shall go.
everything considered, i am not sorry to retain grimaud; he is
accustomed to my ways, and i am particular. yesterday’s affair must have
shaken him a little; his voyage would upset him quite."

planchet was sent for, and instructions were given him. the matter had
been named to him by d’artagnan, who in the first place pointed out the
money to him, then the glory, and then the danger.

"i will carry the letter in the lining of my coat," said planchet; "and
if i am taken i will swallow it."

"well, but then you will not be able to fulfill your com
 
 ___________________________
 
that the three others were those
called the inseparables; that is to say, athos, porthos, and aramis.

it may be supposed that his desire to hear the conversation was
augmented by this discovery. his eyes took a strange expression, and
with the step of a tiger-cat he advanced toward the hedge; but he had
not been able to catch more than a few vague syllables without any
positive sense, when a sonorous and short cry made him start, and
attracted the attention of the musketeers.

"officer!" cried grimaud.

"you are speaking, you scoundrel!" said athos, rising upon his elbow,
and transfixing grimaud with his flaming look.

grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech, but contented himself
with pointing his index finger in the direction of the hedge, announcing
by this gesture the cardinal and his escort.

with a single bound the musketeers were on their feet, and saluted with
respect.

the cardinal seemed furious.

"it appears that messieurs the musketeers keep guard," said he. "are the
englis
 
 ___________________________
 
d them with
his hand, and rode away.

the four young men, standing and motionless, followed him with their
eyes without speaking a single word until he had disappeared. then they
looked at one another.

the countenances of all gave evidence of terror, for notwithstanding the
friendly adieu of his eminence, they plainly perceived that the cardinal
went away with rage in his heart.

athos alone smiled, with a self-possessed, disdainful smile.

when the cardinal was out of hearing and sight, "that grimaud kept bad
watch!" cried porthos, who had a great inclination to vent his ill-humor
on somebody.

grimaud was about to reply to excuse himself. athos lifted his finger,
and grimaud was silent.

"would you have given up the letter, aramis?" said d’artagnan.

"i," said aramis, in his most flutelike tone, "i had made up my mind. if
he had insisted upon the letter being given up to him, i would have
presented the letter to him with one hand, and with the other i would
have run my sword through his 
 
 ___________________________
 
all religions! all the
same," resumed he, after having clicked his tongue against his palate,
"they are brave fellows! but what the devil are you about, aramis?"
continued athos. "why, you are squeezing that letter into your pocket!"

"yes," said d’artagnan, "athos is right, it must be burned. and yet if
we burn it, who knows whether monsieur cardinal has not a secret to
interrogate ashes?"

"he must have one," said athos.

"what will you do with the letter, then?" asked porthos.

"come here, grimaud," said athos. grimaud rose and obeyed. "as a
punishment for having spoken without permission, my friend, you will
please to eat this piece of paper; then to recompense you for the
service you will have rendered us, you shall afterward drink this glass
of wine. first, here is the letter. eat heartily."

grimaud smiled; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass which athos held
in his hand, he ground the paper well between his teeth and then
swallowed it.

"bravo, monsieur grimaud!" said athos; "and
 
 ___________________________
 
 now take this. that’s well.
we dispense with your saying grace."

grimaud silently swallowed the glass of bordeaux wine; but his eyes,
raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation, spoke a language
which, though mute, was not the less expressive.

"and now," said athos, "unless monsieur cardinal should form the
ingenious idea of ripping up grimaud, i think we may be pretty much at
our ease respecting the letter."

meantime, his eminence continued his melancholy ride, murmuring between
his mustaches, "these four men must positively be mine."




52 captivity: the first day


let us return to milady, whom a glance thrown upon the coast of france
has made us lose sight of for an instant.

we shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we left her,
plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection--a dark hell at the gate of
which she ha
 
 ___________________________
 
spair of athos had given place to a concentrated grief which only
rendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinary
man.

possessed by one single thought--that of the promise he had made, and of
the responsibility he had taken--he retired last to his chamber, begged
the host to procure him a map of the province, bent over it, examined
every line traced upon it, perceived that there were four different
roads from bethune to armentieres, and summoned the lackeys.

planchet, grimaud, bazin, and mousqueton presented themselves, and
received clear, positive, and serious orders from athos.

they must set out the next morning at daybreak, and go to
armentieres--each by a different route. planchet, the most intelligent
of the four, was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon
which the four friends had fired, and which was accompanied, as may be
remembered, by rochefort’s servant.

athos set the lackeys to work first because, since these men had been in
the service 
 
 ___________________________
 
rrents of rain.

d’artagnan took off his hat, and could not be persuaded to make use of
his cloak. he found pleasure in feeling the water trickle over his
burning brow and over his body, agitated by feverish shudders.

the moment the little troop passed goskal and were approaching the post,
a man sheltered beneath a tree detached himself from the trunk with
which he had been confounded in the darkness, and advanced into the
middle of the road, putting his finger on his lips.

athos recognized grimaud.

"what’s the manner?" cried athos. "has she left armentieres?"

grimaud made a sign in the affirmative. d’artagnan ground his teeth.

"silence, d’artagnan!" said athos. "i have charged myself with this
affair. it is for me, then, to interrogate grimaud."

"where is she?" asked athos.

grimaud extended his hands in the direction of the lys. "far from here?"
asked athos.

grimaud showed his master his forefinger bent.

"alone?" asked athos.

grimaud made the sign yes.

"gentlemen," said at
 
 ___________________________
 
hos, "she is alone within half a league of us, in
the direction of the river."

"that’s well," said d’artagnan. "lead us, grimaud."

grimaud took his course across the country, and acted as guide to the
cavalcade.

at the end of five hundred paces, more or less, they came to a rivulet,
which they forded.

by the aid of the lightning they perceived the village of erquinheim.

"is she there, grimaud?" asked athos.

grimaud shook his head negatively.

"silence, then!" cried athos.

and the troop continued their route.

another flash illuminated all around them. grimaud extended his arm, and
by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished a little
isolated house on the banks of the river, within a hundred paces of a
ferry.

one window was lighted.

"here we are!" said athos.

at this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up and
came towards them. it was mousqueton. he pointed his fing
 
 ___________________________
 
er to the
lighted window.

"she is there," said he.

"and bazin?" asked athos.

"while i watched the window, he guarded the door."

"good!" said athos. "you are good and faithful servants."

athos sprang from his horse, gave the bridle to grimaud, and advanced
toward the window, after having made a sign to the rest of the troop to
go toward the door.

the little house was surrounded by a low, quickset hedge, two or three
feet high. athos sprang over the hedge and went up to the window, which
was without shutters, but had the half-curtains closely drawn.

he mounted the skirting stone that his eyes might look over the curtain.

by the light of a lamp he saw a woman, wrapped in a dark mantle, seated
upon a stool near a dying fire. her elb
 
 ___________________________
 
amis
walked behind the executioner. planchet and bazin came last.

the two lackeys conducted milady to the bank of the river. her mouth was
mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence,
supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.

being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, "a thousand
pistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if you
deliver me up to your masters, i have near at hand avengers who will
make you pay dearly for my death."

grimaud hesitated. mousqueton trembled in all his members.

athos, who heard milady’s voice, came sharply up. lord de winter did the
same.

"change these lackeys," said he; "she has spoken to them. they are no
longer sure."

planchet and bazin were called, and took the places of grimaud and
mousqueton.

on the bank of the river the executioner approached milady, and bound
her hands and feet.

then she broke the silence to cry out, "you are cowards, miserable
assassins--ten men combined to murder one 
 
 ___________________________
 
nce, and
ceased to write to his friends; they learned at a later period through
mme. de chevreuse, who told it to two or three of her intimates, that,
yielding to his vocation, he had retired into a convent--only into
which, nobody knew.

bazin became a lay brother.

athos remained a musketeer under the command of d’artagnan till the year
1633, at which period, after a journey he made to touraine, he also quit
the service, under the pretext of having inherited a small property in
roussillon.

grimaud followed athos.

d’artagnan fought three times with rochefort, and wounded him three
times.

"i shall probably kill you the fourth," said he to him, holding out his
hand to assist him to rise.

"it is much better both for you and for me to stop where we are,"
answered the wounded man. "corbleu--i am more your friend than you
think--for after our very first encounter, i could by saying a word to
the cardinal have had your throat cut!"

they this time embraced heartily, and without retaining an