, toward the
hotel of m. de treville.

they walked arm in arm, occupying the whole width of the street and
taking in every musketeer they met, so that in the end it became a
triumphal march. the heart of d’artagnan swam in delirium; he marched
between athos and porthos, pressing them tenderly.

"if i am not yet a musketeer," said he to his new friends, as he passed
through the gateway of m. de treville’s hotel, "at least i have entered
upon my apprenticeship, haven’t i?"




6 his majesty king louis xiii


this affair made a great noise. m. de treville scolded his musketeers in
public, and congratulated them in private; but as no time was to be lost
in gaining the king, m. de treville hastened to report himself at the
louvre. it was already too late. the king was closeted with the
cardinal, and m. de treville was informed that the king was busy and
could not receive him at that moment. in the evening m. de treville
attended the king’s gaming table. the king was winning; and as he was
very ava
 
 ___________________________
 
le, with his charming, melancholy smile, which so
became his noble countenance, and porthos would drink, swearing that
aramis would never be anything but a village cure.

planchet, d’artagnan’s valet, supported his good fortune nobly. he
received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned to his
lodgings gay as a chaffinch, and affable toward his master. when the
wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping of the rue des
fossoyeurs--that is to say, when the forty pistoles of king louis xiii
were consumed or nearly so--he commenced complaints which athos thought
nauseous, porthos indecent, and aramis ridiculous. athos counseled
d’artagnan to dismiss the fellow; porthos was of the opinion that he
should give him a good thrashing first; and aramis contended that a
master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.

"this is all very easy for you to say," replied d’artagnan, "for you,
athos, who live like a dumb man with grimaud, who forbid him to speak,
and co
 
 ___________________________
 
ty should present itself
for d’artagnan to render the king any signal service, or to distinguish
himself by some brilliant action. upon this promise d’artagnan withdrew,
and the next day he began service.

then it became the turn of athos, porthos, and aramis to mount guard
with d’artagnan when he was on duty. the company of m. le chevalier
dessessart thus received four instead of one when it admitted
d’artagnan.




8 concerning a court intrigue


in the meantime, the forty pistoles of king louis xiii, like all other
things of this world, after having had a beginning had an end, and after
this end our four companions began to be somewhat embarrassed. at first,
athos supported the association for a time with his own means.

porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearances to
which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wants of all for
a fortnight. at last it became aramis’s turn, who performed it with a
good grace and who succeeded--as he said, by selling some th