e glorious musketeer had picked up
on the bridge tournelle, making rings and plashing in the water.

porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflective and
contemplative organization, and he had brought him away without any
other recommendation. the noble carriage of this gentleman, for whom he
believed himself to be engaged, had won planchet--that was the name of
the picard. he felt a slight disappointment, however, when he saw that
this place was already taken by a compeer named mousqueton, and when
porthos signified to him that the state of his household, though great,
would not support two servants, and that he must enter into the service
of d’artagnan. nevertheless, when he waited at the dinner given by his
master, and saw him take out a handful of gold to pay for it, he
believed his fortune made, and returned thanks to heaven for having
thrown him into the service of such a croesus. he preserved this opinion
even after the feast, with the remnants of which he repaired his o
 
 ___________________________
 
he second rank.
porthos consoled himself by filling the antechamber of m. de treville
and the guardroom of the louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes,
after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies, from
the lawyer’s dame to the baroness, there was question of nothing less
with porthos than a foreign princess, who was enormously fond of him.

an old proverb says, "like master, like man." let us pass, then, from
the valet of athos to the valet of porthos, from grimaud to mousqueton.

mousqueton was a norman, whose pacific name of boniface his master had
changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of mousqueton. he had
entered the service of porthos upon condition that he should only be
clothed and lodged, though in a handsome manner; but he claimed two
hours a day to himself, consecrated to an employment which would provide
for his other wants. porthos agreed to the bargain; the thing suited him
wonderfully well. he had doublets cut out of his old clothes and
cast-off 
 
 ___________________________
 
cloaks for mousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent tailor,
who made his clothes look as good as new by turning them, and whose wife
was suspected of wishing to make porthos descend from his aristocratic
habits, mousqueton made a very good figure when attending on his master.

as for aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explained the
character--a character which, like that of his companions, we shall be
able to follow in its development--his lackey was called bazin. thanks
to the hopes which his master entertained of someday entering into
orders, he was always clothed in black, as became the servant of a
churchman. he was a berrichon, thirty-five or forty years old, mild,
peaceable, sleek, employing th
 
 ___________________________
 
ormed a middle ornament to the mantelpiece,
and assorted badly with the rest of the furniture. athos always carried
the key of this coffer about him; but he one day opened it before
porthos, and porthos was convinced that this coffer contained nothing
but letters and papers--love letters and family papers, no doubt.

porthos lived in an apartment, large in size and of very sumptuous
appearance, in the rue du vieux-colombier. every time he passed with a
friend before his windows, at one of which mousqueton was sure to be
placed in full livery, porthos raised his head and his hand, and said,
"that is my abode!" but he was never to be found at home; he never
invited anybody to go up with him, and no one could form an idea of what
his sumptuous apartment contained in the shape of real riches.

as to aramis, he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir, an
eating room, and a bedroom, which room, situated, as the others were, on
the ground floor, looked out upon a little fresh green garden, shad
 
 ___________________________
 
d’artagnan to dismiss the fellow; porthos was of the opinion that he
should give him a good thrashing first; and aramis contended that a
master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.

"this is all very easy for you to say," replied d’artagnan, "for you,
athos, who live like a dumb man with grimaud, who forbid him to speak,
and consequently never exchange ill words with him; for you, porthos,
who carry matters in such a magnificent style, and are a god to your
valet, mousqueton; and for you, aramis, who, always abstracted by your
theological studies, inspire your servant, bazin, a mild, religious man,
with a profound respect; but for me, who am without any settled means
and without resources--for me, who am neither a musketeer nor even a
guardsman, what am i to do to inspire either the affection, the terror,
or the respect in planchet?"

"this is serious," answered the three friends; "it is a family affair.
it is with valets as with wives, they must be placed at once 
 
 ___________________________
 
so let us go and get killed
where we are told to go. is life worth the trouble of so many questions?
d’artagnan, i am ready to follow you."

"and i also," said porthos.

"and i also," said aramis. "and, indeed, i am not sorry to quit paris; i
had need of distraction."

"well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured," said
d’artagnan.

"and, now, when are we to go?" asked athos.

"immediately," replied d’artagnan; "we have not a minute to lose."

"hello, grimaud! planchet! mousqueton! bazin!" cried the four young men,
calling their lackeys, "clean my boots, and fetch the horses from the
hotel."

each musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel, as at a
barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey. planchet, grimaud,
mousqueton, and bazin set off at full speed.

"now let us lay down the plan of campaign," said porthos. "where do we
go first?"

"to calais," said d’artagnan; "that is the most direct line to london."

"well," said porthos, "this is my advice--"

"
 
 ___________________________
 
ng
half his cloak to a poor man. they ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle
the horses, and to hold themselves in readiness to set off again
immediately.

they entered the common hall, and placed themselves at table. a
gentleman, who had just arrived by the route of dammartin, was seated at
the same table, and was breakfasting. he opened the conversation about
rain and fine weather; the travelers replied. he drank to their good
health, and the travelers returned his politeness.

but at the moment mousqueton came to announce that the horses were
ready, and they were arising from table, the stranger proposed to
porthos to drink the health of the cardinal. porthos replied that he
asked no better if the stranger, in his turn, would drink the health of
the king. the stranger cried that he acknowledged no other king but his
eminence. porthos called him drunk, and the stranger drew his sword.

"you have committed a piece of folly," said athos, "but it can’t be
helped; there is no drawing back. kill the
 
 ___________________________
 
 with this artificial mortar,
apostrophized them rather sharply. athos wished to restrain him, but it
was too late. the laborers began to jeer the travelers and by their
insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the cool athos, who urged on
his horse against one of them.

then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch, from which each
took a concealed musket; the result was that our seven travelers were
outnumbered in weapons. aramis received a ball which passed through his
shoulder, and mousqueton another ball which lodged in the fleshy part
which prolongs the lower portion of the loins. therefore mousqueton
alone fell from his horse, not because he was severely wounded, but not
being able to see the wound, he judged it to be more serious than it
really was.

"it was an ambuscade!" shouted d’artagnan. "don’t waste a charge!
forward!"

aramis, wounded as he was, seized the mane of his horse, which carried
him on with the others. mousqueton’s horse rejoined them, and galloped
by the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 door; but as planchet awoke in an instant and
cried, "who goes there?" somebody replied that he was mistaken, and went
away.

at four o’clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in the
stables. grimaud had tried to waken the stable boys, and the stable boys
had beaten him. when they opened the window, they saw the poor lad lying
senseless, with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork.

planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle the horses; but
the horses were all used up. mousqueton’s horse which had traveled for
five or six hours without a rider the day before, might have been able
to pursue the journey; but by an inconceivable error the veterinary
surgeon, who had been sent for, as it appeared, to bleed one of the
host’s horses, had bled mousqueton’s.

this began to be annoying. all these successive accidents were perhaps
the result of chance; but they might be the fruits of a plot. athos and
d’artagnan went out, while planchet was sent to inquire if there were
n
 
 ___________________________
 
 me by saying you were
not yet gone. the falsehood would then lie at my door, and as i am not a
gentleman, i may be allowed to lie."

"be of good heart, planchet, you shall preserve your reputation as a
veracious man. in a quarter of an hour we set off."

"that’s the advice i was about to give monsieur; and where are we going,
may i ask, without being too curious?"

"pardieu! in the opposite direction to that which you said i was gone.
besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of grimaud, mousqueton,
and bazin as i am to know what has become of athos, porthos, and
aramis?"

"yes, monsieur," said planchet, "and i will go as soon as you please.
indeed, i think provincial air will suit us much better just now than
the air of paris. so then--"

"so then, pack up our luggage, planchet, and let us be off. on my part,
i will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothing may be
suspected. you may join me at the hotel des gardes. by the way,
planchet, i think you are right with respect to our ho
 
 ___________________________
 
d,
i thought proper to insist; but without even giving himself the trouble
to enter into any discussion with me, he took one of his pistols, laid
it on his table, day and night, and said that at the first word that
should be spoken to him about removing, either within the house or out
of it, he would blow out the brains of the person who should be so
imprudent as to meddle with a matter which only concerned himself. since
that time, monsieur, nobody entered his chamber but his servant."

"what! mousqueton is here, then?"

"oh, yes, monsieur. five days after your departure, he came back, and in
a very bad condition, too. it appears that he had met with
disagreeableness, likewise, on his journey. unfortunately, he is more
nimble than his master; so that for the sake of his master, he puts us
all under his feet, and as he thinks we might refuse what he asked for,
he takes all he wants without asking at all."

"the fact is," said d’artagnan, "i have always observed a great degree
of intelligence a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd devotedness in mousqueton."

"that is possible, monsieur; but suppose i should happen to be brought
in contact, even four times a year, with such intelligence and
devotedness--why, i should be a ruined man!"

"no, for porthos will pay you."

"hum!" said the host, in a doubtful tone.

"the favorite of a great lady will not be allowed to be inconvenienced
for such a paltry sum as he owes you."

"if i durst say what i believe on that head--"

"what you believe?"

"i ought rather to say, what i know."

"what you know?"

"an
 
 ___________________________
 
devil as he appears."

saying these words, d’artagnan went upstairs, leaving his host a little
better satisfied with respect to two things in which he appeared to be
very much interested--his debt and his life.

at the top of the stairs, upon the most conspicuous door of the
corridor, was traced in black ink a gigantic number "1." d’artagnan
knocked, and upon the bidding to come in which came from inside, he
entered the chamber.

porthos was in bed, and was playing a game at lansquenet with
mousqueton, to keep his hand in; while a spit loaded with partridges was
turning before the fire, and on each side of a large chimneypiece, over
two chafing dishes, were boiling two stewpans, from which exhaled a
double odor of rabbit and fish stews, rejoicing to the smell. in
addition to this he perceived that the top of a wardrobe and the marble
of a commode were covered with empty bottles.

at the sight of his friend, porthos uttered a loud cry of joy; and
mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his p
 
 ___________________________
 
d to turn both him and his
bill out of the door; so that i am here something in the fashion of a
conqueror, holding my position, as it were, my conquest. so you see,
being in constant fear of being forced from that position, i am armed to
the teeth."

"and yet," said d’artagnan, laughing, "it appears to me that from time
to time you must make sorties." and he again pointed to the bottles and
the stewpans.

"not i, unfortunately!" said porthos. "this miserable strain confines me
to my bed; but mousqueton forages, and brings in provisions. friend
mousqueton, you see that we have a reinforcement, and we must have an
increase of supplies."

"mousqueton," said d’artagnan, "you must render me a service."

"what, monsieur?"

"you must give your recipe to planchet. i may be besieged in my turn,
and i shall not be sorry for him to be able to let me enjoy the same
advantages with which you gratify your master."

"lord, monsieur! there is nothing more easy," said mousqueton, with a
modest air. "one onl
 
 ___________________________
 
his worthy man?" asked d’artagnan.

"oh, of the most unfortunate kind, monsieur. one day he was surprised in
a lonely road between a huguenot and a catholic, with both of whom he
had before had business, and who both knew him again; so they united
against him and hanged him on a tree. then they came and boasted of
their fine exploit in the cabaret of the next village, where my brother
and i were drinking."

"and what did you do?" said d’artagnan.

"we let them tell their story out," replied mousqueton. "then, as in
leaving the cabaret they took different directions, my brother went and
hid himself on the road of the catholic, and i on that of the huguenot.
two hours after, all was over; we had done the business of both,
admiring the foresight of our poor father, who had taken the precaution
to bring each of us up in a different religion."

"well, i must allow, as you say, your father was a very intelligent
fellow. and you say in his leisure moments the worthy man was a
poacher?"

"yes, monsi
 
 ___________________________
 
uns; and while reclining on the banks of his
highness’s pieces of water, i slipped a few lines into his fish ponds.
so that now, thanks be to god, we do not want, as monsieur can testify,
for partridges, rabbits, carp or eels--all light, wholesome food,
suitable for the sick."

"but the wine," said d’artagnan, "who furnishes the wine? your host?"

"that is to say, yes and no."

"how yes and no?"

"he furnishes it, it is true, but he does not know that he has that
honor."

"explain yourself, mousqueton; your conversation is full of instructive
things."

"that is it, monsieur. it has so chanced that i met with a spaniard in
my peregrinations who had seen many countries, and among them the new
world."

"what connection can the new world have with the bottles which are on
the commode and the wardrobe?"

"patience, monsieur, everything will come in its turn."

"this spaniard had in his service a lackey who had accompanied him in
his voyage to mexico. this lackey was my compatriot; and we became t
 
 ___________________________
 
es him; only this cellar has a ventilating
hole. now through this ventilating hole i throw my lasso, and as i now
know in which part of the cellar is the best wine, that’s my point for
sport. you see, monsieur, what the new world has to do with the bottles
which are on the commode and the wardrobe. now, will you taste our wine,
and without prejudice say what you think of it?"

"thank you, my friend, thank you; unfortunately, i have just
breakfasted."

"well," said porthos, "arrange the table, mousqueton, and while we
breakfast, d’artagnan will relate to us what has happened to him during
the ten days since he left us."

"willingly," said d’artagnan.

while porthos and mousqueton were breakfasting, with the appetites of
convalescents and with that brotherly cordiality which unites men in
misfortune, d’artagnan related how aramis, being wounded, was obliged to
stop at crevecoeur, how he had left athos fighting at amiens with four
men who accused him of being a coiner, and how he, d’artag
 
 ___________________________
 
o continue his researches. for the rest, as he reckoned upon
returning by the same route in seven or eight days, if porthos were
still at the great st. martin, he would call for him on his way.

porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would not permit him
to depart yet awhile. besides, it was necessary he should stay at
chantilly to wait for the answer from his duchess.

d’artagnan wished that answer might be prompt and favorable; and having
again recommended porthos to the care of mousqueton, and paid his bill
to the host, he resumed his route with planchet, already relieved of one
of his led horses.




26 aramis and his thesis


d’artagnan had said nothing to porthos of his wound or of his
procurator’s wife. our bearnais was a prudent lad, however young he
might be. consequently he had appeared to believe all that the
vainglorious musketeer had told him, convinced that no friendship will
hold out against a surprised secret. besides, we feel always a sort of
mental superiority
 
 ___________________________
 
placed bazin in the cart with his comrades, and they set
forward to join porthos.

they found him up, less pale than when d’artagnan left him after his
first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he was alone, was
spread enough for four persons. this dinner consisted of meats nicely
dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit.

"ah, pardieu!" said he, rising, "you come in the nick of time,
gentlemen. i was just beginning the soup, and you will dine with me."

"oh, oh!" said d’artagnan, "mousqueton has not caught these bottles with
his lasso. besides, here is a piquant fricandeau and a fillet of beef."

"i am recruiting myself," said porthos, "i am recruiting myself. nothing
weakens a man more than these devilish strains. did you ever suffer from
a strain, athos?"

"never! though i remember, in our affair of the rue ferou, i received a
sword wound which at the end of fifteen or eighteen days produced the
same effect."

"but this dinner was not intended for you alone, porthos?" said aramis
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"no," said porthos, "i expected some gentlemen of the neighborhood, who
have just sent me word they could not come. you will take their places
and i shall not lose by the exchange. hola, mousqueton, seats, and order
double the bottles!"

"do you know what we are eating here?" said athos, at the end of ten
minutes.

"pardieu!" replied d’artagnan, "for my part, i am eating veal garnished
with shrimps and vegetables."

"and i some lamb chops," said porthos.

"and i a plain chicken," said aramis.

"you are all mistaken, gentlemen," answered athos, gravely; "you are
eating horse."

"eating what?" said d’artagnan.

"horse!" said aramis, with a grimace of disgust.

porthos alone made no repl
 
 ___________________________
 
es of it in the wagon with the
lackeys. that has weakened my purse."

"and i," said aramis, "imagined that i had given almost my last sou to
the church of montdidier and the jesuits of amiens, with whom i had made
engagements which i ought to have kept. i have ordered masses for
myself, and for you, gentlemen, which will be said, gentlemen, for which
i have not the least doubt you will be marvelously benefited."

"and i," said porthos, "do you think my strain cost me nothing?--without
reckoning mousqueton’s wound, for which i had to have the surgeon twice
a day, and who charged me double on account of that foolish mousqueton
having allowed himself a ball in a part which people generally only show
to an apothecary; so i advised him to try never to get wounded there any
more."

"ay, ay!" said athos, exchanging a smile with d’artagnan and aramis, "it
is very clear you acted nobly with regard to the poor lad; that is like
a good master."

"in short," said porthos, "when all my expenses are paid,
 
 ___________________________
 
orses of our lackeys we will make two for the
masters, for which we will draw lots. with the four hundred livres we
will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and then we will
give the turnings out of our pockets to d’artagnan, who has a steady
hand, and will go and play in the first gaming house we come to. there!"

"let us dine, then," said porthos; "it is getting cold."

the friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the repast,
the remains of which were abandoned to mousqueton, bazin, planchet, and
grimaud.

on arriving in paris, d’artagnan found a letter from m. de treville,
which informed him that, at his request, the king had promised that he
should enter the company of the musketeers.

as this was the height of d’artagnan’s worldly ambition--apart, be it
well understood, from his desire of finding mme. bonacieux--he ran, full
of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had left only half an hour before,
but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied. they were
 
 ___________________________
 
 happen. it will
then be said of me that i died for the king; so that i shall have
performed my duty without the expense of an outfit."

porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him, tossing his
head and repeating, "i shall follow up on my idea."

aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.

it may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in
the community.

the lackeys on their part, like the coursers of hippolytus, shared the
sadness of their masters. mousqueton collected a store of crusts; bazin,
who had always been inclined to devotion, never quit the churches;
planchet watched the flight of flies; and grimaud, whom the general
distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master,
heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.

the three friends--for, as we have said, athos had sworn not to stir a
foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, and returned late
at night. they wandered about the streets, looking at the pavement as if
 
 ___________________________
 
s imperial, which always
announced on his part the most triumphant resolutions. as d’artagnan
took some precautions to conceal himself, porthos believed he had not
been seen. d’artagnan entered behind him. porthos went and leaned
against the side of a pillar. d’artagnan, still unperceived, supported
himself against the other side.

there happened to be a sermon, which made the church very full of
people. porthos took advantage of this circumstance to ogle the women.
thanks to the cares of mousqueton, the exterior was far from announcing
the distress of the interior. his hat was a little napless, his feather
was a little faded, his gold lace was a little tarnished, his laces were
a trifle frayed; but in the obscurity of the church these things were
not seen, and porthos was still the handsome porthos.

d’artagnan observed, on the bench nearest to the pillar against which
porthos leaned, a sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow and rather dry, but
erect and haughty under her black hood. the ey
 
 ___________________________
 
tagnan, "let us give the money to the lackeys, as lord
de winter desired us to do."

"yes," said athos; "let us give the money to the lackeys--not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the englishmen."

athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. "for
you and your comrades."

this greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
porthos; and this french generosity, repeated by lord de winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by mm grimaud, bazin, mousqueton
and planchet.

lord de winter, on quitting d’artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
she lived in the place royale--then the fashionable quarter--at number
6, and he undertook to call and take d’artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. d’artagnan appointed eight o’clock at athos’s residence.

this introduction to milady clarik occupied the head of our gascon
greatly. he remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto
been mixed up in his destiny. according to his co
 
 ___________________________
 
 on the morrow and the day after that, and each day
milady gave him a more gracious reception.

every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, he met the pretty soubrette. but, as we have said, d’artagnan
paid no attention to this persistence of poor kitty.




32 a procurator’s dinner


however brilliant had been the part played by porthos in the duel, it
had not made him forget the dinner of the procurator’s wife.

on the morrow he received the last touches of mousqueton’s brush for an
hour, and took his way toward the rue aux ours with the steps of a man
who was doubly in favor with fortune.

his heart beat, but not like d’artagnan’s with a young and impatient
love. no; a more material interest stirred his blood. he was about at
last to pass that mysterious threshold, to climb those unknown stairs by
which, one by one, the old crowns of m. coquenard had ascended. he was
about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had twenty times
beheld the imag
 
 ___________________________
 
o his pocket.

"then," continued he, "there is a horse for my lackey, and my valise. as
to my arms, it is useless to trouble you about them; i have them."

"a horse for your lackey?" resumed the procurator’s wife, hesitatingly;
"but that is doing things in lordly style, my friend."

"ah, madame!" said porthos, haughtily; "do you take me for a beggar?"

"no; i only thought that a pretty mule makes sometimes as good an
appearance as a horse, and it seemed to me that by getting a pretty mule
for mousqueton--"

"well, agreed for a pretty mule," said porthos; "you are right, i have
seen very great spanish nobles whose whole suite were mounted on mules.
but then you understand, madame coquenard, a mule with feathers and
bells."

"be satisfied," said the procurator’s wife.

"there remains the valise," added porthos.

"oh, don’t let that disturb you," cried mme. coquenard. "my husband has
five or six valises; you shall choose the best. there is one in
particular which he prefers in his journeys, l
 
 ___________________________
 
nnocence.

"ah, but the valise i want," cried porthos, "is a well-filled one, my
dear."

madame uttered fresh sighs. moliere had not written his scene in
"l’avare" then. mme. coquenard was in the dilemma of harpagan.

finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debated in the same
manner; and the result of the sitting was that the procurator’s wife
should give eight hundred livres in money, and should furnish the horse
and the mule which should have the honor of carrying porthos and
mousqueton to glory.

these conditions being agreed to, porthos took leave of mme. coquenard.
the latter wished to detain him by darting certain tender glances; but
porthos urged the commands of duty, and the procurator’s wife was
obliged to give place to the king.

the musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.




33 soubrette and mistress


meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of his conscience and the
wise counsels of athos, d’artagnan became hourly more in love with
milady. thus he 
 
 ___________________________
 
it; or if
they do follow it, it is for the sake of having someone to blame for
having given it."

porthos arrived a minute after d’artagnan. the four friends were
reunited.

the four countenances expressed four different feelings: that of
porthos, tranquillity; that of d’artagnan, hope; that of aramis,
uneasiness; that of athos, carelessness.

at the end of a moment’s conversation, in which porthos hinted that a
lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his
embarrassment, mousqueton entered. he came to request his master to
return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously
said.

"is it my equipment?"

"yes and no," replied mousqueton.

"well, but can’t you speak?"

"come, monsieur."

porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed mousqueton. an instant
after, bazin made his appearance at the door.

"what do you want with me, my friend?" said aramis, with that mildness
of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were
directed t
 
 ___________________________
 
the moment, he placed the others in the ebony box, inlaid
with mother of pearl, in which was the famous handkerchief which served
him as a talisman.

the two friends repaired to athos’s, and he, faithful to his vow of not
going out, took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them. as he
was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy, d’artagnan and
aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him.

they went to find porthos, and at the corner of the rue bac met
mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving before him a mule
and a horse.

d’artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite free from joy.

"ah, my yellow horse," cried he. "aramis, look at that horse!"

"oh, the frightful brute!" said aramis.

"ah, my dear," replied d’artagnan, "upon that very horse i came to
paris."

"what, does monsieur know this horse?" said mousqueton.

"it is of an original color," said aramis; "i never saw one with such a
hide in my life."

"i can well beli
 
 ___________________________
 
eve it," replied d’artagnan, "and that was why i got
three crowns for him. it must have been for his hide, for, certes, the
carcass is not worth eighteen livres. but how did this horse come into
your hands, mousqueton?"

"pray," said the lackey, "say nothing about it, monsieur; it is a
frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!"

"how is that, mousqueton?"

"why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of
quality, the duchesse de--but, your pardon; my master has commanded me
to be discreet. she had forced us to accept a little souvenir, a
magnificent spanish genet and an andalusian mule, which were beautiful
to look upon. the husband heard of the affair; on their way he
confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, and
substituted these horrible animals."

"which you are taking back to him?" said d’artag
 
 ___________________________
 
nan.

"exactly!" replied mousqueton. "you may well believe that we will not
accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been
promised to us."

"no, pardieu; though i should like to have seen porthos on my yellow
horse. that would give me an idea of how i looked when i arrived in
paris. but don’t let us hinder you, mousqueton; go and perform your
master’s orders. is he at home?"

"yes, monsieur," said mousqueton, "but in a very ill humor. get up!"

he continued his way toward the quai des grands augustins, while the two
friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate porthos. he, having
seen them crossing the yard, took care not to answer, and they rang in
vain.

meanwhile mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the pont neuf,
still driving the two sorry animals before him, he reached the rue aux
ours. arrived there, he fastened, according to the orders of his master,
both horse and mule to t
 
 ___________________________
 
sts, who had not eaten anything
since the morning, made such a noise in raising and letting fall the
knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in
the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged.

mme. coquenard recognized her present, and could not at first comprehend
this restitution; but the visit of porthos soon enlightened her. the
anger which fired the eyes of the musketeer, in spite of his efforts to
suppress it, terrified his sensitive inamorata. in fact, mousqueton had
not concealed from his master that he had met d’artagnan and aramis, and
that d’artagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the bearnese pony
upon which he had come to paris, and which he had sold for three crowns.

porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the procurator’s
wife in the cloister of st. magloire. the procurator, seeing he was
going, invited him to dinner--an invitation which the musketeer refused
with a majestic air.

mme. coquenard repaired trembling to t
 
 ___________________________
 
e sum from his pocket; "i know that is the coin in which you
were paid for your poems."

"you are rich, then?" said aramis.

"rich? richest, my dear fellow!"

and d’artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket.

"send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the musketeers, and your horse
can be brought back with ours."

"very well; but it is already five o’clock, so make haste."

a quarter of an hour afterward porthos appeared at the end of the rue
ferou on a very handsome genet. mousqueton followed him upon an auvergne
horse, small but very handsome. porthos was resplendent with joy and
pride.

at the same time, aramis made his appearance at the other end of the
street upon a superb english charger. bazin followed him upon a roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous mecklenburg horse; this was
d’artagnan’s mount.

the two musketeers met at the gate. athos and d’artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

"the devil!" cried aramis, "you have a magnificent horse there,
por
 
 ___________________________
 
he cardinal saluted the three friends with an
inclination of his head, and took the right hand, followed by his
attendant--for that night he himself slept in the camp.

"well!" said porthos and aramis together, as soon as the cardinal was
out of hearing, "well, he signed the paper she required!"

"i know it," said athos, coolly, "since here it is."

and the three friends did not exchange another word till they reached
their quarters, except to give the watchword to the sentinels. only they
sent mousqueton to tell planchet that his master was requested, the
instant that he left the trenches, to come to the quarters of the
musketeers.

milady, as athos had foreseen, on finding the two men that awaited her,
made no difficulty in following them. she had had for an instant an
inclination to be reconducted to the cardinal, and relate everything to
him; but a revelation on her part would bring about a revelation on the
part of athos. she might say that athos had hanged her; but then athos
would tell th
 
 ___________________________
 
ay in exhibiting his musketeer’s uniform in every
street of the camp.

in the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met. there only
remained three things to decide--what they should write to milady’s
brother; what they should write to the clever person at tours; and which
should be the lackeys to carry the letters.

everyone offered his own. athos talked of the discretion of grimaud, who
never spoke a word but when his master unlocked his mouth. porthos
boasted of the strength of mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four
men of ordinary size. aramis, confiding in the address of bazin, made a
pompous eulogium on his candidate. finally, d’artagnan had entire faith
in the bravery of planchet, and reminded them of the manner in which he
had conducted himself in the ticklish affair of boulogne.

these four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time, and gave
birth to magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they
should be deemed too long.

"unfortunately," s
 
 ___________________________
 
aid athos, "he whom we send must possess in himself
alone the four qualities united."

"but where is such a lackey to be found?"

"not to be found!" cried athos. "i know it well, so take grimaud."

"take mousqueton."

"take bazin."

"take planchet. planchet is brave and shrewd; they are two qualities out
of the four."

"gentlemen," said aramis, "the principal question is not to know which
of our four lackeys is the most discreet, the most strong, the most
clever, or the most brave; the principal thing is to know which loves
money the best."

"what aramis says is very sensible," replied athos; "we must speculate
upon the faults of people, and not upon their virtues. monsieur abbe,
you are a great moralist.
 
 ___________________________
 
iven place to a concentrated grief which only
rendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinary
man.

possessed by one single thought--that of the promise he had made, and of
the responsibility he had taken--he retired last to his chamber, begged
the host to procure him a map of the province, bent over it, examined
every line traced upon it, perceived that there were four different
roads from bethune to armentieres, and summoned the lackeys.

planchet, grimaud, bazin, and mousqueton presented themselves, and
received clear, positive, and serious orders from athos.

they must set out the next morning at daybreak, and go to
armentieres--each by a different route. planchet, the most intelligent
of the four, was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon
which the four friends had fired, and which was accompanied, as may be
remembered, by rochefort’s servant.

athos set the lackeys to work first because, since these men had been in
the service of himself and his frie
 
 ___________________________
 
grimaud?" asked athos.

grimaud shook his head negatively.

"silence, then!" cried athos.

and the troop continued their route.

another flash illuminated all around them. grimaud extended his arm, and
by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished a little
isolated house on the banks of the river, within a hundred paces of a
ferry.

one window was lighted.

"here we are!" said athos.

at this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up and
came towards them. it was mousqueton. he pointed his finger to the
lighted window.

"she is there," said he.

"and bazin?" asked athos.

"while i watched the window, he guarded the door."

"good!" said athos. "you are good and faithful servants."

athos sprang from his horse, gave the bridle to grimaud, and advanced
toward the window, after having made a sign to the rest of the troop to
go toward the door.

the little house was surrounded by a low, quickset hedge, two or three
feet high. athos sprang over the hedge and went up to 
 
 ___________________________
 
the executioner. planchet and bazin came last.

the two lackeys conducted milady to the bank of the river. her mouth was
mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence,
supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.

being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, "a thousand
pistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if you
deliver me up to your masters, i have near at hand avengers who will
make you pay dearly for my death."

grimaud hesitated. mousqueton trembled in all his members.

athos, who heard milady’s voice, came sharply up. lord de winter did the
same.

"change these lackeys," said he; "she has spoken to them. they are no
longer sure."

planchet and bazin were called, and took the places of grimaud and
mousqueton.

on the bank of the river the executioner approached milady, and bound
her hands and feet.

then she broke the silence to cry out, "you are cowards, miserable
assassins--ten men combined to murder one woman. beware! if i am
 
 ___________________________
 
nty-eighth of october, 1628, the capitulation was signed.

the king made his entrance into paris on the twenty-third of december of
the same year. he was received in triumph, as if he came from conquering
an enemy and not frenchmen. he entered by the faubourg st. jacques,
under verdant arches.

d’artagnan took possession of his command. porthos left the service, and
in the course of the following year married mme. coquenard; the coffer
so much coveted contained eight hundred thousand livres.

mousqueton had a magnificent livery, and enjoyed the satisfaction of
which he had been ambitious all his life--that of standing behind a
gilded carriage.

aramis, after a journey into lorraine, disappeared all at once, and
ceased to write to his friends; they learned at a later period through
mme. de chevreuse, who told it to two or three of her intimates, that,
yielding to his vocation, he had retired into a convent--only into
which, nobody knew.

bazin became a lay brother.

athos remained a musketeer u