saw you,
madame bonacieux, and i should not be astonished if in the course of a
few months it were to excite the envy of many folks."

"yes, particularly if you follow the instructions i am about to give
you."

"me?"

"yes, you. there is good and holy action to be performed, monsieur, and
much money to be gained at the same time."

mme. bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband, she took
him on his weak side. but a man, were he even a mercer, when he had
talked for ten minutes with cardinal richelieu, is no longer the same
man.

"much money to be gained?" said bonacieux, protruding his lip.

"yes, much."

"about how much?"

"a thousand pistoles, perhaps."

"what you demand of me is serious, then?"

"it is indeed."

"what must be done?"

"you must go away immediately. i will give you a paper which you must
not part with on any account, and which you will deliver into the proper
hands."

"and whither am i to go?"

"to london."

"i go to london? go to! you jest! i have no business in london."

 
 ___________________________
 
e wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killed by
his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered your infamous
secret, wished to have him killed in his turn by two assassins, whom you
sent in pursuit of him; it was you who, finding the balls had missed
their mark, sent poisoned wine with a forged letter, to make your victim
believe that the wine came from his friends. in short, it was you who
have but now in this chamber, seated in this chair i now fill, made an
engagement with cardinal richelieu to cause the duke of buckingham to be
assassinated, in exchange for the promise he has made you to allow you
to assassinate d’artagnan."

milady was livid.

"you must be satan!" cried she.

"perhaps," said athos; "but at all events listen well to this.
assassinate the duke of buckingham, or cause him to be assassinated--i
care very little about that! i don’t know him. besides, he is an
englishman. but do not touch with the tip of your finger a single hair
of d’artagnan, who is a faithful 
 
 ___________________________
 
for a frenchwoman whom
the english persecuted at portsmouth out of their hatred for france.

milady had, likewise, the best of passports--her beauty, her noble
appearance, and the liberality with which she distributed her pistoles.
freed from the usual formalities by the affable smile and gallant
manners of an old governor of the port, who kissed her hand, she only
remained long enough at boulogne to put into the post a letter,
conceived in the following terms:

"to his eminence monseigneur the cardinal richelieu, in his camp before
la rochelle.

"monseigneur,

let your eminence be reassured. his grace the duke of buckingham will
not set out for france.

"milady de ----

"boulogne, evening of the twenty-fifth.

"p.s.--according to the desire of your eminence, i report to the convent
of the carmelites at bethune, where i will await your orders."

accordingly, that same evening milady commenced her journey. night
overtook her; she stopped, and slept at an inn. at five o’clock the next
morning she again 
 
 ___________________________
 
all not escape me!"

"neither is it my intention, monsieur, for this time i was seeking you;
in the name of the king, i arrest you."

"how! what do you say?" cried d’artagnan.

"i say that you must surrender your sword to me, monsieur, and that
without resistance. this concerns your head, i warn you."

"who are you, then?" demanded d’artagnan, lowering the point of his
sword, but without yet surrendering it.

"i am the chevalier de rochefort," answered the other, "the equerry of
monsieur le cardinal richelieu, and i have orders to conduct you to his
eminence."

"we are returning to his eminence, monsieur the chevalier," said athos,
advancing; "and you will please to accept the word of monsieur
d’artagnan that he will go straight to la rochelle."

"i must place him in the hands of guards who will take him into camp."

"we will be his guards, monsieur, upon our word as gentlemen; but
likewise, upon our word as gentlemen," added athos, knitting his brow,
"monsieur d’artagnan shall not leave us."

t