 the luxembourg; that’s a charming spot for such amusements as
the one i propose to you."

"that will do; i will be there."

"your hour?"

"six o’clock."

"a propos, you have probably one or two friends?"

"i have three, who would be honored by joining in the sport with me."

"three? marvelous! that falls out oddly! three is just my number!"

"now, then, who are you?" asked the englishman.

"i am monsieur d’artagnan, a gascon gentleman, serving in the king’s
musketeers. and you?"

"i am lord de winter, baron sheffield."

"well, then, i am your servant, monsieur baron," said d’artagnan,
"though you have names rather difficult to recollect." and touching his
horse with the spur, he cantered back to paris. as he was accustomed to
do in all cases of any consequence, d’artagnan went straight to the
residence of athos.

he found athos reclining upon a large sofa, where he was waiting, as he
said, for his outfit to come and find him. he related to athos all that
had passed, except the letter to
 
 ___________________________
 
 to a spot behind
the luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats. athos threw a piece of
money to the goatkeeper to withdraw. the lackeys were ordered to act as
sentinels.

a silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure, entered, and joined
the musketeers. then, according to foreign custom, the presentations
took place.

the englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the odd names of their
adversaries were for them not only a matter of surprise, but of
annoyance.

"but after all," said lord de winter, when the three friends had been
named, "we do not know who you are. we cannot fight with such names;
they are names of shepherds."

"therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed names," said
athos.

"which only gives us a greater desire to know the real ones," replied
the englishman.

"you played very willingly with us without knowing our names," said
athos, "by the same token that you won our horses."

"that is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; this time we risk
our blo
 
 ___________________________
 
lishman, delighted at having to do with a gentleman of such a
kind disposition, pressed d’artagnan in his arms, and paid a thousand
compliments to the three musketeers, and as porthos’s adversary was
already installed in the carriage, and as aramis’s had taken to his
heels, they had nothing to think about but the dead.

as porthos and aramis were undressing him, in the hope of finding his
wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from his clothes. d’artagnan
picked it up and offered it to lord de winter.

"what the devil would you have me do with that?" said the englishman.

"you can restore it to his family," said d’artagnan.

"his family will care much about such a trifle as that! his family will
inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him. keep the purse for your
lackeys."

d’artagnan put the purse into his pocket.

"and now, my young friend, for you will permit me, i hope, to give you
that name," said lord de winter, "on this very evening, if agreeable to
you, i will present you to 
 
 ___________________________
 
s shoulders; aramis by a movement of his lips
endorsed athos.

"then," said d’artagnan, "let us give the money to the lackeys, as lord
de winter desired us to do."

"yes," said athos; "let us give the money to the lackeys--not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the englishmen."

athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. "for
you and your comrades."

this greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
porthos; and this french generosity, repeated by lord de winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by mm grimaud, bazin, mousqueton
and planchet.

lord de winter, on quitting d’artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
she lived in the place royale--then the fashionable quarter--at number
6, and he undertook to call and take d’artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. d’artagnan appointed eight o’clock at athos’s residence.

this introduction to milady clarik occupied the head of our gascon
greatly. he remembered in what a strange ma
 
 ___________________________
 
leave your head."

"the devil! my dear athos, you view things on the dark side, methinks."

"my dear fellow, i mistrust women. can it be otherwise? i bought my
experience dearly--particularly fair women. milady is fair, you say?"

"she has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!"

"ah, my poor d’artagnan!" said athos.

"listen to me! i want to be enlightened on a subject; then, when i shall
have learned what i desire to know, i will withdraw."

"be enlightened!" said athos, phlegmatically.

lord de winter arrived at the appointed time; but athos, being warned of
his coming, went into the other chamber. he therefore found d’artagnan
alone, and as it was nearly eight o’clock he took the young man with
him.

an elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by two excellent
horses, they were soon at the place royale.

milady clarik received d’artagnan ceremoniously. her hotel was
remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of the english had quit,
or were about to quit, france on accoun
 
 ___________________________
 
t of the war, milady had just
been laying out much money upon her residence; which proved that the
general measure which drove the english from france did not affect her.

"you see," said lord de winter, presenting d’artagnan to his sister, "a
young gentleman who has held my life in his hands, and who has not
abused his advantage, although we have been twice enemies, although it
was i who insulted him, and although i am an englishman. thank him,
then, madame, if you have any affection for me."

milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passed over her brow,
and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her lips that the young man, who
saw and observed this triple shade, almost shuddered at i
 
 ___________________________
 
ntrasted with the symptoms of ill-humor which d’artagnan had
just remarked; "you have today acquired eternal rights to my gratitude."

the englishman then turned round and described the combat without
omitting a single detail. milady listened with the greatest attention,
and yet it was easily to be perceived, whatever effort she made to
conceal her impressions, that this recital was not agreeable to her. the
blood rose to her head, and her little foot worked with impatience
beneath her robe.

lord de winter perceived nothing of this. when he had finished, he went
to a table upon which was a salver with spanish wine and glasses. he
filled two glasses, and by a sign invited d’artagnan to drink.

d’artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an englishman to refuse
to pledge him. he therefore drew near to the table and took the second
glass. he did not, however, lose sight of milady, and in a mirror he
perceived the change that came over her face. now that she believed
herself to be no longer 
 
 ___________________________
 
observed, a sentiment resembling ferocity
animated her countenance. she bit her handkerchief with her beautiful
teeth.

that pretty little soubrette whom d’artagnan had already observed then
came in. she spoke some words to lord de winter in english, who
thereupon requested d’artagnan’s permission to retire, excusing himself
on account of the urgency of the business that had called him away, and
charging his sister to obtain his pardon.

d’artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with lord de winter, and then
returned to milady. her countenance, with surprising mobility, had
recovered its gracious expression; but some little red spots on her
handkerchief indicated that she had bitten her lips till the blood came.
those lips were magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.

the conversation took a cheerful turn. milady appeared to have entirely
recovered. she told d’artagnan that lord de winter was her
brother-in-law, and not her brother. she had married a younger brother
of the famil
 
 ___________________________
 
y, who had left her a widow with one child. this child was
the only heir to lord de winter, if lord de winter did not marry. all
this showed d’artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something;
but he could not yet see under this veil.

in addition to this, after a half hour’s conversation d’artagnan was
convinced that milady was his compatriot; she spoke french with an
elegance and a purity that left no doubt on that head.

d’artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations of
devotion. to all the simple things which escaped our gascon, milady
replied with a smile of kindness.
 
 ___________________________
 
 the hour came for him to retire.
d’artagnan took leave of milady, and left the saloon the happiest of
men.

on the staircase he met the pretty soubrette, who brushed gently against
him as she passed, and then, blushing to the eyes, asked his pardon for
having touched him in a voice so sweet that the pardon was granted
instantly.

d’artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still better received than
on the evening before. lord de winter was not at home; and it was milady
who this time did all the honors of the evening. she appeared to take a
great interest in him, asked him whence he came, who were his friends,
and whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself to the
cardinal.

d’artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent for a young
man of twenty, then remembered his suspicions regarding milady. he
launched into a eulogy of his eminence, and said that he should not have
failed to enter into the guar
 
 ___________________________
 
be inconstant
before being happy?"

"oh, no; he must have been prevented by monsieur de treville or monsieur
dessessart. i understand my game, kitty; i have this one safe."

"what will you do with him, madame?"

"what will i do with him? be easy, kitty, there is something between
that man and me that he is quite ignorant of: he nearly made me lose my
credit with his eminence. oh, i will be revenged!"

"i believed that madame loved him."

"i love him? i detest him! an idiot, who held the life of lord de winter
in his hands and did not kill him, by which i missed three hundred
thousand livres’ income."

"that’s true," said kitty; "your son was the only heir of his uncle, and
until his majority you would have had the enjoyment of his fortune."

d’artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave creature
reproach him, with that sharp voice which she took such pains to conceal
in conversation, for not having killed a man whom he had seen load her
with kindnesses.

"for all this," continued mi
 
 ___________________________
 
his hands.

"this is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years."

"fair," said athos, "is she not?"

"very."

"blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?"

"yes."

"tall, well-made? she has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?"

"yes."

"the fleur-de-lis is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had
been made to efface it by the application of poultices?"

"yes."

"but you say she is english?"

"she is called milady, but she may be french. lord de winter is only her
brother-in-law."

"i will see her, d’artagnan!"

"beware, athos, beware. you tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail."

"she will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself."

"she is capable of anything or everything. did you ever see her
furious?"

"no," said athos.

"a tigress, a panther! ah, my dear athos, i am greatly afraid i have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!"

d’artagnan then related all--the mad passion of m
 
 ___________________________
 
y, this woman, this creature, this demon, has a
brother-in-law, as i think you told me, d’artagnan?"

"yes, i know him very well; and i also believe that he has not a very
warm affection for his sister-in-law."

"there is no harm in that. if he detested her, it would be all the
better," replied athos.

"in that case we are as well off as we wish."

"and yet," said porthos, "i would like to know what grimaud is about."

"silence, porthos!" said aramis.

"what is her brother-in-law’s name?"

"lord de winter."

"where is he now?"

"he returned to london at the first sound of war."

"well, there’s just the man we want," said athos. "it is he whom we must
warn. we will have him informed that his sister-in-law is on the point
of having someone assassinated, and beg him not to lose sight of her.
there is in london, i hope, some establishment like that of the
magdalens, or of the repentant daughters. he must place his sister in
one of these, and we shall be in peace."

"yes," said d’artagnan, "till 
 
 ___________________________
 
she comes out."

"ah, my faith!" said athos, "you require too much, d’artagnan. i have
given you all i have, and i beg leave to tell you that this is the
bottom of my sack."

"but i think it would be still better," said aramis, "to inform the
queen and lord de winter at the same time."

"yes; but who is to carry the letter to tours, and who to london?"

"i answer for bazin," said aramis.

"and i for planchet," said d’artagnan.

"ay," said porthos, "if we cannot leave the camp, our lackeys may."

"to be sure they may; and this very day we will write the letters," said
aramis. "give the lackeys money, and they will start."

"we will give them money?" replied athos. "have you any money?"

the four friends looked at one another, and a cloud came over the brow
 
 ___________________________
 
t the devil! we
are not children. to reach england"--athos lowered his voice--"all
france, covered with spies and creatures of the cardinal, must be
crossed. a passport for embarkation must be obtained; and the party must
be acquainted with english in order to ask the way to london. really, i
think the thing very difficult."

"not at all," cried d’artagnan, who was anxious the matter should be
accomplished; "on the contrary, i think it very easy. it would be, no
doubt, parbleu, if we write to lord de winter about affairs of vast
importance, of the horrors of the cardinal--"

"speak lower!" said athos.

"--of intrigues and secrets of state," continued d’artagnan, complying
with the recommendation. "there can be no doubt we would all be broken
on the wheel; but for god’s sake, do not forget, as you yourself said,
athos, that we only write to him concerning a family affair; that we
only write to him to entreat that as soon as milady arrives in london he
will put it out of her power to injure us. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 you are ignorant
that before she contracted a marriage in england she was already married
in france. but the third time, which is the present, you may succumb.
your relative left la rochelle for england during the night. watch her
arrival, for she has great and terrible projects. if you require to know
positively what she is capable of, read her past history on her left
shoulder."

"well, now that will do wonderfully well," said athos. "my dear aramis,
you have the pen of a secretary of state. lord de winter will now be
upon his guard if the letter should reach him; and even if it should
fall into the hands of the cardinal, we shall not be compromised. but as
the lackey who goes may make us believe he has been to london and may
stop at chatellerault, let us give him only half the sum promised him,
with the letter, with an agreement that he shall have the other half in
exchange for the reply. have you the diamond?" continued athos.

"i have what is still better. i have the price;" and d’artagnan t
 
 ___________________________
 
out the
money to him, then the glory, and then the danger.

"i will carry the letter in the lining of my coat," said planchet; "and
if i am taken i will swallow it."

"well, but then you will not be able to fulfill your commission," said
d’artagnan.

"you will give me a copy this evening, which i shall know by heart
tomorrow."

d’artagnan looked at his friends, as if to say, "well, what did i tell
you?"

"now," continued he, addressing planchet, "you have eight days to get an
interview with lord de winter; you have eight days to return--in all
sixteen days. if, on the sixteenth day after your departure, at eight
o’clock in the evening you are not here, no money--even if it be but
five minutes past eight."

"then, monsieur," said planchet, "you must buy me a watch."

"take this," said athos, with his usual careless generosity, giving him
his own, "and be a good lad. remember, if you talk, if you babble, if
you get drunk, you risk your master’s head, who has so much confidence
in your fidelity
 
 ___________________________
 
d a sword, and flourished a handkerchief in his
hand.

milady thought she recognized this shadow in the gloom; she supported
herself with one hand upon the arm of the chair, and advanced her head
as if to meet a certainty.

the stranger advanced slowly, and as he advanced, after entering into
the circle of light projected by the lamp, milady involuntarily drew
back.

then when she had no longer any doubt, she cried, in a state of stupor,
"what, my brother, is it you?"

"yes, fair lady!" replied lord de winter, making a bow, half courteous,
half ironical; "it is i, myself."

"but this castle, then?"

"is mine."

"this chamber?"

"is yours."

"i am, then, your prisoner?"

"nearly so."

"but this is a frightful abuse of power!"

"no high-sounding words! let us sit down and chat quietly, as brother
and sister ought to do."

then, turning toward the door, and seeing that the young officer was
waiting for his last orders, he said. "all is well, i thank you; now
leave us alone, mr. felton."




50 chat bet
 
 ___________________________
 
ween brother and sister


during the time which lord de winter took to shut the door, close a
shutter, and draw a chair near to his sister-in-law’s fauteuil, milady,
anxiously thoughtful, plunged her glance into the depths of possibility,
and discovered all the plan, of which she could not even obtain a glance
as long as she was ignorant into whose hands she had fallen. she knew
her brother-in-law to be a worthy gentleman, a bold hunter, an intrepid
player, enterprising with women, but by no means remarkable for his
skill in intrigues. how had he discove
 
 ___________________________
 
sition appeared to her most reasonable. it seemed to her that
they wanted to revenge the past, and not to anticipate the future. at
all events, she congratulated herself upon having fallen into the hands
of her brother-in-law, with whom she reckoned she could deal very
easily, rather than into the hands of an acknowledged and intelligent
enemy.

"yes, let us chat, brother," said she, with a kind of cheerfulness,
decided as she was to draw from the conversation, in spite of all the
dissimulation lord de winter could bring, the revelations of which she
stood in need to regulate her future conduct.

"you have, then, decided to come to england again," said lord de winter,
"in spite of the resolutions you so often expressed in paris never to
set your feet on british ground?"

milady replied to this question by another question. "to begin with,
tell me," said she, "how have you watched me so closely as to be aware
beforehand not only of my arrival, but even of the day, the hour, and
the port at which i sh
 
 ___________________________
 
ould arrive?"

lord de winter adopted the same tactics as milady, thinking that as his
sister-in-law employed them they must be the best.

"but tell me, my dear sister," replied he, "what makes you come to
england?"

"i come to see you," replied milady, without knowing how much she
aggravated by this reply the suspicions to which d’artagnan’s letter had
given birth in the mind of her brother-in-law, and only desiring to gain
the good will of her auditor by a falsehood.

"ah, to see me?" said de winter, cunningly.

"to b
 
 ___________________________
 
e sure, to see you. what is there astonishing in that?"

"and you had no other object in coming to england but to see me?"

"no."

"so it was for me alone you have taken the trouble to cross the
channel?"

"for you alone."

"the deuce! what tenderness, my sister!"

"but am i not your nearest relative?" demanded milady, with a tone of
the most touching ingenuousness.

"and my only heir, are you not?" said lord de winter in his turn, fixing
his eyes on those of milady.

whatever command she had over herself, milady could not help starting;
and as in pronouncing the last words lord de winter placed his hand upon
the arm of his sister, this start did not escape him.

in fact, the blow was direct and severe. the first idea that occurred to
milady’s mind was that she had been betrayed by kitty, and that she had
recounted to the baron the selfish aversion toward himself of which she
had imprudently allowed some ma
 
 ___________________________
 
rks to escape before her servant. she
also recollected the furious and imprudent attack she had made upon
d’artagnan when he spared the life of her brother.

"i do not understand, my lord," said she, in order to gain time and make
her adversary speak out. "what do you mean to say? is there any secret
meaning concealed beneath your words?"

"oh, my god, no!" said lord de winter, with apparent good nature. "you
wish to see me, and you come to england. i learn this desire, or rather
i suspect that you feel it; and in order to spare you all the annoyances
of a nocturnal arrival in a port and all the fatigues of landing, i send
one of my officers to meet you, i place a carriage at his orders, and he
brings you hither to this castle, of which i am governor, whither i come
every day, and where, in order to satisfy our mutual desire of seeing
each other, i have prepared you 
 
 ___________________________
 
ering the roadstead, sent forward, in order to obtain permission to
enter the port, a little boat bearing his logbook and the register of
his voyagers? i am commandant of the port. they brought me that book. i
recognized your name in it. my heart told me what your mouth has just
confirmed--that is to say, with what view you have exposed yourself to
the dangers of a sea so perilous, or at least so troublesome at this
moment--and i sent my cutter to meet you. you know the rest."

milady knew that lord de winter lied, and she was the more alarmed.

"my brother," continued she, "was not that my lord buckingham whom i saw
on the jetty this evening as we arrived?"

"himself. ah, i can understand how the sight of him struck you," replied
lord de winter. "you came from a country where he must be very much
talked of, and i know that his armaments against france greatly engage
the attention of your friend the cardinal."

"my friend the cardinal!" cried milady, seeing that on this point as on
the other lord de
 
 ___________________________
 
each other every day."

"am i, then, to remain here eternally?" demanded milady, with a certain
terror.

"do you find yourself badly lodged, sister? demand anything you want,
and i will hasten to have you furnished with it."

"but i have neither my women nor my servants."

"you shall have all, madame. tell me on what footing your household was
established by your first husband, and although i am only your
brother-in-law, i will arrange one similar."

"my first husband!" cried milady, looking at lord de winter with eyes
almost starting from their sockets.

"yes, your french husband. i don’t speak of my brother. if you have
forgotten, as he is still living, i can write to him and he will send me
information on the subject."

a cold sweat burst from the brow of milady.

"you jest!" said she, in a hollow voice.

"do i look so?" asked the baron, rising and going a step backward.

"or rather you insult me," continued she, pressing with her stiffened
hands the two arms of her easy chair, and raising hers
 
 ___________________________
 
elf upon her
wrists.

"i insult you!" said lord de winter, with contempt. "in truth, madame,
do you think that can be possible?"

"indeed, sir," said milady, "you must be either drunk or mad. leave the
room, and send me a woman."

"women are very indiscreet, my sister. cannot i serve you as a waiting
maid? by that means all our secrets will remain in the family."

"insolent!" cried milady; and as if acted upon by a spring, she bounded
toward the baron, who awaited her attack with his arms crossed, but
nevertheless with one hand on the hilt of his swor
 
 ___________________________
 
 all the appearance of being
cowardly enough to lift your hand against a woman."

"perhaps so; and i have an excuse, for mine would not be the first hand
of a man that has been placed upon you, i imagine."

and the baron pointed, with a slow and accusing gesture, to the left
shoulder of milady, which he almost touched with his finger.

milady uttered a deep, inward shriek, and retreated to a corner of the
room like a panther which crouches for a spring.

"oh, growl as much as you please," cried lord de winter, "but don’t try
to bite, for i warn you that it would be to your disadvantage. there are
here no procurators who regulate successions beforehand. there is no
knight-errant to come and seek a quarrel with me on account of the fair
lady i detain a prisoner; but i have judges quite ready who will quickly
dispose of a woman so shameless as to glide, a bigamist, into the bed of
lord de winter, my brother. and these judges, i warn you, will soon send
you to an executioner who will make both your sh
 
 ___________________________
 
nt, but you must endure your captivity quietly. in fifteen or twenty
days i shall set out for la rochelle with the army; but on the eve of my
departure a vessel which i shall see depart will take you hence and
convey you to our colonies in the south. and be assured that you shall
be accompanied by one who will blow your brains out at the first attempt
you make to return to england or the continent."

milady listened with an attention that dilated her inflamed eyes.

"yes, at present," continued lord de winter, "you will remain in this
castle. the walls are thick, the doors strong, and the bars solid;
besides, your window opens immediately over the sea. the men of my crew,
who are devoted to me for life and death, mount guard around this
apartment, and watch all the passages that lead to the courtyard. even
if you gained the yard, there would still be three iron gates for you to
pass. the order is positive. a step, a gesture, a word, on your part,
denoting an effort to escape, and you are to be fired
 
 ___________________________
 
 your features regain their calmness, your
countenance recovers its assurance. you are saying to yourself: ’fifteen
days, twenty days? bah! i have an inventive mind; before that is expired
some idea will occur to me. i have an infernal spirit. i shall meet with
a victim. before fifteen days are gone by i shall be away from here.’
ah, try it!"

milady, finding her thoughts betrayed, dug her nails into her flesh to
subdue every emotion that might give to her face any expression except
agony.

lord de winter continued: "the officer who commands here in my absence
you have already seen, and therefore know him. he knows how, as you must
have observed, to obey an order--for you did not, i am sure, come from
portsmouth hither without endeavoring to make him speak. what do you say
of him? could a statue of marble have been more impassive and more mute?
you have already tried the power of your seductions upon many men, and
unfortunately you have always succeeded; but i give you leave to try
them upon thi
 
 ___________________________
 
mon himself."

he went toward the door and opened it hastily.

"call mr. felton," said he. "wait a minute longer, and i will introduce
him to you."

there followed between these two personages a strange silence, during
which the sound of a slow and regular step was heard approaching.
shortly a human form appeared in the shade of the corridor, and the
young lieutenant, with whom we are already acquainted, stopped at the
threshold to receive the orders of the baron.

"come in, my dear john," said lord de winter, "come in, and shut the
door."

the young officer entered.

"now," said the baron, "look at this woman. she is young; she is
beautiful; she possesses all earthly seductions. well, she is a monster,
who, at twenty-five years of age, has been guilty of as many crimes as
you could read of in a year in the archives of our tribunals. her voice
prejudices her hearers in her favor; her beauty serves as a bait to her
victims; her body even pays what she promises--i must do her that
justice. she will tr
 
 ___________________________
 
ur
hopes of salvation, to keep her safely for the chastisement she has
merited. john felton, i trust your word! john felton, i put faith in
your loyalty!"

"my lord," said the young officer, summoning to his mild countenance all
the hatred he could find in his heart, "my lord, i swear all shall be
done as you desire."

milady received this look like a resigned victim; it was impossible to
imagine a more submissive or a more mild expression than that which
prevailed on her beautiful countenance. lord de winter himself could
scarcely recognize the tigress who, a minute before, prepared apparently
for a fight.

"she is not to leave this chamber, understand, john," continued the
baron. "she is to correspond with nobody; she is to speak to no one but
you--if you will do her the honor to address a word to her."

"that is sufficient, my lord! i have sworn."

"and now, madame, try to make your peace with god, for you are judged by
men!"

milady let her head sink, as if crushed by this sentence. lord de wint
 
 ___________________________
 
 in short, at the moment
in which she has just obtained from richelieu a carte blanche by the
means of which she is about to take vengeance on her enemy, this
precious paper is torn from her hands, and it is d’artagnan who holds
her prisoner and is about to send her to some filthy botany bay, some
infamous tyburn of the indian ocean.

all this she owes to d’artagnan, without doubt. from whom can come so
many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him? he alone could
have transmitted to lord de winter all these frightful secrets which he
has discovered, one after another, by a train of fatalities. he knows
her brother-in-law. he must have written to him.

what hatred she distills! motionless, with her burning and fixed
glances, in her solitary apartment, how well the outbursts of passion
which at times escape from the depths of her chest with her respiration,
accompany the sound of the surf which rises, growls, roars, and breaks
itself like an eternal and powerless despair against the rocks 
 
 ___________________________
 
r her mind against mme. bonacieux, against
buckingham, but above all against d’artagnan--projects lost in the
distance of the future.

yes; but in order to avenge herself she must be free. and to be free, a
prisoner has to pierce a wall, detach bars, cut through a floor--all
undertakings which a patient and strong man may accomplish, but before
which the feverish irritations of a woman must give way. besides, to do
all this, time is necessary--months, years; and she has ten or twelve
days, as lord de winter, her fraternal and terrible jailer, has told
her.

and yet, if she were a man she would attempt all this, and perhaps might
succeed; why, then, did heaven make the mistake of placing that manlike
soul in that frail and delicate body?

the first moments of her captivity were terrible; a few convulsions of
rage which she could not suppress paid her debt of feminine weakness to
nature. but by degrees she overcame the outbursts of her mad passion;
and nervous tremblings which agitated her frame dis
 
 ___________________________
 
ll. when she wakes she can
sup." and he made some steps toward the door.

"but, my lieutenant," said a soldier, less stoical than his chief, and
who had approached milady, "this woman is not asleep."

"what, not asleep!" said felton; "what is she doing, then?"

"she has fainted. her face is very pale, and i have listened in vain; i
do not hear her breathe."

"you are right," said felton, after having looked at milady from the
spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her. "go and tell
lord de winter that his prisoner has fainted--for this event not having
been foreseen, i don’t know what to do."

the soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer. felton sat down
upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, and waited without
speaking a word, without making a gesture. milady possessed that great
art, so much studied by women, of looking through her long eyelashes
without appearing to open the lids. she perceived felton, who sat with
his back toward her. she continued to look 
 
 ___________________________
 
at him for nearly ten
minutes, and in these ten minutes the immovable guardian never turned
round once.

she then thought that lord de winter would come, and by his presence
give fresh strength to her jailer. her first trial was lost; she acted
like a woman who reckons up her resources. as a result she raised her
head, opened her eyes, and sighed deeply.

at this sigh felton turned round.

"ah, you are awake, madame," he said; "then i have nothing more to do
here. if you want anything you can ring."

"oh, my god, my god! how i have suffered!" said milady, in that
harmonious voice which, like that of the ancient enchantresses, charmed
 
 ___________________________
 
does not suit you, you can point out what other hours
you prefer, and in this respect your wishes will be complied with."

"but am i to remain always alone in this vast and dismal chamber?" asked
milady.

"a woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for, who will be tomorrow at
the castle, and will return as often as you desire her presence."

"i thank you, sir," replied the prisoner, humbly.

felton made a slight bow, and directed his steps toward the door. at the
moment he was about to go out, lord de winter appeared in the corridor,
followed by the soldier who had been sent to inform him of the swoon of
milady. he held a vial of salts in his hand.

"well, what is it--what is going on here?" said he, in a jeering voice,
on seeing the prisoner sitting up and felton about to go out. "is this
corpse come to life already? felton, my lad, did you not perceive that
you were taken for a novice, and that the first act was being performed
of a comedy of which we shall doubtless have the pleasure of followin
 
 ___________________________
 
eveled, that white skin, and that languishing look, have not yet
seduced you, you heart of stone?"

"no, my lord," replied the impassive young man; "your lordship may be
assured that it requires more than the tricks and coquetry of a woman to
corrupt me."

"in that case, my brave lieutenant, let us leave milady to find out
something else, and go to supper; but be easy! she has a fruitful
imagination, and the second act of the comedy will not delay its steps
after the first."

and at these words lord de winter passed his arm through that of felton,
and led him out, laughing.

"oh, i will be a match for you!" murmured milady, between her teeth; "be
assured of that, you poor spoiled monk, you poor converted soldier, who
has cut his uniform out of a monk’s frock!"

"by the way," resumed de winter, stopping at the threshold of the door,
"you must not, milady, let this check take away your appetite. taste
that fowl and those fish. on my honor, they are not poisoned. i have a
very good cook, and he is no
 
 ___________________________
 
t to be my heir; i have full and perfect
confidence in him. do as i do. adieu, dear sister, till your next
swoon!"

this was all that milady could endure. her hands clutched her armchair;
she ground her teeth inwardly; her eyes followed the motion of the door
as it closed behind lord de winter and felton, and the moment she was
alone a fresh fit of despair seized her. she cast her eyes upon the
table, saw the glittering of a knife, rushed toward it and clutched it;
but her disappointment was cruel. the blade was round, and of flexible
silver.

a burst of laughter resounded from the other side of the ill-closed
door, and the door reopened.

"ha, ha!" cried lord de winter; "ha, ha! don’t you see, my brave felton;
don’t you see what i told you? that knife was for you, my lad; she wo
 
 ___________________________
 
, drank a
little spanish wine, and felt all her resolution return.

before she went to bed she had pondered, analyzed, turned on all sides,
examined on all points, the words, the steps, the gestures, the signs,
and even the silence of her interlocutors; and of this profound,
skillful, and anxious study the result was that felton, everything
considered, appeared the more vulnerable of her two persecutors.

one expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner: "if i had
listened to you," lord de winter had said to felton.

felton, then, had spoken in her favor, since lord de winter had not been
willing to listen to him.

"weak or strong," repeated milady, "that man has, then, a spark of pity
in his soul; of that spark i will make a flame that shall devour him. as
to the other, he knows me, he fears me, and knows what he has to expect
of me if ever i escape from his hands. it is useless, then, to attempt
anything with him. but felton--that’s another thing. he is a young,
ingenuous, pure man 
 
 ___________________________
 
therefore deceive a
person who saw her for the first time.

"i am in a fever," said she; "i have not slept a single instant during
all this long night. i suffer horribly. are you likely to be more humane
to me than others were yesterday? all i ask is permission to remain
abed."

"would you like to have a physician called?" said the woman.

felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word.

milady reflected that the more people she had around her the more she
would have to work upon, and lord de winter would redouble his watch.
besides, the physician might declare the ailment feigned; and milady,
after having lost the first trick, was not willing to lose the second.

"go and fetch a physician?" said she. "what could be the good of that?
these gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was a comedy; it
would be just the same today, no doubt--for since yesterday evening they
have had plenty of time to send for a doctor."

"then," said felton, who became impatient, "say yourself, madame, what

 
 ___________________________
 
treatment you wish followed."

"eh, how can i tell? my god! i know that i suffer, that’s all. give me
anything you like, it is of little consequence."

"go and fetch lord de winter," said felton, tired of these eternal
complaints.

"oh, no, no!" cried milady; "no, sir, do not call him, i conjure you. i
am well, i want nothing; do not call him."

she gave so much vehemence, such magnetic eloquence to this exclamation,
that felton in spite of himself advanced some steps into the room.

"he has come!" thought milady.

"meanwhile, madame, if you really suffer," said felton, "a physician
shall be sent for; and if you deceive us--well, it will be the worse for
you. but at least
 
 ___________________________
 
 we shall not have to reproach ourselves with
anything."

milady made no reply, but turning her beautiful head round upon her
pillow, she burst into tears, and uttered heartbreaking sobs.

felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness; then,
seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged, he went out. the
woman followed him, and lord de winter did not appear.

"i fancy i begin to see my way," murmured milady, with a savage joy,
burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybody who might be
watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.

two hours passed away.

"now it is time that the malady should be over," said she; "let me rise,
and obtain some success this very day. i have but ten days, and this
evening two of them will be gone."

in the morning, when they entered milady’s chamber they had brought her
breakfast. now, s
 
 ___________________________
 
coming to clear
the table, and that felton would then reappear.

milady was not deceived. felton reappeared, and without observing
whether milady had or had not touched her repast, made a sign that the
table should be carried out of the room, it having been brought in ready
spread.

felton remained behind; he held a book in his hand.

milady, reclining in an armchair near the chimney, beautiful, pale, and
resigned, looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom.

felton approached her, and said, "lord de winter, who is a catholic,
like yourself, madame, thinking that the deprivation of the rites and
ceremonies of your church might be painful to you, has consented that
you should read every day the ordinary of your mass; and here is a book
which contains the ritual."

at the manner in which felton laid the book upon the little table near
which milady was sitting, at the tone in which he pronounced the two
words, your mass, at the disdainful smile with which he accompanied
them, milady raised her head, 
 
 ___________________________
 
xultation, "on the day
when i shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith."

the look of felton revealed to milady the full extent of the space she
had opened for herself by this single word.

the young officer, however, remained mute and motionless; his look alone
had spoken.

"i am in the hands of my enemies," continued she, with that tone of
enthusiasm which she knew was familiar to the puritans. "well, let my
god save me, or let me perish for my god! that is the reply i beg you to
make to lord de winter. and as to this book," added she, pointing to the
manual with her finger but without touching it, as if she must be
contaminated by it, "you may carry it back and make use of it yourself,
for doubtless you are doubly the accomplice of lord de winter--the
accomplice in his persecutions, the accomplice in his heresies."

felton made no reply, took the book with the same appearance of
repugnance which he had before manifested, and retired pensively.

lord de winter came toward five o’clock in th
 
 ___________________________
 

the rest, in eight days you will be where you ought to be, and my task
will be completed."

"infamous task! impious task!" cried milady, with the exultation of a
victim who provokes his judge.

"my word," said de winter, rising, "i think the hussy is going mad!
come, come, calm yourself, madame puritan, or i’ll remove you to a
dungeon. it’s my spanish wine that has got into your head, is it not?
but never mind; that sort of intoxication is not dangerous, and will
have no bad effects."

and lord de winter retired swearing, which at that period was a very
knightly habit.

felton was indeed behind the door, and had not lost one word of this
scene. milady had guessed aright.

"yes, go, go!" said she to her brother; "the effects are drawing near,
on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see them until it is too
late to shun them."

silence was re-established. two hours passed away. milady’s supper was
brought in, and she was found deeply engaged in saying her prayers
aloud--prayers which she 
 
 ___________________________
 
amut
of tones from human speech to language celestial.

yet in spite of all this seduction milady might fail--for felton was
forewarned, and that against the least chance. from that moment she
watched all his actions, all his words, from the simplest glance of his
eyes to his gestures--even to a breath that could be interpreted as a
sigh. in short, she studied everything, as a skillful comedian does to
whom a new part has been assigned in a line to which he is not
accustomed.

face to face with lord de winter her plan of conduct was more easy. she
had laid that down the preceding evening. to remain silent and dignified
in his presence; from time to time to irritate him by affected disdain,
by a contemptuous word; to provoke him to threats and violence which
would produce a contrast with her own resignation--such was her plan.
felton would see all; perhaps he would say nothing, but he would see.

in the morning, felton came as usual; but milady allowed him to preside
over all the preparations for bre
 
 ___________________________
 
akfast without addressing a word to
him. at the moment when he was about to retire, she was cheered with a
ray of hope, for she thought he was about to speak; but his lips moved
without any sound leaving his mouth, and making a powerful effort to
control himself, he sent back to his heart the words that were about to
escape from his lips, and went out. toward midday, lord de winter
entered.

it was a tolerably fine winter’s day, and a ray of that pale english sun
which lights but does not warm came through the bars of her prison.

milady was looking out at the window, and pretended not to hear the door
as it opened.

"ah, ah!" said lord de winter, "after having played comedy, after having
played tragedy, we are now playing melancholy?"

the prisoner made no reply.

"yes, yes," continued lord de winter, "i understand. you would like very
well to be at liberty on that bea
 
 ___________________________
 
s an offering to god."

"what do you say? oh, you do not understand me! when i speak of
ignominy, you think i speak of some chastisement, of imprisonment or
death. would to heaven! of what consequence to me is imprisonment or
death?"

"it is i who no longer understand you, madame," said felton.

"or, rather, who pretend not to understand me, sir!" replied the
prisoner, with a smile of incredulity.

"no, madame, on the honor of a soldier, on the faith of a christian."

"what, you are ignorant of lord de winter’s designs upon me?"

"i am."

"impossible; you are his confidant!"

"i never lie, madame."

"oh, he conceals them too little for you not to divine them."

"i seek to divine nothing, madame; i wait till i am confided in, and
apart from that which lord de winter has said to me before you, he has
confided nothing to me."

"why, then," cried milady, with an incredible tone of truthfulness, "you
are not his accomplice; you do not know that he destines me to a
disgrace which all the punishments of 
 
 ___________________________
 
the world cannot equal in horror?"

"you are deceived, madame," said felton, blushing; "lord de winter is
not capable of such a crime."

"good," said milady to herself; "without thinking what it is, he calls
it a crime!" then aloud, "the friend of that wretch is capable of
everything."

"whom do you call ’that wretch’?" asked felton.

"are there, then, in england two men to whom such an epithet can be
applied?"

"you mean george villiers?" asked felton, whose looks became excited.

"whom pagans and unbelieving gentiles call duke of buckingham," replied
milady. "i could not have thought that 
 
 ___________________________
 
lady recognized the step of lord de
winter.

felton recognized it also, and made a step toward the door.

milady sprang toward him. "oh, not a word," said she in a concentrated
voice, "not a word of all that i have said to you to this man, or i am
lost, and it would be you--you--"

then as the steps drew near, she became silent for fear of being heard,
applying, with a gesture of infinite terror, her beautiful hand to
felton’s mouth.

felton gently repulsed milady, and she sank into a chair.

lord de winter passed before the door without stopping, and they heard
the noise of his footsteps soon die away.

felton, as pale as death, remained some instants with his ear bent and
listening; then, when the sound was quite extinct, he breathed like a
man awaking from a dream, and rushed out of the apartment.

"ah!" said milady, listening in her turn to the noise of felton’s steps,
which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of lord de winter; "at
length you are mine!"

then her brow darkened. "if he
 
 ___________________________
 
 tells the baron," said she, "i am
lost--for the baron, who knows very well that i shall not kill myself,
will place me before him with a knife in my hand, and he will discover
that all this despair is but acted."

she placed herself before the glass, and regarded herself attentively;
never had she appeared more beautiful.

"oh, yes," said she, smiling, "but we won’t tell him!"

in the evening lord de winter accompanied the supper.

"sir," said milady, "is your presence an indispensable accessory of my
captivity? could you not spare me the increase of torture which your
visits cause me?"

"how, dear sister!" said lord de winter. "did not you sentimentally
inform me with that pretty mouth of yours, so cruel to me today, that
you came to england solely for the pleasure of seeing me at your ease,
an enjoyment of which you told me you so sensibly felt the deprivation
that you had risked everything for 
 
 ___________________________
 
it--seasickness, tempest, captivity?
well, here i am; be satisfied. besides, this time, my visit has a
motive."

milady trembled; she thought felton had told all. perhaps never in her
life had this woman, who had experienced so many opposite and powerful
emotions, felt her heart beat so violently.

she was seated. lord de winter took a chair, drew it toward her, and sat
down close beside her. then taking a paper out of his pocket, he
unfolded it slowly.

"here," said he, "i want to show you the kind of passport which i have
drawn up, and which will serve you henceforward as the rule of order in
the life i consent to leave you."

then turning his eyes from milady to the paper, he read: "’order to
conduct--’ the name is blank," interrupted lord de winter. "if you have
any preference you can point it out to me; and if
 
 ___________________________
 
mine."

"a name? have you a name, then?"

"i bear that of your brother."

"ay, but you are mistaken. my brother is only your second husband; and
your first is still living. tell me his name, and i will put it in the
place of the name of charlotte backson. no? you will not? you are
silent? well, then you must be registered as charlotte backson."

milady remained silent; only this time it was no longer from
affectation, but from terror. she believed the order ready for
execution. she thought that lord de winter had hastened her departure;
she thought she was condemned to set off that very evening. everything
in her mind was lost for an instant; when all at once she perceived that
no signature was attached to the order. the joy she felt at this
discovery was so great she could not conceal it.

"yes, yes," said lord de winter, who perceived what was passing in her
mind; "yes, you look for the signature, and you say to yourself: ’all is
not lost, for that order is not signed. it is only shown to me to

 
 ___________________________
 
 settled. you think me rather
parsimonious, don’t you? that’s because i don’t care to leave you the
means of corrupting your jailers. besides, you will always have your
charms left to seduce them with. employ them, if your check with regard
to felton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind."

"felton has not told him," said milady to herself. "nothing is lost,
then."

"and now, madame, till i see you again! tomorrow i will come and
announce to you the departure of my messenger."

lord de winter rose, saluted her ironically, and went out.

milady breathed again. she had still four days before her. four days
would quite suffice to complete the seduction of felton.

a terrible idea, however, rushed into her mind. she thought that lord de
winter would perhaps send felton himself to get the order signed by the
duke of buckingham. in that case felton would escape her--for in order
to secure success, the magic of a continuous seduction was necessary.
nevertheless, as we have said, one circum
 
 ___________________________
 
stance reassured her. felton
had not spoken.

as she would not appear to be agitated by the threats of lord de winter,
she placed herself at the table and ate.

then, as she had done the evening before, she fell on her knees and
repeated her prayers aloud. as on the evening before, the soldier
stopped his march to listen to her.

soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel, which
came from the end of the corridor and stopped before her door.

"it is he," said she. and she began the same religious chant which had
so strongly excited felton the evening before.

but although her voice--sweet, fu
 
 ___________________________
 
lty; but what name can you give it, what name will the lord give
it, if i am innocent?"

"i am a soldier, madame, and fulfill the orders i have received."

"do you believe, then, that at the day of the last judgment god will
separate blind executioners from iniquitous judges? you are not willing
that i should kill my body, and you make yourself the agent of him who
would kill my soul."

"but i repeat it again to you," replied felton, in great emotion, "no
danger threatens you; i will answer for lord de winter as for myself."

"dunce," cried milady, "dunce! who dares to answer for another man, when
the wisest, when those most after god’s own heart, hesitate to answer
for themselves, and who ranges himself on the side of the strongest and
the most fortunate, to crush the weakest and the most unfortunate."

"impossible, madame, impossible," murmured felton, who felt to the
bottom of his heart the justness of this argument. "a prisoner, you will
not recover your liberty through me; living, you will no
 
 ___________________________
 
apparition like one petrified.

"who art thou? who art thou?" cried he, clasping his hands. "art thou a
messenger from god; art thou a minister from hell; art thou an angel or
a demon; callest thou thyself eloa or astarte?"

"do you not know me, felton? i am neither an angel nor a demon; i am a
daughter of earth, i am a sister of thy faith, that is all."

"yes, yes!" said felton, "i doubted, but now i believe."

"you believe, and still you are an accomplice of that child of belial
who is called lord de winter! you believe, and yet you leave me in the
hands of mine enemies, of the enemy of england, of the enemy of god! you
believe, and yet you deliver me up to him who fills and defiles the
world with his heresies and debaucheries--to that infamous sardanapalus
whom the blind call the duke of buckingham, and whom believers name
antichrist!"

"i deliver you up to buckingham? i? what mean you by that?"

"they have eyes," cried milady, "but they see not; ears have they, but
they hear not."

"yes, yes!" s
 
 ___________________________
 
ze the features of the angel
who appears to me every night, crying to my soul, which cannot sleep:
’strike, save england, save thyself--for thou wilt die without having
appeased god!’ speak, speak!" cried felton, "i can understand you now."

a flash of terrible joy, but rapid as thought, gleamed from the eyes of
milady.

however fugitive this homicide flash, felton saw it, and started as if
its light had revealed the abysses of this woman’s heart. he recalled,
all at once, the warnings of lord de winter, the seductions of milady,
her first attempts after her arrival. he drew back a step, and hung down
his head, without, however, ceasing to look at her, as if, fascinated by
this strange creature, he could not detach his eyes from her eyes.

milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of this hesitation.
under her apparent emotions her icy coolness never abandoned her. before
felton replied, and before she should be forced to resume this
conversation, so difficult to be sustained in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
r."

hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, so timid
and downcast, felton reproached himself. by degrees the enchantress had
clothed herself with that magic adornment which she assumed and threw
aside at will; that is to say, beauty, meekness, and tears--and above
all, the irresistible attraction of mystical voluptuousness, the most
devouring of all voluptuousness.

"alas!" said felton, "i can do but one thing, which is to pity you if
you prove to me you are a victim! but lord de winter makes cruel
accusations against you. you are a christian; you are my sister in
religion. i feel myself drawn toward you--i, who have never loved anyone
but my benefactor--i who have met with nothing but traitors and impious
men. but you, madame, so beautiful in reality, you, so pure in
appearance, must have committed great iniquities for lord de winter to
pursue you thus."

"they have eyes," repeated milady, with an accent of indescribable
grief, "but they see not; ears have they, but they hear
 
 ___________________________
 
hame to you, a man, and i a woman? oh," continued
she, placing her hand modestly over her beautiful eyes, "never!
never!--i could not!"

"to me, to a brother?" said felton.

milady looked at him for some time with an expression which the young
man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing but observation, or
rather the wish to fascinate.

felton, in his turn a suppliant, clasped his hands.

"well, then," said milady, "i confide in my brother; i will dare to--"

at this moment the steps of lord de winter were heard; but this time the
terrible brother-in-law of milady did not content himself, as on the
preceding day, with passing before the door and going away again. he
paused, exchanged two words with the sentinel; then the door opened, and
he appeared.

during the exchange of these two words felton drew back quickly, and
when lord de winter entered, he was several paces from the prisoner.

the baron entered slowly, sending a scrutinizing glance from milady to
the young officer.

"you have been
 
 ___________________________
 
said he. "has this woman
been relating her crimes to you? in that case i can comprehend the
length of the conversation."

felton started; and milady felt she was lost if she did not come to the
assistance of the disconcerted puritan.

"ah, you fear your prisoner should escape!" said she. "well, ask your
worthy jailer what favor i this instant solicited of him."

"you demanded a favor?" said the baron, suspiciously.

"yes, my lord," replied the young man, confused.

"and what favor, pray?" asked lord de winter.

"a knife, which she would return to me through the grating of the door a
minute after she had received it," replied felton.

"there is someone, then, concealed here whose throat this amiable lady
is desirous of cutting," said de winter, in an ironical, contemptuous
tone.

"there is myself," replied milady.

"i have given you the choice between america and tyburn," replied lord
de winter. "choose tyburn, madame. believe me, the cord is more certain
than the knife."

felton grew pale, and made 
 
 ___________________________
 
led thy thunder at him, my god! and thou hast left
him noble, honored, powerful, for the ruin of us all!"

"god abandons him who abandons himself," said milady.

"but he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for the damned!"
said felton, with increasing exultation. "he wills that human vengeance
should precede celestial justice."

"men fear him and spare him."

"i," said felton, "i do not fear him, nor will i spare him."

the soul of milady was bathed in an infernal joy.

"but how can lord de winter, my protector, my father," asked felton,
"possibly be mixed up with all this?"

"listen, felton," resumed milady, "for by the side of base and
contemptible men there are often found great and generous natures. i had
an affianced husband, a man whom i loved, and who loved me--a heart like
yours, felton, a man like you. i went to him and told him all; he knew
me, that man did, and did not doubt an instant. he was a nobleman, a man
equal to buckingham in every respect. he said nothing; he only gir
 
 ___________________________
 
," said felton; "i understand how he would act. but with such
men it is not the sword that should be employed; it is the poniard."

"buckingham had left england the day before, sent as ambassador to
spain, to demand the hand of the infanta for king charles i, who was
then only prince of wales. my affianced husband returned.

"’hear me,’ said he; ’this man has gone, and for the moment has
consequently escaped my vengeance; but let us be united, as we were to
have been, and then leave it to lord de winter to maintain his own honor
and that of his wife.’"

"lord de winter!" cried felton.

"yes," said milady, "lord de winter; and now you can understand it all,
can you not? buckingham remained nearly a year absent. a week before his
return lord de winter died, leaving me his sole heir. whence came the
blow? god who knows all, knows without doubt; but as for me, i accuse
nobody."

"oh, what an abyss; what an abyss!" cried felton.

"lord de winter died without revealing anything to his brother. the
 
 ___________________________
 
rother with a portionless girl. i was
sensible that i could look for no support from a man disappointed in his
hopes of an inheritance. i went to france, with a determination to
remain there for the rest of my life. but all my fortune is in england.
communication being closed by the war, i was in want of everything. i
was then obliged to come back again. six days ago, i landed at
portsmouth."

"well?" said felton.

"well; buckingham heard by some means, no doubt, of my return. he spoke
of me to lord de winter, already prejudiced against me, and told him
that his sister-in-law was a prostitute, a branded woman. the noble and
pure voice of my husband was no longer here to defend me. lord de winter
believed all that was told him with so much the more ease that it was
his interest to believe it. he caused me to be arrested, had me
conducted hither, and placed me under your guard. you know the rest. the
day after tomorrow he banishes me, he transports me; the day after
tomorrow he exiles me among the inf
 
 ___________________________
 
me in
contact with the steel busk, which at that period, like a cuirass,
defended the chests of women. it had glided down it, tearing the robe,
and had penetrated slantingly between the flesh and the ribs. milady’s
robe was not the less stained with blood in a second.

milady fell down, and seemed to be in a swoon.

felton snatched away the knife.

"see, my lord," said he, in a deep, gloomy tone, "here is a woman who
was under my guard, and who has killed herself!"

"be at ease, felton," said lord de winter. "she is not dead; demons do
not die so easily. be tranquil, and go wait for me in my chamber."

"but, my lord--"

"go, sir, i command you!"

at this injunction from his superior, felton obeyed; but in going out,
he put the knife into his bosom.

as to lord de winter, he contented himself with calling the woman who
waited on milady, and when she was come, he recommended the prisoner,
who was still fainting, to her care, and left them alone.

meanwhile, all things considered and notwithstanding 
 
 ___________________________
 
his suspicions, as
the wound might be serious, he immediately sent off a mounted man to
find a physician.




58 escape


as lord de winter had thought, milady’s wound was not dangerous. so soon
as she was left alone with the woman whom the baron had summoned to her
assistance she opened her eyes.

it was, however, necessary to affect weakness and pain--not a very
difficult task for so finished an actress as milady. thus the poor woman
was completely the dupe of the prisoner, whom, notwithstanding her
hints, she persisted in watching all night.

but the presence of this woman did not prevent milady from thinking.

there was no lo
 
 ___________________________
 
nger a doubt that felton was convinced; felton was hers.
if an angel appeared to that young man as an accuser of milady, he would
take him, in the mental disposition in which he now found himself, for a
messenger sent by the devil.

milady smiled at this thought, for felton was now her only hope--her
only means of safety.

but lord de winter might suspect him; felton himself might now be
watched!

toward four o’clock in the morning the doctor arrived; but since the
time milady stabbed herself, however short, the wound had closed. the
doctor could therefore measure neither the direction nor the depth of
it; he only satisfied himself by milady’s pulse that the case was not
serious.

in the morning milady, under the pretext that she had not slept well in
the night and wanted rest, sent away the woman who attended her.

she had one
 
 ___________________________
 
the baron had had a plank nailed
over the grating. he no doubt feared that by this opening she might
still by some diabolical means corrupt her guards.

milady smiled with joy. she was free now to give way to her transports
without being observed. she traversed her chamber with the excitement of
a furious maniac or of a tigress shut up in an iron cage. certes, if the
knife had been left in her power, she would now have thought, not of
killing herself, but of killing the baron.

at six o’clock lord de winter came in. he was armed at all points. this
man, in whom milady till that time had only seen a very simple
gentleman, had become an admirable jailer. he appeared to foresee all,
to divine all, to anticipate all.

a single look at milady apprised him of all that was passing in her
mind.

"ay!" said he, "i see; but you shall not kill me today. you have no
longer a weapon; and besides, i am on my guard. you had begun to pervert
my poor felton. he was yielding to your infernal influence; but i will
s
 
 ___________________________
 
nothing!" cried milady. "i remember now."

milady looked around her, as if in search of something.

"it is there," said felton, touching the bag of money with his foot.

they drew near to the sloop. a sailor on watch hailed the boat; the boat
replied.

"what vessel is that?" asked milady.

"the one i have hired for you."

"where will it take me?"

"where you please, after you have put me on shore at portsmouth."

"what are you going to do at portsmouth?" asked milady.

"accomplish the orders of lord de winter," said felton, with a gloomy
smile.

"what orders?" asked milady.

"you do not understand?" asked felton.

"no; explain yourself, i beg."

"as he mistrusted me, he determined to guard you himself, and sent me in
his place to get buckingham to sign the order for your transportation."

"but if he mistrusted you, how could he confide such an order to you?"

"how could i know what i was the bearer of?"

"that’s true! and you are going to portsmouth?"

"i have no time to lose. tomorrow is the twen
 
 ___________________________
 
rning. the whole
population was on foot; drums were beating in the streets and in the
port; the troops about to embark were marching toward the sea.

felton arrived at the palace of the admiralty, covered with dust, and
streaming with perspiration. his countenance, usually so pale, was
purple with heat and passion. the sentinel wanted to repulse him; but
felton called to the officer of the post, and drawing from his pocket
the letter of which he was the bearer, he said, "a pressing message from
lord de winter."

at the name of lord de winter, who was known to be one of his grace’s
most intimate friends, the officer of the post gave orders to let felton
pass, who, besides, wore the uniform of a naval officer.

felton darted into the palace.

at the moment he entered the vestibule, another man was entering
likewise, dusty, out of breath, leaving at the gate a post horse, which,
on reaching the palace, tumbled on his foreknees.

felton and he addressed patrick, the duke’s confidential lackey, at th
 
 ___________________________
 
e
same moment. felton named lord de winter; the unknown would not name
anybody, and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would make
himself known. each was anxious to gain admission before the other.

patrick, who knew lord de winter was in affairs of the service, and in
relations of friendship with the duke, gave the preference to the one
who came in his name. the other was forced to wait, and it was easily to
be seen how he cursed the delay.

the valet led felton through a large hall in which waited the deputies
from la rochelle, headed by the prince de soubise, and introduced him
into a closet where buckingham, just out of the bath, was finishing his
toilet, upon which, as at all times, he bestowed extraordinary
attentio
 
 ___________________________
 
n.

"lieutenant felton, from lord de winter," said patrick.

"from lord de winter!" repeated buckingham; "let him come in."

felton entered. at that moment buckingham was throwing upon a couch a
rich toilet robe, worked with gold, in order to put on a blue velvet
doublet embroidered with pearls.

"why didn’t the baron come himself?" demanded buckingham. "i expected
him this morning."

"he desired me to tell your grace," replied felton, "that he very much
regretted not having that honor, but that he was prevented by the guard
he is obliged to keep at the castle."

"yes, i k
 
 ___________________________
 
our grace knows that it is to milady de winter this
relates."

"i know it perfectly, although i am astonished that you know it."

"and will your grace sign that order without remorse?"

buckingham looked at the young man haughtily.

"do you know, sir, that you are asking me very strange questions, and
that i am very foolish to answer them?"

"reply to them, my lord," said felton; "the circumstances are more
serious than you perhaps believe."

buckingham reflected that the young man, coming from lord de winter,
undoubtedly spoke in his name, and softened.

"without remorse," said he. "the baron knows, as well as myself, that
milady de winter is a very guilty woman, and it is treating her very
favorably to commute her punishment to transportation." the duke put his
pen to the paper.

"you will not sign that order, my lord!" said felton, making a step
toward the duke.

"i will not sign this order! and why not?"

"because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to the
lady."

"i should do h
 
 ___________________________
 
ing in thinking from
whom that letter came.

felton took advantage of this moment, and plunged the knife into his
side up to the handle.

"ah, traitor," cried buckingham, "you have killed me!"

"murder!" screamed patrick.

felton cast his eyes round for means of escape, and seeing the door
free, he rushed into the next chamber, in which, as we have said, the
deputies from la rochelle were waiting, crossed it as quickly as
possible, and rushed toward the staircase; but upon the first step he
met lord de winter, who, seeing him pale, confused, livid, and stained
with blood both on his hands and face, seized him by the throat, crying,
"i knew it! i guessed it! but too late by a minute, unfortunate,
unfortunate that i am!"

felton made no resistance. lord de winter placed him in the hands of the
guards, who led him, while awaiting further orders, to a little terrace
commanding the sea; and then the baron hastened to the duke’s chamber.

at the cry uttered by the duke and the scream of patrick, the man
 
 ___________________________
 
 whom
felton had met in the antechamber rushed into the chamber.

he found the duke reclining upon a sofa, with his hand pressed upon the
wound.

"laporte," said the duke, in a dying voice, "laporte, do you come from
her?"

"yes, monseigneur," replied the faithful cloak bearer of anne of
austria, "but too late, perhaps."

"silence, laporte, you may be overheard. patrick, let no one enter. oh,
i cannot tell what she says to me! my god, i am dying!"

and the duke swooned.

meanwhile, lord de winter, the deputies, the leaders of the expedition,
the officers of buckingham’s household, had all made their way into the
chamber. cries of despair resounded on all sides. the news, which filled
the palace with tears and groans, soon became known, and spread itself
throughout the city.

the report of a cannon announced that something new and unexpected had
taken place.

lord de winter tore his hair.

"too late by a minute!" cried he, "too late by a minute! oh, my god, my
god! what a misfortune!"

 
 ___________________________
 
his brow like a last kiss of love.

at this moment the duke’s surgeon arrived, quite terrified; he was
already on board the admiral’s ship, where they had been obliged to seek
him.

he approached the duke, took his hand, held it for an instant in his
own, and letting it fall, "all is useless," said he, "he is dead."

"dead, dead!" cried patrick.

at this cry all the crowd re-entered the apartment, and throughout the
palace and town there was nothing but consternation and tumult.

as soon as lord de winter saw buckingham was dead, he ran to felton,
whom the soldiers still guarded on the terrace of the palace.

"wretch!" said he to the young man, who since the death of buckingham
had regained that coolness and self-possession which never after
abandoned him, "wretch! what have you done?"

"i have avenged myself!" said he.

"avenged yourself," said the baron. "rather say that you have served as
an instrument to that accursed woman; but i swear to you that this crime
shall be her last."

"i don’t 
 
 ___________________________
 
 had ordered the
anchor to be weighed. the vessel was making way under a blue sky, at
great distance from the coast.

"god has so willed it!" said he, with the resignation of a fanatic; but
without, however, being able to take his eyes from that ship, on board
of which he doubtless fancied he could distinguish the white outline of
her to whom he had sacrificed his life.

de winter followed his look, observed his feelings, and guessed all.

"be punished alone, for the first, miserable man!" said lord de winter
to felton, who was being dragged away with his eyes turned toward the
sea; "but i swear to you by the memory of my brother whom i have loved
so much that your accomplice is not saved."

felton lowered his head without pronouncing a syllable.

as to lord de winter, he descended the stairs rapidly, and went straight
to the port.




60 in france


the first fear of the king of england, charles i, on learning of the
death of the duke, was that such terrible news might discourage the
rochellais; he
 
 ___________________________
 
, they will go so far that we shall be obliged to send them to
the bastille."

"why is it not done already?"

"what would you? the cardinal has a weakness for these men which i
cannot comprehend."

"indeed!"

"yes."

"well, then, tell him this, rochefort. tell him that our conversation at
the inn of the red dovecot was overheard by these four men; tell him
that after his departure one of them came up to me and took from me by
violence the safe-conduct which he had given me; tell him they warned
lord de winter of my journey to england; that this time they nearly
foiled my mission as they foiled the affair of the studs; tell him that
among these four men two only are to be feared--d’artagnan and athos;
tell him that the third, aramis, is the lover of madame de chevreuse--he
may be left alone, we know his secret, and it may be useful; as to the
fourth, porthos, he is a fool, a simpleton, a blustering booby, not
worth troubling himself about."

"but these four men must be now at the siege of la rochel
 
 ___________________________
 
it not so?"

"eh, who knows? never mind," said milady, writing the name on half a
sheet of paper; "i will compromise myself."

"well," said rochefort, taking the paper from milady, folding it, and
placing it in the lining of his hat, "you may be easy. i will do as
children do, for fear of losing the paper--repeat the name along the
route. now, is that all?"

"i believe so."

"let us see: buckingham dead or grievously wounded; your conversation
with the cardinal overheard by the four musketeers; lord de winter
warned of your arrival at portsmouth; d’artagnan and athos to the
bastille; aramis the lover of madame de chevreuse; porthos an ass;
madame bonacieux found again; to send you the chaise as soon as
possible; to place my lackey at your disposal; to make you out a victim
of the cardinal in order that the abbess may entertain no suspicion;
armentieres, on the banks of the lys. is that all, then?"

"in truth, my dear chevalier, you are a miracle of memory. a propos, add
one thing--"

"what?"

"i s
 
 ___________________________
 
ce as well as the
countenance reminded them of someone they had seen, they could not
remember under what circumstances.

"gentlemen," continued the stranger, "since you do not recognize a man
who probably owes his life to you twice, i must name myself. i am lord
de winter, brother-in-law of that woman."

the three friends uttered a cry of surprise.

athos rose, and offering him his hand, "be welcome, my lord," said he,
"you are one of us."

"i set out five hours after her from portsmouth," said lord de winter.
"i arrived three hours after her at boulogne. i missed her by twenty
minutes at st. omer. finally, at lilliers i lost all trace of her. i was
going about at random, inquiring of everybody, when i saw you gallop
past. i recognized monsieur d’artagnan. i called to you, but you did not
answer me; i wished to follow you, but my horse was too much fatigued to
go at the same pace with yours. and yet it appears, in spite of all your
diligence, you have arrived too late."

"you see!" said athos, poi
 
 ___________________________
 
nting to mme. bonacieux dead, and to
d’artagnan, whom porthos and aramis were trying to recall to life.

"are they both dead?" asked lord de winter, sternly.

"no," replied athos, "fortunately monsieur d’artagnan has only fainted."

"ah, indeed, so much the better!" said lord de winter.

at that moment d’artagnan opened his eyes. he tore himself from the arms
of porthos and aramis, and threw himself like a madman on the corpse of
his mistress.

athos rose, walked toward his friend with a slow and solemn step,
embraced him tenderly, and as he burst into violent sobs, he said to him
with his noble and persuasive voice, "friend, be a man! women weep for
the dead; men avenge them!"

"oh, yes!" cried d’artagnan, "yes! if it be to avenge her, i am ready to
follow you."

athos p
 
 ___________________________
 
fore the first inn they came to.

"but," said d’artagnan, "shall we not pursue that woman?"

"later," said athos. "i have measures to take."

"she will escape us," replied the young man; "she will escape us, and it
will be your fault, athos."

"i will be accountable for her," said athos.

d’artagnan had so much confidence in the word of his friend that he
lowered his head, and entered the inn without reply.

porthos and aramis regarded each other, not understanding this assurance
of athos.

lord de winter believed he spoke in this manner to soothe the grief of
d’artagnan.

"now, gentlemen," said athos, when he had ascertained there were five
chambers free in the hotel, "let everyone retire to his own apartment.
d’artagnan needs to be alone, to weep and to sleep. i take charge of
everything; be easy."

"it appears, however," said lord de winter, "if there are any measures
to take against the countess, it concerns me; she is my sister-in-law."

"and me," said athos, "--she is my wife!"

d’ar
 
 ___________________________
 
tagnan smiled--for he understood that athos was sure of his
vengeance when he revealed such a secret. porthos and aramis looked at
each other, and grew pale. lord de winter thought athos was mad.

"now, retire to your chambers," said athos, "and leave me to act. you
must perceive that in my quality of a husband this concerns me. only,
d’artagnan, if you have not lost it, give me the paper which fell from
that man’s hat, upon which is written the name of the village of--"

"ah," said d’artagnan, "i comprehend! that name written in her hand."

"you see, then," said athos, "there is a god in heaven still!"




64 the man in the red cloak


the despair of athos 
 
 ___________________________
 
reak d’artagnan entered the chamber, and demanded what was to be
done.

"to wait," replied athos.

some minutes after, the superior of the convent sent to inform the
musketeers that the burial would take place at midday. as to the
poisoner, they had heard no tidings of her whatever, only that she must
have made her escape through the garden, on the sand of which her
footsteps could be traced, and the door of which had been found shut. as
to the key, it had disappeared.

at the hour appointed, lord de winter and the four friends repaired to
the convent; the bells tolled, the chapel was open, the grating of the
choir was closed. in the middle of the choir the body of the victim,
clothed in her novitiate dress, was exposed. on each side of the choir
and behind the gratings opening into the convent was assembled the whole
community of the carmelites, who listened to the divine service, and
mingled their chant with the chant of the priests, without seeing the
profane, or being seen by them.

at the doo
 
 ___________________________
 
 learn more. he hastened to the rendezvous, found
the lackeys at their posts, placed them as sentinels at all the outlets
of the hotel, and came to find athos, who had just received this
information when his friends returned.

all their countenances were melancholy and gloomy, even the mild
countenance of aramis.

"what is to be done?" asked d’artagnan.

"to wait!" replied athos.

each retired to his own apartment.

at eight o’clock in the evening athos ordered the horses to be saddled,
and lord de winter and his friends notified that they must prepare for
the expedition.

in an instant all five were ready. each examined his arms, and put them
in order. athos came down last, and found d’artagnan already on
horseback, and growing impatient.

"patience!" cried athos; "one of our party is still wanting."

the four horsemen looked round them with astonishment, for they sought
vainly in their minds to know who this other person could be.

at this moment planchet brought out athos’s horse; the mus
 
 ___________________________
 
keteer leaped
lightly into the saddle.

"wait for me," cried he, "i will soon be back," and he set off at a
gallop.

in a quarter of an hour he returned, accompanied by a tall man, masked,
and wrapped in a large red cloak.

lord de winter and the three musketeers looked at one another
inquiringly. neither could give the others any information, for all were
ignorant who this man could be; nevertheless, they felt convinced that
all was as it should be, as it was done by the order of athos.

at nine o’clock, guided by planchet, the little cavalcade set out,
taking the route the carriage had taken.

it was a melancholy sight--that of these six men, traveling in silence,
each plunged in his own thoughts, sad as despair, gloomy as
c
 
 ___________________________
 
olitary;
the flash extinct, all remained in darkness.

every minute athos was forced to restrain d’artagnan, constantly in
advance of the little troop, and to beg him to keep in the line, which
in an instant he again departed from. he had but one thought--to go
forward; and he went.

they passed in silence through the little village of festubert, where
the wounded servant was, and then skirted the wood of richebourg. at
herlier, planchet, who led the column, turned to the left.

several times lord de winter, porthos, or aramis tried to talk with the
man in the red cloak; but to every interrogation which they put to him
he bowed, without response. the travelers then comprehended that there
must be some reason why the unknown preserved such a silence, and ceased
to address themselves to him.

the storm increased, the flashes succeeded one another more rapidly, the
thunder began to growl, and the wind, the precursor of a hurricane,
whistled in the plumes and the hair of the horsemen.

the cavalcade t
 
 ___________________________
 
y recoiled, uttering a cry. d’artagnan, believing she might have
means of flight and fearing she should escape, drew a pistol from his
belt; but athos raised his hand.

"put back that weapon, d’artagnan!" said he; "this woman must be tried,
not assassinated. wait an instant, my friend, and you shall be
satisfied. come in, gentlemen."

d’artagnan obeyed; for athos had the solemn voice and the powerful
gesture of a judge sent by the lord himself. behind d’artagnan entered
porthos, aramis, lord de winter, and the man in the red cloak.

the four lackeys guarded the door and the window.

milady had sunk into a chair, with her hands extended, as if to conjure
this terrible apparition. perceiving her brother-in-law, she uttered a
terrible cry.

"what do you want?" screamed milady.

"we want," said athos, "charlotte backson, who first was called comtesse
de la fere, and afterwards milady de winter, baroness of sheffield."

"that is i! that is i!" murmured milady, in extreme terror; "what do you
want
 
 ___________________________
 
kingham assassinated!" cried all present, with one
voice.

"yes," said the baron, "assassinated. on receiving the warning letter
you wrote to me, i had this woman arrested, and gave her in charge to a
loyal servant. she corrupted this man; she placed the poniard in his
hand; she made him kill the duke. and at this moment, perhaps, felton is
paying with his head for the crime of this fury!"

a shudder crept through the judges at the revelation of these unknown
crimes.

"that is not all," resumed lord de winter. "my brother, who made you his
heir, died in three hours of a strange disorder which left livid traces
all over the body. my sister, how did your husband die?"

"horror!" cried porthos and aramis.

"assassin of buckingham, assassin of felton, assassin of my brother, i
demand justice upon you, and i swear that if it be not granted to me, i
will execute it myself."

and lord de winter ranged himself by the side of d’artagnan, leaving the
place free for another accuser.

milady let her head sink
 
 ___________________________
 
ed me in his place, surrendered himself, and hanged himself that
same night from the iron bar of the loophole of his prison.

"to do justice to them who had condemned me, they kept their word. as
soon as the identity of my brother was proved, i was set at liberty.

"that is the crime of which i accuse her; that is the cause for which
she was branded."

"monsieur d’artagnan," said athos, "what is the penalty you demand
against this woman?"

"the punishment of death," replied d’artagnan.

"my lord de winter," continued athos, "what is the penalty you demand
against this woman?"

"the punishment of death," replied lord de winter.

"messieurs porthos and aramis," repeated athos, "you who are her judges,
what is the sentence you pronounce upon this woman?"

"the punishment of death," replied the musketeers, in a hollow voice.

milady uttered a frightful shriek, and dragged herself along several
paces upon her knees toward her judges.

athos stretched out his hand toward her.

"charlotte backson, comt
 
 ___________________________
 
e winter," said he,
"your crimes have wearied men on earth and god in heaven. if you know a
prayer, say it--for you are condemned, and you shall die."

at these words, which left no hope, milady raised herself in all her
pride, and wished to speak; but her strength failed her. she felt that a
powerful and implacable hand seized her by the hair, and dragged her
away as irrevocably as fatality drags humanity. she did not, therefore,
even attempt the least resistance, and went out of the cottage.

lord de winter, d’artagnan, athos, porthos, and aramis, went out close
behind her. the lackeys followed their masters, and the chamber was left
solitary, with its broken window, its open door, and its smoky lamp
burning sadly on the table.




66 execution


it was near midnight; the moon, lessened by its decline, and reddened by
the last traces of the storm, arose behind the little town of
armentieres, which showed against its pale light the dark outline of its
houses, and the skeleton of its high belfry. 
 
 ___________________________
 
izon in its
whole width, darted like a serpent over the black mass of trees, and
like a terrible scimitar divided the heavens and the waters into two
parts. not a breath of wind now disturbed the heavy atmosphere. a
deathlike silence oppressed all nature. the soil was humid and
glittering with the rain which had recently fallen, and the refreshed
herbs sent forth their perfume with additional energy.

two lackeys dragged milady, whom each held by one arm. the executioner
walked behind them, and lord de winter, d’artagnan, porthos, and aramis
walked behind the executioner. planchet and bazin came last.

the two lackeys conducted milady to the bank of the river. her mouth was
mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence,
supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.

being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, "a thousand
pistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if you
deliver me up to your masters, i have near at hand avengers who will
make 
 
 ___________________________
 
you pay dearly for my death."

grimaud hesitated. mousqueton trembled in all his members.

athos, who heard milady’s voice, came sharply up. lord de winter did the
same.

"change these lackeys," said he; "she has spoken to them. they are no
longer sure."

planchet and bazin were called, and took the places of grimaud and
mousqueton.

on the bank of the river the executioner approached milady, and bound
her hands and feet.

then she broke the silence to cry out, "you are cowards, miserable
assassins--ten men combined to murder one woman. beware! if i am not
saved i shall be avenged."

"you are not a woman," said athos, coldly and sternly. "you do n
 
 ___________________________
 
e sword. "this is
the last judge; that is all. nachrichter, as say our neighbors, the
germans."

and as he bound her while saying these words, milady uttered two or
three savage cries, which produced a strange and melancholy effect in
flying away into the night, and losing themselves in the depths of the
woods.

"if i am guilty, if i have committed the crimes you accuse me of,"
shrieked milady, "take me before a tribunal. you are not judges! you
cannot condemn me!"

"i offered you tyburn," said lord de winter. "why did you not accept
it?"

"because i am not willing to die!" cried milady, struggling. "because i
am too young to die!"

"the woman you poisoned at bethune was still younger than you, madame,
and yet she is dead," said d’artagnan.

"i will enter a cloister; i will become a nun," said milady.

"you were in a cloister," said the executioner, "and you left it to ruin
my brother."

milady uttered a cry of terror and sank upon her knees. the executioner
took her up in his arms and was carryin
 
 ___________________________
 
nees and prayed.

"come," continued athos, "executioner, do your duty."

"willingly, monseigneur," said the executioner; "for as i am a good
catholic, i firmly believe i am acting justly in performing my functions
on this woman."

"that’s well."

athos made a step toward milady.

"i pardon you," said he, "the ill you have done me. i pardon you for my
blasted future, my lost honor, my defiled love, and my salvation forever
compromised by the despair into which you have cast me. die in peace!"

lord de winter advanced in his turn.

"i pardon you," said he, "for the poisoning of my brother, and the
assassination of his grace, lord buckingham. i pardon you for the death
of poor felton; i pardon you for the attempts upon my own person. die in
peace!"

"and i," said m. d’artagnan. "pardon me, madame, for having by a trick
unworthy of a gentleman provoked your anger; and i, in exchange, pardon
you the murder of my poor love and your cruel vengeance against me. i
pardon you, and i weep for you. die in p