ught the wine
good; "and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man. then
there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty pistoles
are worth the risk of four heads."

"but observe," cried d’artagnan, "that there is a woman in the affair--a
woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened, tortured
perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her mistress."

"beware, d’artagnan, beware," said aramis. "you grow a little too warm,
in my opinion, about the fate of madame bonacieux. woman was created for
our destruction, and it is from her we inherit all our miseries."

at this speech of aramis, the brow of athos became clouded and he bit
his lips.

"it is not madame bonacieux about whom i am anxious," cried d’artagnan,
"but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom the cardinal persecutes,
and who sees the heads of all her friends fall, one after the other."

"why does she love what we hate most in the world, the spaniards and the
english?"

"spain is her country," repli
 
 ___________________________
 
tagnan, he did not budge from his apartment. he converted his
chamber into an observatory. from his windows he saw all the visitors
who were caught. then, having removed a plank from his floor, and
nothing remaining but a simple ceiling between him and the room beneath,
in which the interrogatories were made, he heard all that passed between
the inquisitors and the accused.

the interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated upon the
persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: "has madame bonacieux
sent anything to you for her husband, or any other person? has monsieur
bonacieux sent anything to you for his wife, or for any other person?
has either of them confided anything to you by word of mouth?"

"if they knew anything, they would not question people in this manner,"
said d’artagnan to himself. "now, what is it they want to know? why,
they want to know if the duke of buckingham is in paris, and if he has
had, or is likely to have, an interview with the queen."

d’artagnan held ont
 
 ___________________________
 
or at full
length, and listened.

cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared to be
endeavoring to stifle. there were no questions.

"the devil!" said d’artagnan to himself. "it seems like a woman! they
search her; she resists; they use force--the scoundrels!"

in spite of his prudence, d’artagnan restrained himself with great
difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going on below.

"but i tell you that i am the mistress of the house, gentlemen! i tell
you i am madame bonacieux; i tell you i belong to the queen!" cried the
unfortunate woman.

"madame bonacieux!" murmured d’artagnan. "can i be so lucky as to find
what everybody is seeking for?"

the voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movement shook
the partition. the victim resisted as much as a woman could resist four
men.

"pardon, gentlemen--par--" murmured the voice, which could now only be
heard in inarticulate sounds.

"they are binding her; they are going to drag her away," cried
d’artagnan 
 
 ___________________________
 
t you ever went to that house?"

"undoubtedly."

"and you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man?"

"no."

"by a musketeer?"

"no, indeed!"

"it was not he, then, you came to seek?"

"not the least in the world. besides, you must have seen that the person
to whom i spoke was a woman."

"that is true; but this woman is a friend of aramis--"

"i know nothing of that."

"--since she lodges with him."

"that does not concern me."

"but who is she?"

"oh, that is not my secret."

"my dear madame bonacieux, you are charming; but at the same time you
are one of the most mysterious women."

"do i lose by that?"

"no; you are, on the contrary, adorable."

"give me your arm, then."

"most willingly. and now?"

"now escort me."

"where?"

"where i am going."

"but where are you going?"

"you will see, because you will leave me at the door."

"shall i wait for you?"

"that will be useless."

"you will return alone, then?"

"perhaps yes, perhaps no."

"but will the person who shall accompany you afterwa
 
 ___________________________
 
man who did love and was
anxious to be loved in return. there was certainly enough in all this to
turn a head only twenty-three years old, and mme. bonacieux had just
attained that happy period of life.

the couple, then, although they had not seen each other for eight days,
and during that time serious events had taken place in which both were
concerned, accosted each other with a degree of preoccupation.
nevertheless, bonacieux manifested real joy, and advanced toward his
wife with open arms. madame bonacieux presented her cheek to him.

"let us talk a little," said she.

"how!" said bonacieux, astonished.

"yes, i have something of the highest importance to tell you."

"true," said he, "and i have some questions sufficiently serious to put
to you. describe to me your abduction, i pray you."

"oh, that’s of no consequence just now," said mme. bonacieux.

"and what does it concern, then--my captivity?"

"i heard of it the day it happened; but as you were not guilty of any
crime, as you were not gui
 
 ___________________________
 
the bastille?"

"oh, a day and night soon pass away. let us return to the object that
brings me here."

"what, that which brings you home to me? is it not the desire of seeing
a husband again from whom you have been separated for a week?" asked the
mercer, piqued to the quick.

"yes, that first, and other things afterward."

"speak."

"it is a thing of the highest interest, and upon which our future
fortune perhaps depends."

"the complexion of our fortune has changed very much since i saw you,
madame bonacieux, and i should not be astonished if in the course of a
few months it were to excite the envy of many folks."

"yes, particularly if you follow the instructions i am about to give
you."

"me?"

"yes, you. there is good and holy action to be performed, monsieur, and
much money to be gained at the same time."

mme. bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband, she took
him on his weak side. but a man, were he even a mercer, when he had
talked for ten minutes with cardinal richelieu, is no
 
 ___________________________
 
he held out her hand to him, "i restore my love."

bonacieux was cowardly and avaricious, but he loved his wife. he was
softened. a man of fifty cannot long bear malice with a wife of
twenty-three. mme. bonacieux saw that he hesitated.

"come! have you decided?" said she.

"but, my dear love, reflect a little upon what you require of me. london
is far from paris, very far, and perhaps the commission with which you
charge me is not without dangers?"

"what matters it, if you avoid them?"

"hold, madame bonacieux," said the mercer, "hold! i positively refuse;
intrigues terrify me. i have seen the bastille. my! whew! that’s a
frightful place, that bastille! only to think of it makes my flesh
crawl. they threatened me with torture. do you know what torture is?
wooden points that they stick in between your legs till your bones stick
out! no, positively i will not go. and, morbleu, why do you not go
yourself? for in truth, i think i have hitherto been deceived in you. i
really believe you are a man, and a
 
 ___________________________
 
woman, whom an instinctive mistrust now impelled to draw back. "it was
about one of those purchases that interest women--a purchase by which
much might have been gained."

but the more the young woman excused herself, the more important
bonacieux thought the secret which she declined to confide to him. he
resolved then to hasten immediately to the residence of the comte de
rochefort, and tell him that the queen was seeking for a messenger to
send to london.

"pardon me for quitting you, my dear madame bonacieux," said he; "but,
not knowing you would come to see me, i had made an engagement with a
friend. i shall soon return; and if you will wait only a few minutes for
me, as soon as i have concluded my business with that friend, as it is
growing late, i will come back and reconduct you to the louvre."

"thank you, monsieur, you are not brave enough to be of any use to me
whatever," replied mme. bonacieux. "i shall return very safely to the
louvre all alone."

"as you please, madame bonacieux," said th
 
 ___________________________
 
st. and i, who have answered for him to the queen--i,
who have promised my poor mistress--ah, my god, my god! she will take me
for one of those wretches with whom the palace swarms and who are placed
about her as spies! ah, monsieur bonacieux, i never did love you much,
but now it is worse than ever. i hate you, and on my word you shall pay
for this!"

at the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made her raise
her head, and a voice which reached her through the ceiling cried, "dear
madame bonacieux, open for me the little door on the alley, and i will
come down to you."




18 lover and husband


ah, madame," said d’artagnan, entering by the door which the young woman
opened for him, "allow me to tell you that you have a bad sort of a
husband."

"you have, then, overheard our conversation?" asked mme. bonacieux,
eagerly, and looking at d’artagnan with disquiet.

"the whole."

"but how, my god?"

"by a mode of proceeding known to myself, and by which i likewise
overheard the more anima
 
 ___________________________
 
who was ignorant that d’artagnan had overheard his
conversation with the stranger of meung, related to his young tenant the
persecutions of that monster, m. de laffemas, whom he never ceased to
designate, during his account, by the title of the "cardinal’s
executioner," and expatiated at great length upon the bastille, the
bolts, the wickets, the dungeons, the gratings, the instruments of
torture.

d’artagnan listened to him with exemplary complaisance, and when he had
finished said, "and madame bonacieux, do you know who carried her
off?--for i do not forget that i owe to that unpleasant circumstance the
good fortune of having made your acquaintance."

"ah!" said bonacieux, "they took good care not to tell me that; and my
wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that’s sacred that she does
not know. but you," continued m. bonacieux, in a tone of perfect good
fellowship, "what has become of you all these days? i have not seen you
nor your friends, and i don’t think you could gather all that
 
 ___________________________
 
nd asked him what was the matter.

"nothing," replied bonacieux, "nothing. since my misfortunes i have been
subject to faintnesses, which seize me all at once, and i have just felt
a cold shiver. pay no attention to it; you have nothing to occupy
yourself with but being happy."

"then i have full occupation, for i am so."

"not yet; wait a little! this evening, you said."

"well, this evening will come, thank god! and perhaps you look for it
with as much impatience as i do; perhaps this evening madame bonacieux
will visit the conjugal domicile."

"madame bonacieux is not at liberty this evening," replied the husband,
seriously; "she is detained at the louvre this evening by her duties."

"so much the worse for you, my dear host, so much the worse! when i am
happy, i wish all the world to be so; but it appears that is not
possible."

the young man departed, laughing at the joke, which he thought he alone
could comprehend.

"amuse yourself well!" replied bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.

but d’artagna
 
 ___________________________
 
twenty years old, above all if we were born at
tarbes.

d’artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, then returned to
athos’s, and according to custom, related everything to him. athos
listened to his projects, then shook his head, and recommended prudence
to him with a shade of bitterness.

"what!" said he, "you have just lost one woman, whom you call good,
charming, perfect; and here you are, running headlong after another."

d’artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.

"i loved madame bonacieux with my heart, while i only love milady with
my head," said he. "in getting introduced to her, my principal object is
to ascertain what part she plays at court."

"the part she plays, pardieu! it is not difficult to divine that, after
all you have told me. she is some emissary of the cardinal; a woman who
will draw you into a snare in which you will leave your head."

"the devil! my dear athos, you view things on the dark side, methinks."

"my dear fellow, i mistrust women. can it be otherwise?
 
 ___________________________
 
 treville telling me, when
he did me the honor to call upon me yesterday, that you associated with
the suspected english, whom the cardinal protects?"

"that is to say, i visit an englishwoman--the one i named."

"oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account i gave you advice, which
naturally you took care not to adopt."

"i gave you my reasons."

"yes; you look there for your outfit, i think you said."

"not at all. i have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was
concerned in the abduction of madame bonacieux."

"yes, i understand now: to find one woman, you court another. it is the
longest road, but certainly the most amusing."

d’artagnan was on the point of telling athos all; but one consideration
restrained him. athos was a gentleman, punctilious in points of honor;
and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for milady, he
was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this
puritan. he was therefore silent; and as athos was the least inquisitive
of any man on earth, d
 
 ___________________________
 
tance to the
question i am about to put to you. did you never hear talk of a young
woman who was carried off one night?"

"there, now! oh, monsieur chevalier, do you love that woman still?"

"no, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--monsieur athos, this
gentleman here."

"i?" cried athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is
about to tread upon an adder.

"you, to be sure!" said d’artagnan, pressing athos’s hand. "you know the
interest we both take in this poor little madame bonacieux. besides,
kitty will tell nothing; will you, kitty? you understand, my dear girl,"
continued d’artagnan, "she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw
at the door as you came in."

"oh, my god! you remind me of my fright! if he should have known me
again!"

"how? know you again? did you ever see that man before?"

"he came twice to milady’s."

"that’s it. about what time?"

"why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago."

"exactly so."

"and yesterday evening he came again."

"yesterday ev
 
 ___________________________
 
 and how to
meet with her?"

"time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity; opportunity is the
martingale of man. the more we have ventured the more we gain, when we
know how to wait."

"yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners."

"bah!" said athos. "god has preserved us hitherto, god will preserve us
still."

"yes, we. besides, we are men; and everything considered, it is our lot
to risk our lives; but she," asked he, in an undertone.

"what she?" asked athos.

"constance."

"madame bonacieux! ah, that’s true!" said athos. "my poor friend, i had
forgotten you were in love."

"well, but," said aramis, "have you not learned by the letter you found
on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent? one may be very
comfortable in a convent; and as soon as the siege of la rochelle is
terminated, i promise you on my part--"

"good," cried athos, "good! yes, my dear aramis, we all know that your
views have a religious tendency."

"i am only temporarily a musketeer," said aramis, humbly.

"
 
 ___________________________
 


"that is to say, she was there," replied milady; "but the queen has
obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed
to a convent."

"to a convent?" said the duke.

"yes, to a convent."

"and to which?"

"i don’t know; the secret has been well kept."

"but i will know!"

"and your eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is?"

"i can see nothing inconvenient in that," said the cardinal.

"well, now i have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this
little madame bonacieux."

"who is that?"

"her lover."

"what is his name?"

"oh, your eminence knows him well," cried milady, carried away by her
anger. "he is the evil genius of both of us. it is he who in an
encounter with your eminence’s guards decided the victory in favor of
the king’s musketeers; it is he who gave three desperate wounds to de
wardes, your emissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs to
fail; it is he who, knowing it was i who had madame bonacieux carried
off, has sworn my death.
 
 ___________________________
 
w, faint voice, "what brings you back to
me, and what do you want with me?"

"i wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your eyes, i have
not lost sight of you."

"you know what i have done?"

"i can relate to you, day by day, your actions from your entrance to the
service of the cardinal to this evening."

a smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of milady.

"listen! it was you who cut off the two diamond studs from the shoulder
of the duke of buckingham; it was you had the madame bonacieux carried
off; it was you who, in love with de wardes and thinking to pass the
night with him, opened the door to monsieur d’artagnan; it was you who,
believing that de wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killed by
his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered your infamous
secret, wished to have him killed in his turn by two assassins, whom you
sent in pursuit of him; it was you who, finding the balls had missed
their mark, sent poisoned wine with a forged letter, to make y
 
 ___________________________
 
 as if no
danger hovered over him, and as if he breathed his customary atmosphere.

on the sixteenth day, in particular, these signs were so strong in
d’artagnan and his two friends that they could not remain quiet in one
place, and wandered about like ghosts on the road by which planchet was
expected.

"really," said athos to them, "you are not men but children, to let a
woman terrify you so! and what does it amount to, after all? to be
imprisoned. well, but we should be taken out of prison; madame bonacieux
was released. to be decapitated? why, every day in the trenches we go
cheerfully to expose ourselves to worse than that--for a bullet may
break a leg, and i am convinced a surgeon would give us more pain in
cutting off a thigh than an executioner in cutting off a head. wait
quietly, then; in two hours, in four, in six hours at latest, planchet
will be here. he promised to be here, and i have very great faith in
planchet, who appears to me to be a very good lad."

"but if he does not come?" said
 
 ___________________________
 
at the door.

"well, where the devil are you going now?" cried athos.

"it is he!" cried d’artagnan, pale with anger, and with the sweat on his
brow, "it is he! let me overtake him!"

"he? what he?" asked athos.

"he, that man!"

"what man?"

"that cursed man, my evil genius, whom i have always met with when
threatened by some misfortune, he who accompanied that horrible woman
when i met her for the first time, he whom i was seeking when i offended
our athos, he whom i saw on the very morning madame bonacieux was
abducted. i have seen him; that is he! i recognized him when the wind
blew upon his cloak."

"the devil!" said athos, musingly.

"to saddle, gentlemen! to saddle! let us pursue him, and we shall
overtake him!"

"my dear friend," said aramis, "remember that he goes in an opposite
direction from that in which we are going, that he has a fresh horse,
and ours are fatigued, so that we shall disable our own horses without
even a chance of overtaking him. let the man go, d’artagnan; let us save
 
 ___________________________
 
gnan!" cried the novice, in her turn seizing
the hands of milady and devouring her with her eyes.

then remarking the strange expression of milady’s countenance, she said,
"pardon me, madame; you know him by what title?"

"why," replied milady, embarrassed, "why, by the title of friend."

"you deceive me, madame," said the novice; "you have been his mistress!"

"it is you who have been his mistress, madame!" cried milady, in her
turn.

"i?" said the novice.

"yes, you! i know you now. you are madame bonacieux!"

the young woman drew back, filled with surprise and terror.

"oh, do not deny it! answer!" continued milady.

"well, yes, madame," said the novice, "are we rivals?"

the countenance of milady was illumined by so savage a joy that under
any other circumstances mme. bonacieux would have fled in terror; but
she was absorbed by jealousy.

"speak, madame!" resumed mme. bonacieux, with an energy of which she
might not have been believed capable. "have you been, or are you, his
mistress?"

"oh, no!
 
 ___________________________
 
ce--one
that will delight his eminence! have you informed him of it?"

"i wrote to him from boulogne. but what brings you here?"

"his eminence was uneasy, and sent me to find you."

"i only arrived yesterday."

"and what have you been doing since yesterday?"

"i have not lost my time."

"oh, i don’t doubt that."

"do you know whom i have encountered here?"

"no."

"guess."

"how can i?"

"that young woman whom the queen took out of prison."

"the mistress of that fellow d’artagnan?"

"yes; madame bonacieux, with whose retreat the cardinal was
unacquainted."

"well, well," said rochefort, "here is a chance which may pair off with
the other! monsieur cardinal is indeed a privileged man!"

"imagine my astonishment," continued milady, "when i found myself face
to face with this woman!"

"does she know you?"

"no."

"then she looks upon you as a stranger?"

milady smiled. "i am her best friend."

"upon my honor," said rochefort, "it takes you, my dear countess, to
perform such miracles!"

"and it is w
 
 ___________________________
 
y nearly
foiled my mission as they foiled the affair of the studs; tell him that
among these four men two only are to be feared--d’artagnan and athos;
tell him that the third, aramis, is the lover of madame de chevreuse--he
may be left alone, we know his secret, and it may be useful; as to the
fourth, porthos, he is a fool, a simpleton, a blustering booby, not
worth troubling himself about."

"but these four men must be now at the siege of la rochelle?"

"i thought so, too; but a letter which madame bonacieux has received
from madame the constable, and which she has had the imprudence to show
me, leads me to believe that these four men, on the contrary, are on the
road hither to take her away."

"the devil! what’s to be done?"

"what did the cardinal say about me?"

"i was to take your dispatches, written or verbal, and return by post;
and when he shall know what you have done, he will advise what you have
to do."

"i must, then, remain here?"

"here, or in the neighborhood."

"you cannot take me 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to place himself at my disposal."

"well."

"you have, no doubt, some order from the cardinal about you?"

"i have my full power."

"show it to the abbess, and tell her that someone will come and fetch
me, either today or tomorrow, and that i am to follow the person who
presents himself in your name."

"very well."

"don’t forget to treat me harshly in speaking of me to the abbess."

"to what purpose?"

"i am a victim of the cardinal. it is necessary to inspire confidence in
that poor little madame bonacieux."

"that’s true. now, will you make me a report of all that has happened?"

"why, i have related the events to you. you have a good memory; repeat
what i have told you. a paper may be lost."

"you are right; only let me know where to find you that i may not run
needlessly about the neighborhood."

"that’s correct; wait!"

"do you want a map?"

"oh, i know this country marvelously!"

"you? when were you here?"

"i was brought up here."

"truly?"

"it is worth something, you see, to have been
 
 ___________________________
 
 taking the paper from milady, folding it, and
placing it in the lining of his hat, "you may be easy. i will do as
children do, for fear of losing the paper--repeat the name along the
route. now, is that all?"

"i believe so."

"let us see: buckingham dead or grievously wounded; your conversation
with the cardinal overheard by the four musketeers; lord de winter
warned of your arrival at portsmouth; d’artagnan and athos to the
bastille; aramis the lover of madame de chevreuse; porthos an ass;
madame bonacieux found again; to send you the chaise as soon as
possible; to place my lackey at your disposal; to make you out a victim
of the cardinal in order that the abbess may entertain no suspicion;
armentieres, on the banks of the lys. is that all, then?"

"in truth, my dear chevalier, you are a miracle of memory. a propos, add
one thing--"

"what?"

"i saw some very pretty woods which almost touch the convent garden. say
that i am permitted to walk in those woods. who knows? perhaps i shall
stand in nee