 is in london they must be found."

"what are your eminenceâ€™s orders?"

"not a word of what has passed. let the queen remain in perfect
security; let her be ignorant that we know her secret. let her believe
that we are in search of some conspiracy or other. send me the keeper of
the seals, seguier."

"and that man, what has your eminence done with him?"

"what man?" asked the cardinal.

"that bonacieux."

"i have done with him all that could be done. i have made him a spy upon
his wife."

the comte de rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges the superiority
of the master as great, and retired.

left alone, the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter, which
he secured with his special seal. then he rang. the officer entered for
the fourth time.

"tell vitray to come to me," said he, "and tell him to get ready for a
journey."

an instant after, the man he asked for was before him, booted and
spurred.

"vitray," said he, "you will go with all speed to london. you must not
stop an instant on t
 
 ___________________________
 

"the letter shall be given to himself."

"generous girl!" cried anne of austria.

mme. bonacieux kissed the hands of the queen, concealed the paper in the
bosom of her dress, and disappeared with the lightness of a bird.

ten minutes afterward she was at home. as she told the queen, she had
not seen her husband since his liberation; she was ignorant of the
change that had taken place in him with respect to the cardinal--a
change which had since been strengthened by two or three visits from the
comte de rochefort, who had become the best friend of bonacieux, and had
persuaded him, without much trouble, that no culpable sentiments had
prompted the abduction of his wife, but that it was only a political
precaution.

she found m. bonacieux alone; the poor man was recovering with
difficulty the order in his house, in which he had found most of the
furniture broken and the closets nearly emptied--justice not being one
of the three things which king solomon names as leaving no traces of
their passage. as to t
 
 ___________________________
 
wledge no other power but that of
the great man whom i have the honor to serve."

"you serve the cardinal?"

"yes, madame; and as his servant, i will not allow you to be concerned
in plots against the safety of the state, or to serve the intrigues of a
woman who is not french and who has a spanish heart. fortunately we have
the great cardinal; his vigilant eye watches over and penetrates to the
bottom of the heart."

bonacieux was repeating, word for word, a sentence which he had heard
from the comte de rochefort; but the poor wife, who had reckoned on her
husband, and who, in that hope, had answered for him to the queen, did
not tremble the less, both at the danger into which she had nearly cast
herself and at the helpless state to which she was reduced.
nevertheless, knowing the weakness of her husband, and more particularly
his cupidity, she did not despair of bringing him round to her purpose.

"ah, you are a cardinalist, then, monsieur, are you?" cried she; "and
you serve the party of those who mal
 
 ___________________________
 
ve the state," said bonacieux, emphatically.

"and what do you know about the state you talk of?" said mme. bonacieux,
shrugging her shoulders. "be satisfied with being a plain,
straightforward citizen, and turn to that side which offers the most
advantages."

"eh, eh!" said bonacieux, slapping a plump, round bag, which returned a
sound a money; "what do you think of this, madame preacher?"

"whence comes that money?"

"you do not guess?"

"from the cardinal?"

"from him, and from my friend the comte de rochefort."

"the comte de rochefort! why, it was he who carried me off!"

"that may be, madame!"

"and you receive silver from that man?"

"have you not said that that abduction was entirely political?"

"yes; but that abduction had for its object the betrayal of my mistress,
to draw from me by torture confessions that might compromise the honor,
and perhaps the life, of my august mistress."

"madame," replied bonacieux, "your august mistress is a perfidious
spaniard, and what the cardinal does is well 
 
 ___________________________
 
f you please."

"oh, my god, my god!" cried mme. bonacieux. "can it be bad news?"

"i fear it."

"i will leave you with this stranger; but as soon as he is gone, if you
will permit me, i will return."

"permit you? i beseech you."

the superior and mme. bonacieux retired.

milady remained alone, with her eyes fixed upon the door. an instant
later, the jingling of spurs was heard upon the stairs, steps drew near,
the door opened, and a man appeared.

milady uttered a cry of joy; this man was the comte de rochefort--the
demoniacal tool of his eminence.




62 two varieties of demons


ah," cried milady and rochefort together, "it is you!"

"yes, it is i."

"and you come?" asked milady.

"from la rochelle; and you?"

"from england."

"buckingham?"

"dead or desperately wounded, as i left without having been able to hear
anything of him. a fanatic has just assassinated him."

"ah," said rochefort, with a smile; "this is a fortunate chance--one
that will delight his eminence! have you informed him of it?"

"