you, my son, but fifteen crowns, my
horse, and the counsels you have just heard. your mother will add to
them a recipe for a certain balsam, which she had from a bohemian and
which has the miraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach
the heart. take advantage of all, and live happily and long. i have but
one word to add, and that is to propose an example to you--not mine, for
i myself have never appeared at court, and have only taken part in
religious wars as a volunteer; i speak of monsieur de treville, who was
formerly my neighbor, and who had the honor to be, as a child, the
play-fellow of our king, louis xiii, whom god preserve! sometimes their
play degenerated into battles, and in these battles the king was not
always the stronger. the blows which he received increased greatly his
esteem and friendship for monsieur de treville. afterward, monsieur de
treville fought with others: in his first journey to paris, five times;
from the death of the late king till the young one came of age, with
 
 ___________________________
 
out
reckoning wars and sieges, seven times; and from that date up to the
present day, a hundred times, perhaps! so that in spite of edicts,
ordinances, and decrees, there he is, captain of the musketeers; that is
to say, chief of a legion of caesars, whom the king holds in great
esteem and whom the cardinal dreads--he who dreads nothing, as it is
said. still further, monsieur de treville gains ten thousand crowns a
year; he is therefore a great noble. he began as you begin. go to him
with this letter, and make him your model in order that you may do as he
has done."

upon which m. d’artagnan the elder girded his own sword round his son,
kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him his benediction.

on leaving the paternal chamber, the young man found his mother, who was
waiting for him with the famous recipe of which the counsels we have
just repeated would necessitate fr
 
 ___________________________
 
owever, did
not prevent his saying, as he was fainting, that if such a thing had
happened in paris, you should have cause to repent of it at a later
period."

"then," said the stranger coolly, "he must be some prince in disguise."

"i have told you this, good sir," resumed the host, "in order that you
may be on your guard."

"did he name no one in his passion?"

"yes; he struck his pocket and said, ’we shall see what monsieur de
treville will think of this insult offered to his protege.’"

"monsieur de treville?" said the stranger, becoming attentive, "he put
his hand upon his pocket while pronouncing the name of monsieur de
treville? now, my dear host, while your young man was insensible, you
did not fail, i am quite sure, to ascertain what that pocket contained.
what was there in it?"

"a letter addressed to monsieur de treville, captain of the musketeers."

"indeed!"

"exactly as i have the honor to tell your excellency."

the host, who was not endowed with great perspicacity, did not observe
the e
 
 ___________________________
 
 host had carefully placed in the scabbard. as to the
rest of the blade, the master had slyly put that on one side to make
himself a larding pin.

but this deception would probably not have stopped our fiery young man
if the host had not reflected that the reclamation which his guest made
was perfectly just.

"but, after all," said he, lowering the point of his spit, "where is
this letter?"

"yes, where is this letter?" cried d’artagnan. "in the first place, i
warn you that that letter is for monsieur de treville, and it must be
found, or if it is not found, he will know how to find it."

his threat completed the intimidation of the host. after the king and
the cardinal, m. de treville was the man whose name was perhaps most
frequently repeated by the military, and even by citizens. there was, to
be sure, father joseph, but his name was never pronounced but with a
subdued voice, such was the terror inspired by his gray eminence, as the
cardinal’s familiar was called.

throwing down his spit, and order
 
 ___________________________
 
ed d’artagnan, but little convinced, as he knew
better than anyone else how entirely personal the value of this letter
was, and saw nothing in it likely to tempt cupidity. the fact was that
none of his servants, none of the travelers present, could have gained
anything by being possessed of this paper.

"do you say," resumed d’artagnan, "that you suspect that impertinent
gentleman?"

"i tell you i am sure of it," continued the host. "when i informed him
that your lordship was the protege of monsieur de treville, and that you
even had a letter for that illustrious gentleman, he appeared to be very
much disturbed, and asked me where that letter was, and immediately came
down into the kitchen, where he knew your doublet was."

"then that’s my thief," replied d’artagnan. "i will complain to monsieur
de treville, and monsieur de treville will complain to the king." he
then drew two crowns majestically from his purse and gave them to the
host, who accompanied him, cap in hand, to the gate, and remounted
 
 ___________________________
 
 for?" asked another.

"only till the queen has given an heir to the crown of france."

"no jesting upon that subject, gentlemen," said porthos; "thank god the
queen is still of an age to give one!"

"they say that monsieur de buckingham is in france," replied aramis,
with a significant smile which gave to this sentence, apparently so
simple, a tolerably scandalous meaning.

"aramis, my good friend, this time you are wrong," interrupted porthos.
"your wit is always leading you beyond bounds; if monsieur de treville
heard you, you would repent of speaking thus."

"are you going to give me a lesson, porthos?" cried aramis, from whose
usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning.

"my dear fellow, be a musketeer or an abbe. be one or the other, but not
both," replied porthos. "you know what athos told you the other day; you
eat at everybody’s mess. ah, don’t be angry, i beg of you, that would be
useless; you know what is agreed upon between you, athos and me. you go
to madame d’aguillon’s, and you 
 
 ___________________________
 
er, let it be
respectfully."

"porthos, you are as vain as narcissus; i plainly tell you so," replied
aramis. "you know i hate moralizing, except when it is done by athos. as
to you, good sir, you wear too magnificent a baldric to be strong on
that head. i will be an abbe if it suits me. in the meanwhile i am a
musketeer; in that quality i say what i please, and at this moment it
pleases me to say that you weary me."

"aramis!"

"porthos!"

"gentlemen! gentlemen!" cried the surrounding group.

"monsieur de treville awaits monsieur d’artagnan," cried a servant,
throwing open the door of the cabinet.

at this announcement, during which the door remained open, everyone
became mute, and amid the general silence the young man crossed part of
the length of the antechamber, and entered the apartment of the captain
of the musketeers, congratulating himself with all his heart at having
so narrowly escaped the end of this strange quarrel.




3 the audience


m de treville was at the moment in rather ill-humor, n
 
 ___________________________
 
ng his shoulder violently, made him utter a
cry, or rather a howl.

"excuse me," said d’artagnan, endeavoring to resume his course, "excuse
me, but i am in a hurry."

scarcely had he descended the first stair, when a hand of iron seized
him by the belt and stopped him.

"you are in a hurry?" said the musketeer, as pale as a sheet. "under
that pretense you run against me! you say, ’excuse me,’ and you believe
that is sufficient? not at all, my young man. do you fancy because you
have heard monsieur de treville speak to us a little cavalierly today
that other people are to treat us as he speaks to us? undeceive
yourself, comrade, you are not monsieur de treville."

"my faith!" replied d’artagnan, recognizing athos, who, after the
dressing performed by the doctor, was returning to his own apartment. "i
did not do it intentionally, and not doing it intentionally, i said
’excuse me.’ it appears to me that this is quite enough. i repeat to
you, however, and this time on my word of honor--i think per
 
 ___________________________
 
onsieur; but do not be too confident. take your handkerchief;
whether it belongs to you or another, you may perhaps stand in need of
it."

"monsieur is a gascon?" asked aramis.

"yes. monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence?"

"prudence, monsieur, is a virtue sufficiently useless to musketeers, i
know, but indispensable to churchmen; and as i am only a musketeer
provisionally, i hold it good to be prudent. at two o’clock i shall have
the honor of expecting you at the hotel of monsieur de treville. there i
will indicate to you the best place and time."

the two young men bowed and separated, aramis ascending the street which
led to the luxembourg, while d’artagnan, perceiving the appointed hour
was approaching, took the road to the carmes-deschaux, saying to
himself, "decidedly i can’t draw back; but at least, if i am killed, i
shall be killed by a musketeer."




5 the king’s musketeers and the cardinal’s guards


d’artagnan was acquainted with nobody in paris. he went therefo
 
 ___________________________
 
ng, i can assure you that we would make no
effort to prevent you. leave us alone, then, and you will enjoy a little
amusement without cost to yourselves."

"gentlemen," said jussac, "it is with great regret that i pronounce the
thing impossible. duty before everything. sheathe, then, if you please,
and follow us."

"monsieur," said aramis, parodying jussac, "it would afford us great
pleasure to obey your polite invitation if it depended upon ourselves;
but unfortunately the thing is impossible--monsieur de treville has
forbidden it. pass on your way, then; it is the best thing to do."

this raillery exasperated jussac. "we will charge upon you, then," said
he, "if you disobey."

"there are five of them," said athos, half aloud, "and we are but three;
we shall be beaten again, and must die on the spot, for, on my part, i
declare i will never appear again before the captain as a conquered
man."

athos, porthos, and aramis instantly drew near one another, while jussac
drew up his soldiers.

this short interv
 
 ___________________________
 
hanged."

"no, sire," replied treville, who saw at the first glance how things
would go, "on the contrary, they are good creatures, as meek as lambs,
and have but one desire, i’ll be their warranty. and that is that their
swords may never leave their scabbards but in your majesty’s service.
but what are they to do? the guards of monsieur the cardinal are forever
seeking quarrels with them, and for the honor of the corps even, the
poor young men are obliged to defend themselves."

"listen to monsieur de treville," said the king; "listen to him! would
not one say he was speaking of a religious community? in truth, my dear
captain, i have a great mind to take away your commission and give it to
mademoiselle de chemerault, to whom i promised an abbey. but don’t fancy
that i am going to take you on your bare word. i am called louis the
just, monsieur de treville, and by and by, by and by we will see."

"ah, sire; it is because i confide in that justice that i shall wait
patiently and quietly the good ple
 
 ___________________________
 
eed, monsieur! upon my soul, everything
degenerates; and i don’t know whether it is the game which leaves no
scent, or the dogs that have no noses. we started a stag of ten
branches. we chased him for six hours, and when he was near being
taken--when st.-simon was already putting his horn to his mouth to sound
the mort--crack, all the pack takes the wrong scent and sets off after a
two-year-older. i shall be obliged to give up hunting, as i have given
up hawking. ah, i am an unfortunate king, monsieur de treville! i had
but one gerfalcon, and he died day before yesterday."

"indeed, sire, i wholly comprehend your disappointment. the misfortune
is great; but i think you have still a good number of falcons, sparrow
hawks, and tiercels."

"and not a man to instruct them. falconers are declining. i know no one
but myself who is acquainted with the noble art of venery. after me it
will all be over, and people will hunt with gins, snares, and traps. if
i had but the time to train pupils! but there is the card
 
 ___________________________
 
inal always at
hand, who does not leave me a moment’s repose; who talks to me about
spain, who talks to me about austria, who talks to me about england! ah!
a propos of the cardinal, monsieur de treville, i am vexed with you!"

this was the chance at which m. de treville waited for the king. he knew
the king of old, and he knew that all these complaints were but a
preface--a sort of excitation to encourage himself--and that he had now
come to his point at last.

"and in what have i been so unfortunate as to displease your majesty?"
asked m. de treville, feigning the most profound astonishment.

"is it thus you perform your charge, monsieur?" continued the king,
without directly replying to de t
 
 ___________________________
 
d too
late to present himself at the louvre, that he had only that moment
arrived and that he was at that very hour with the king.

this circumstance pleased m. de treville much, as he thus became certain
that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself between m. de la
tremouille’s testimony and himself.

in fact, ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door of the
king’s closet opened, and m. de treville saw m. de la tremouille come
out. the duke came straight up to him, and said: "monsieur de treville,
his majesty has just sent for me in order to inquire respecting the
circumstances which took place yesterday at my hotel. i have told him
the truth; that is to say, that the fault lay with my people, and that i
was ready to offer you my excuses. since i have the good fortune to meet
you, i beg you to receive them, and to hold me always as one of your
friends."

"monsieur the duke," said m. de treville, "i was so confident of your
loyalty that i required no other defender before his majesty tha
 
 ___________________________
 
d the king, who had heard all these compliments
through the open door; "only tell him, treville, since he wishes to be
considered your friend, that i also wish to be one of his, but he
neglects me; that it is nearly three years since i have seen him, and
that i never do see him unless i send for him. tell him all this for me,
for these are things which a king cannot say for himself."

"thanks, sire, thanks," said the duke; "but your majesty may be assured
that it is not those--i do not speak of monsieur de treville--whom your
majesty sees at all hours of the day that are most devoted to you."

"ah! you have heard what i said? so much the better, duke, so much the
better," said the king, advancing toward the door. "ah! it is you,
treville. where are your musketeers? i told you the day before yesterday
to bring them with you; why have you not done so?"

"they are below, sire, and with your permission la chesnaye will bid
them come up."

"yes, yes, let them come up immediately. it is nearly eight o’clock, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he was
convinced.

"what diabolical villainy you have performed here," said porthos, when
the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found
themselves alone. "shame, shame, for four musketeers to allow an
unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst! and
a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!"

"porthos," said aramis, "athos has already told you that you are a
simpleton, and i am quite of his opinion. d’artagnan, you are a great
man; and when you occupy monsieur de treville’s place, i will come and
ask your influence to secure me an abbey."

"well, i am in a maze," said porthos; "do you approve of what d’artagnan
has done?"

"parbleu! indeed i do," said athos; "i not only approve of what he has
done, but i congratulate him upon it."

"and now, gentlemen," said d’artagnan, without stopping to explain his
conduct to porthos, "all for one, one for all--that is our motto, is it
not?"

"and yet--" said porthos.

"hold out your hand and swear!" cried athos and ara
 
 ___________________________
 
uch as a woman could resist four
men.

"pardon, gentlemen--par--" murmured the voice, which could now only be
heard in inarticulate sounds.

"they are binding her; they are going to drag her away," cried
d’artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor. "my sword! good, it
is by my side! planchet!"

"monsieur."

"run and seek athos, porthos and aramis. one of the three will certainly
be at home, perhaps all three. tell them to take arms, to come here, and
to run! ah, i remember, athos is at monsieur de treville’s."

"but where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?"

"i am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner," cried
d’artagnan. "you put back the boards, sweep the floor, go out at the
door, and run as i told you."

"oh, monsieur! monsieur! you will kill yourself," cried planchet.

"hold your tongue, stupid fellow," said d’artagnan; and laying hold of
the casement, he let himself gently down from the first story, which
fortunately was not very elevated, without doing h
 
 ___________________________
 
 the papers. the last two mounted guard at the door during
this examination; then, when all was over, they went away, leaving the
house empty and exposed."

"and porthos and aramis?"

"i could not find them; they did not come."

"but they may come any moment, for you left word that i awaited them?"

"yes, monsieur."

"well, don’t budge, then; if they come, tell them what has happened. let
them wait for me at the pomme-de-pin. here it would be dangerous; the
house may be watched. i will run to monsieur de treville to tell them
all this, and will meet them there."

"very well, monsieur," said planchet.

"but you will remain; you are not afraid?" said d’artagnan, coming back
to recommend courage to his lackey.

"be easy, monsieur," said planchet; "you do not know me yet. i am brave
when i set about it. it is all in beginning. besides, i am a picard."

"then it is understood," said d’artagnan; "you would rather be killed
than desert your post?"

"yes, monsieur; and there is nothing i would not do to pro
 
 ___________________________
 

"you see, monsieur, that you say it again."

"but i tell you, monsieur commissary," cried bonacieux, in his turn,
"there is not the least doubt about the matter. monsieur d’artagnan is
my tenant, although he does not pay me my rent--and even better on that
account ought i to know him. monsieur d’artagnan is a young man,
scarcely nineteen or twenty, and this gentleman must be thirty at least.
monsieur d’artagnan is in monsieur dessessart’s guards, and this
gentleman is in the company of monsieur de treville’s musketeers. look
at his uniform, monsieur commissary, look at his uniform!"

"that’s true," murmured the commissary; "pardieu, that’s true."

at this moment the door was opened quickly, and a messenger, introduced
by one of the gatekeepers of the bastille, gave a letter to the
commissary.

"oh, unhappy woman!" cried the commissary.

"how? what do you say? of whom do you speak? it is not of my wife, i
hope!"

"on the contrary, it is of her. yours is a pretty business."

"but," said the a
 
 ___________________________
 
errupted the king; "for all that was done for our
service."

"then," said treville, "it was also for your majesty’s service that one
of my musketeers, who was innocent, has been seized, that he has been
placed between two guards like a malefactor, and that this gallant man,
who has ten times shed his blood in your majesty’s service and is ready
to shed it again, has been paraded through the midst of an insolent
populace?"

"bah!" said the king, who began to be shaken, "was it so managed?"

"monsieur de treville," said the cardinal, with the greatest phlegm,
"does not tell your majesty that this innocent musketeer, this gallant
man, had only an hour before attacked, sword in hand, four commissaries
of inquiry, who were delegated by myself to examine into an affair of
the highest importance."

"i defy your eminence to prove it," cried treville, with his gascon
freedom and military frankness; "for one hour before, monsieur athos,
who, i will confide it to your majesty, is really a man of the highest
qual
 
 ___________________________
 
d treville haughtily.

"come, come, treville, hold your tongue," said the king.

"if his eminence entertains any suspicion against one of my musketeers,"
said treville, "the justice of monsieur the cardinal is so well known
that i demand an inquiry."

"in the house in which the judicial inquiry was made," continued the
impassive cardinal, "there lodges, i believe, a young bearnais, a friend
of the musketeer."

"your eminence means monsieur d’artagnan."

"i mean a young man whom you patronize, monsieur de treville."

"yes, your eminence, it is the same."

"do you not suspect this young man of having given bad counsel?"

"to athos, to a man double his age?" interrupted treville. "no,
monseigneur. besides, d’artagnan passed the evening with me."

"well," said the cardinal, "everybody seems to have passed the evening
with you."

"does your eminence doubt my word?" said treville, with a brow flushed
with anger.

"no, god forbid," said the cardinal; "only, at what hour was he with
you?"

"oh, as to that i c
 
 ___________________________
 
 pardoning only applies to the guilty," said treville, who
was determined to have the last word, "and my musketeer is innocent. it
is not mercy, then, that you are about to accord, sire, it is justice."

"and he is in the fort l’eveque?" said the king.

"yes, sire, in solitary confinement, in a dungeon, like the lowest
criminal."

"the devil!" murmured the king; "what must be done?"

"sign an order for his release, and all will be said," replied the
cardinal. "i believe with your majesty that monsieur de treville’s
guarantee is more than sufficient."

treville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixed with
fear; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on the part of the
cardinal to this sudden yielding.

the king signed the order for release, and treville carried it away
without delay. as he was about to leave the presence, the cardinal gave
him a friendly smile, and said, "a perfect harmony reigns, sire, between
the leaders and the soldiers of your musketeers, which must be
pro
 
 ___________________________
 
at guarantee will you give me," asked she, "if i consent to
confide this message to you?"

"my love for you. speak! command! what is to be done?"

"my god, my god!" murmured the young woman, "ought i to confide such a
secret to you, monsieur? you are almost a boy."

"i see that you require someone to answer for me?"

"i admit that would reassure me greatly."

"do you know athos?"

"no."

"porthos?"

"no."

"aramis?"

"no. who are these gentleman?"

"three of the king’s musketeers. do you know monsieur de treville, their
captain?"

"oh, yes, him! i know him; not personally, but from having heard the
queen speak of him more than once as a brave and loyal gentleman."

"you do not fear lest he should betray you to the cardinal?"

"oh, no, certainly not!"

"well, reveal your secret to him, and ask him whether, however
important, however valuable, however terrible it may be, you may not
confide it to me."

"but this secret is not mine, and i cannot reveal it in this manner."

"you were about to confide it to 
 
 ___________________________
 
id porthos, "at least i should
like to know what for."

"you would be all the wiser," said athos.

"and yet," said aramis, "i am somewhat of porthos’s opinion."

"is the king accustomed to give you such reasons? no. he says to you
jauntily, ’gentlemen, there is fighting going on in gascony or in
flanders; go and fight,’ and you go there. why? you need give yourselves
no more uneasiness about this."

"d’artagnan is right," said athos; "here are our three leaves of absence
which came from monsieur de treville, and here are three hundred
pistoles which came from i don’t know where. so let us go and get killed
where we are told to go. is life worth the trouble of so many questions?
d’artagnan, i am ready to follow you."

"and i also," said porthos.

"and i also," said aramis. "and, indeed, i am not sorry to quit paris; i
had need of distraction."

"well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured," said
d’artagnan.

"and, now, when are we to go?" asked athos.

"immediately," replie
 
 ___________________________
 
eyes. he saw that the duke
was searching for a means of making him accept something and the idea
that the blood of his friends and himself was about to be paid for with
english gold was strangely repugnant to him.

"let us understand each other, my lord," replied d’artagnan, "and let us
make things clear beforehand in order that there may be no mistake. i am
in the service of the king and queen of france, and form part of the
company of monsieur dessessart, who, as well as his brother-in-law,
monsieur de treville, is particularly attached to their majesties. what
i have done, then, has been for the queen, and not at all for your
grace. and still further, it is very probable i should not have done
anything of this, if it had not been to make myself agreeable to someone
who is my lady, as the queen is yours."

"yes," said the duke, smiling, "and i even believe that i know that
other person; it is--"

"my lord, i have not named her!" interrupted the young man, warmly.

"that is true," said the duke; "and i
 
 ___________________________
 
ingular farewell, and asking
himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate.

at the top of the stairs he found planchet in a great fright.

"ah, monsieur!" cried planchet, as soon as he perceived his master,
"here is more trouble. i thought you would never come in."

"what’s the matter now, planchet?" demanded d’artagnan.

"oh! i give you a hundred, i give you a thousand times to guess,
monsieur, the visit i received in your absence."

"when?"

"about half an hour ago, while you were at monsieur de treville’s."

"who has been here? come, speak."

"monsieur de cavois."

"monsieur de cavois?"

"in person."

"the captain of the cardinal’s guards?"

"himself."

"did he come to arrest me?"

"i have no doubt that he did, monsieur, for all his wheedling manner."

"was he so sweet, then?"

"indeed, he was all honey, monsieur."

"indeed!"

"he came, he said, on the part of his eminence, who wished you well, and
to beg you to follow him to the palais-royal*."

_*it was called the palais-cardinal before 
 
 ___________________________
 
 replied aramis; "but on your account i will add some
eggs, and that is a serious infraction of the rule-for eggs are meat,
since they engender chickens."

"this feast is not very succulent; but never mind, i will put up with it
for the sake of remaining with you."

"i am grateful to you for the sacrifice," said aramis; "but if your body
be not greatly benefited by it, be assured your soul will."

"and so, aramis, you are decidedly going into the church? what will our
two friends say? what will monsieur de treville say? they will treat you
as a deserter, i warn you."

"i do not enter the church; i re-enter it. i deserted the church for the
world, for you know that i forced myself when i became a musketeer."

"i? i know nothing about it."

"you don’t know i quit the seminary?"

"not at all."

"this is my story, then. besides, the scriptures say, ’confess
yourselves to one another,’ and i confess to you, d’artagnan."

"and i give you absolution beforehand. you see i am a good sort of a
man."

"do no
 
 ___________________________
 
 d’artagnan turned aside to conceal his ill
humor.

"hold, hold, hold!" said athos, wit his quiet tone; "that throw of the
dice is extraordinary. i have not seen such a one four times in my life.
two aces!"

the englishman looked, and was seized with astonishment. d’artagnan
looked, and was seized with pleasure.

"yes," continued athos, "four times only; once at the house of monsieur
crequy; another time at my own house in the country, in my chateau
at--when i had a chateau; a third time at monsieur de treville’s where
it surprised us all; and the fourth time at a cabaret, where it fell to
my lot, and where i lost a hundred louis and a supper on it."

"then monsieur takes his horse back again," said the englishman.

"certainly," said d’artagnan.

"then there is no revenge?"

"our conditions said, ’no revenge,’ you will please to recollect."

"that is true; the horse shall be restored to your lackey, monsieur."

"a moment," said athos; "with your permission, monsieur, i wish to speak
a word wit
 
 ___________________________
 
, "i have an idea."

"well, that’s something, for i have not the shadow of one," said athos
coolly; "but as to d’artagnan, gentlemen, the idea of belonging to ours
has driven him out of his senses. a thousand livres! for my part, i
declare i want two thousand."

"four times two makes eight," then said aramis; "it is eight thousand
that we want to complete our outfits, toward which, it is true, we have
already the saddles."

"besides," said athos, waiting till d’artagnan, who went to thank
monsieur de treville, had shut the door, "besides, there is that
beautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend. what the
devil! d’artagnan is too good a comrade to leave his brothers in
embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king on his finger."




29 hunting for the equipments


the most preoccupied of the four friends was certainly d’artagnan,
although he, in his quality of guardsman, would be much more easily
equipped than messieurs the musketeers, who were all of high rank; but
our gascon 
 
 ___________________________
 
t
will not be women that will defray the expense of my outfit."

"handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear athos, neither
princesses nor queens would be secure from your amorous solicitations."

"how young this d’artagnan is!" said athos, shrugging his shoulders; and
he made a sign to grimaud to bring another bottle.

at that moment planchet put his head modestly in at the half-open door,
and told his master that the horses were ready.

"what horses?" asked athos.

"two horses that monsieur de treville lends me at my pleasure, and with
which i am now going to take a ride to st. germain."

"well, and what are you going to do at st. germain?" then demanded
athos.

then d’artagnan described the meeting which he had at the church, and
how he had found that lady who, with the seigneur in the black cloak and
with the scar near his temple, filled his mind constantly.

"that is to say, you are in love with this lady as you were with madame
bonacieux," said athos, shrugging his shoulders contemptuou
 
 ___________________________
 
m i!" cried kitty, springing forward to meet
her mistress.

both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communication remained
open, d’artagnan could hear milady for some time scolding her maid. she
was at length appeased, and the conversation turned upon him while kitty
was assisting her mistress.

"well," said milady, "i have not seen our gascon this evening."

"what, milady! has he not come?" said kitty. "can he be inconstant
before being happy?"

"oh, no; he must have been prevented by monsieur de treville or monsieur
dessessart. i understand my game, kitty; i have this one safe."

"what will you do with him, madame?"

"what will i do with him? be easy, kitty, there is something between
that man and me that he is quite ignorant of: he nearly made me lose my
credit with his eminence. oh, i will be revenged!"

"i believed that madame loved him."

"i love him? i detest him! an idiot, who held the life of lord de winter
in his hands and did not kill him, by which i missed three hundred
thousand livre
 
 ___________________________
 
ruth, i have never been seriously uneasy on his
account. but you, my dear athos--you, who so generously distributed the
englishman’s pistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do you
mean to do?"

"i am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy, seeing that it
is blessed bread to kill an englishman; but if i had pocketed his
pistoles, they would have weighed me down like a remorse."

"go to, my dear athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas."

"let it pass. what do you think of monsieur de treville telling me, when
he did me the honor to call upon me yesterday, that you associated with
the suspected english, whom the cardinal protects?"

"that is to say, i visit an englishwoman--the one i named."

"oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account i gave you advice, which
naturally you took care not to adopt."

"i gave you my reasons."

"yes; you look there for your outfit, i think you said."

"not at all. i have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was
concerned in the abduction of madame bo
 
 ___________________________
 
, "to be sure we will get you out; but meantime, as we are to set
off the day after tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this
bastille."

"let us do better than that," said athos; "do not let us leave him
during the whole evening. let each of us wait at a gate of the palace
with three musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all
suspicious in appearance, come out, let us fall upon it. it is a long
time since we have had a skirmish with the guards of monsieur the
cardinal; monsieur de treville must think us dead."

"to a certainty, athos," said aramis, "you were meant to be a general of
the army! what do you think of the plan, gentlemen?"

"admirable!" replied the young men in chorus.

"well," said porthos, "i will run to the hotel, and engage our comrades
to hold themselves in readiness by eight o’clock; the rendezvous, the
place du palais-cardinal. meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the
horses."

"i have no horse," said d’artagnan; "but that is of no consequence, i
can t
 
 ___________________________
 
ake one of monsieur de treville’s."

"that is not worth while," said aramis, "you can have one of mine."

"one of yours! how many have you, then?" asked d’artagnan.

"three," replied aramis, smiling.

"certes," cried athos, "you are the best-mounted poet of france or
navarre."

"well, my dear aramis, you don’t want three horses? i cannot comprehend
what induced you to buy three!"

"therefore i only purchased two," said aramis.

"the third, then, fell from the clouds, i suppose?"

"no, the third was brought to me this ve
 
 ___________________________
 
 be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as is probable, i may
consider myself almost as a condemned man," said d’artagnan, shaking his
head. "but why has he waited till now? that’s all plain enough. milady
has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which
renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made the cup
overflow."

"fortunately," added he, "my good friends are down yonder, and they will
not allow me to be carried away without a struggle. nevertheless,
monsieur de treville’s company of musketeers alone cannot maintain a war
against the cardinal, who disposes of the forces of all france, and
before whom the queen is without power and the king without will.
d’artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you have
excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!"

he came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber. he
placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty, who led him into
the waiting room and passed on into the interior of
 
 ___________________________
 
gracious majesty."

"that is well. it is you who set out seven or eight months ago from your
country to seek your fortune in the capital?"

"yes, monseigneur."

"you came through meung, where something befell you. i don’t very well
know what, but still something."

"monseigneur," said d’artagnan, "this was what happened to me--"

"never mind, never mind!" resumed the cardinal, with a smile which
indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it.
"you were recommended to monsieur de treville, were you not?"

"yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at meung--"

"the letter was lost," replied his eminence; "yes, i know that. but
monsieur de treville is a skilled physiognomist, who knows men at first
sight; and he placed you in the company of his brother-in-law, monsieur
dessessart, leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter
the musketeers."

"monseigneur is correctly informed," said d’artagnan.

"since that time many things have happened to you. you were w
 
 ___________________________
 
 i will go and find buckingham."

"you shall not do that, d’artagnan," said athos, coolly.

"and why not? have i not been there once?"

"yes; but at that period we were not at war. at that period buckingham
was an ally, and not an enemy. what you would now do amounts to
treason."

d’artagnan perceived the force of this reasoning, and was silent.

"but," said porthos, "i think i have an idea, in my turn."

"silence for monsieur porthos’s idea!" said aramis.

"i will ask leave of absence of monsieur de treville, on some pretext or
other which you must invent; i am not very clever at pretexts. milady
does not know me; i will get access to her without her suspecting me,
and when i catch my beauty, i will strangle her."

"well," replied athos, "i am not far from approving the idea of monsieur
porthos."

"for shame!" said aramis. "kill a woman? no, listen to me; i have the
true idea."

"let us see your idea, aramis," said athos, who felt much deference for
the young musketeer.

"we must inform the queen."
 
 ___________________________
 

"still my three brave fellows!" murmured the cardinal. "and the
guardsman?"

"d’artagnan."

"still my young scapegrace. positively, these four men must be on my
side."

the same evening the cardinal spoke to m. de treville of the exploit of
the morning, which was the talk of the whole camp. m. de treville, who
had received the account of the adventure from the mouths of the heroes
of it, related it in all its details to his eminence, not forgetting the
episode of the napkin.

"that’s well, monsieur de treville," said the cardinal; "pray let that
napkin be sent to me. i will have three fleur-de-lis embroidered on it
in gold, and will give it to your company as a standard."

"monseigneur," said m. de treville, "that will be unjust to the
guardsmen. monsieur d’artagnan is not with me; he serves under monsieur
dessessart."

"well, then, take him," said the cardinal; "when four men are so much
attached to one another, it is only fair that they should serve in the
same company."

that same evening m. de 
 
 ___________________________
 
 they least expect it, they
have proof of a kind remembrance."

"alas!" said milady, "i believe so; the queen is so good!"

"oh, you know her, then, that lovely and noble queen, that you speak of
her thus!" cried the novice, with enthusiasm.

"that is to say," replied milady, driven into her entrenchment, "that i
have not the honor of knowing her personally; but i know a great number
of her most intimate friends. i am acquainted with monsieur de putange;
i met monsieur dujart in england; i know monsieur de treville."

"monsieur de treville!" exclaimed the novice, "do you know monsieur de
treville?"

"yes, perfectly well--intimately even."

"the captain of the king’s musketeers?"

"the captain of the king’s musketeers."

"why, then, only see!" cried the novice; "we shall soon be well
acquainted, almost friends. if you know monsieur de treville, you must
have visited him?"

"often!" said milady, who, having entered this track, and perceiving
that falsehood succeeded, was determined to follow it to the e