e thought that considering three months’ lodging, about
which i have said nothing--"

"yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and i find it
excellent."

"reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor to remain
in my house i shall never speak to you about rent--"

"very kind!"

"and adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer you fifty
pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be short at the
present moment."

"admirable! you are rich then, my dear monsieur bonacieux?"

"i am comfortably off, monsieur, that’s all; i have scraped together
some such things as an income of two or three thousand crowns in the
haberdashery business, but more particularly in venturing some funds in
the last voyage of the celebrated navigator jean moquet; so that you
understand, monsieur--but!--" cried the citizen.

"what!" demanded d’artagnan.

"whom do i see yonder?"

"where?"

"in the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that door--a man
wrapped in a cloak."

"it
 
 ___________________________
 
 flight has caused us to miss a
glorious affair, gentlemen--an affair by which there were a hundred
pistoles, and perhaps more, to be gained."

"how is that?" cried porthos and aramis in a breath.

as to athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented himself
with interrogating d’artagnan by a look.

"planchet," said d’artagnan to his domestic, who just then insinuated
his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of
the conversation, "go down to my landlord, monsieur bonacieux, and ask
him to send me half a dozen bottles of beaugency wine; i prefer that."

"ah, ah! you have credit with your landlord, then?" asked porthos.

"yes," replied d’artagnan, "from this very day; and mind, if the wine is
bad, we will send him to find better."

"we must use, and not abuse," said aramis, sententiously.

"i always said that d’artagnan had the longest head of the four," said
athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which d’artagnan replied with
a bow, immediately resumed h
 
 ___________________________
 
," said athos. "silence!"

"but you promised me--" whispered the poor mercer.

"we can only save you by being free ourselves," replied d’artagnan, in a
rapid, low tone; "and if we appear inclined to defend you, they will
arrest us with you."

"it seems, nevertheless--"

"come, gentlemen, come!" said d’artagnan, aloud; "i have no motive for
defending monsieur. i saw him today for the first time, and he can tell
you on what occasion; he came to demand the rent of my lodging. is that
not true, monsieur bonacieux? answer!"

"that is the very truth," cried the mercer; "but monsieur does not tell
you--"

"silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my friends;
silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin everybody without
saving yourself! come, come, gentlemen, remove the fellow." and
d’artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer among the guards, saying to
him, "you are a shabby old fellow, my dear. you come to demand money of
me--of a musketeer! to prison with him! gentlemen, once more
 
 ___________________________
 
e was alone with her liberator. she extended her hands to him with a
smile. mme. bonacieux had the sweetest smile in the world.

"ah, monsieur!" said she, "you have saved me; permit me to thank you."

"madame," said d’artagnan, "i have only done what every gentleman would
have done in my place; you owe me no thanks."

"oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and i hope to prove to you that you have
not served an ingrate. but what could these men, whom i at first took
for robbers, want with me, and why is monsieur bonacieux not here?"

"madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers could have been,
for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as to your husband,
monsieur bonacieux, he is not here because he was yesterday evening
conducted to the bastille."

"my husband in the bastille!" cried mme. bonacieux. "oh, my god! what
has he done? poor dear man, he is innocence itself!"

and something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrified features of
the young woman.

"what has he done, madame?" said d’
 
 ___________________________
 
 black hair, a dark
complexion, and a scar on his left temple."

"that is he, that is he; but his name?"

"ah, his name? i do not know that."

"and did my husband know i had been carried off?"

"he was informed of it by a letter, written to him by the abductor
himself."

"and does he suspect," said mme. bonacieux, with some embarrassment,
"the cause of this event?"

"he attributed it, i believe, to a political cause."

"i doubted from the first; and now i think entirely as he does. then my
dear monsieur bonacieux has not suspected me a single instant?"

"so far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and above
all, of your love."

a second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips of the
pretty young woman.

"but," continued d’artagnan, "how did you escape?"

"i took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as i had
known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the help of the
sheets i let myself down from the window. then, as i believed my husband
would be at 
 
 ___________________________
 
 you wish me to conduct you?"
asked d’artagnan.

"i am at quite a loss how to answer you, i admit," said mme. bonacieux.
"my intention was to inform monsieur laporte, through my husband, in
order that monsieur laporte might tell us precisely what had taken place
at the louvre in the last three days, and whether there is any danger in
presenting myself there."

"but i," said d’artagnan, "can go and inform monsieur laporte."

"no doubt you could, only there is one misfortune, and that is that
monsieur bonacieux is known at the louvre, and would be allowed to pass;
whereas you are not known there, and the gate would be closed against
you."

"ah, bah!" said d’artagnan; "you have at some wicket of the louvre a
concierge who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to a password, would--"

mme. bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man.

"and if i give you this password," said she, "would you forget it as
soon as you used it?"

"by my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!" said d’artagnan, with an
accent so
 
 ___________________________
 
estafania, for she felt that her strength was about
to fail her.

buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand, and
then rising, said, "within six months, if i am not dead, i shall have
seen you again, madame--even if i have to overturn the world." and
faithful to the promise he had made, he rushed out of the apartment.

in the corridor he met mme. bonacieux, who waited for him, and who, with
the same precautions and the same good luck, conducted him out of the
louvre.




13 monsieur bonacieux


there was in all this, as may have been observed, one personage
concerned, of whom, notwithstanding his precarious position, we have
appeared to take but very little notice. this personage was m.
bonacieux, the respectable martyr of the political and amorous intrigues
which entangled themselves so nicely together at this gallant and
chivalric period.

fortunately, the reader may remember, or may not remember--fortunately
we have promised not to lose sight of him.

the officers who arrested hi
 
 ___________________________
 
ossible for me to tell you, because i don’t know myself;
but to a certainty it is not for having, knowingly at least, disobliged
monsieur the cardinal."

"you must, nevertheless, have committed a crime, since you are here and
are accused of high treason."

"of high treason!" cried bonacieux, terrified; "of high treason! how is
it possible for a poor mercer, who detests huguenots and who abhors
spaniards, to be accused of high treason? consider, monsieur, the thing
is absolutely impossible."

"monsieur bonacieux," said the commissary, looking at the accused as if
his little eyes had the faculty of reading to the very depths of hearts,
"you have a wife?"

"yes, monsieur," replied the mercer, in a tremble, feeling that it was
at this point affairs were likely to become perplexing; "that is to say,
i had one."

"what, you ’had one’? what have you done with her, then, if you have her
no longer?"

"they have abducted her, monsieur."

"they have abducted her? ah!"

bonacieux inferred from this "ah" that 
 
 ___________________________
 
ife does
while i am in prison?"

"because that which she does is part of a plan concerted between you--of
an infernal plan."

"i swear to you, monsieur commissary, that you are in the profoundest
error, that i know nothing in the world about what my wife had to do,
that i am entirely a stranger to what she has done; and that if she has
committed any follies, i renounce her, i abjure her, i curse her!"

"bah!" said athos to the commissary, "if you have no more need of me,
send me somewhere. your monsieur bonacieux is very tiresome."

the commissary designated by the same gesture athos and bonacieux, "let
them be guarded more closely than ever."

"and yet," said athos, with his habitual calmness, "if it be monsieur
d’artagnan who is concerned in this matter, i do not perceive how i can
take his place."

"do as i bade you," cried the commissary, "and preserve absolute
secrecy. you understand!"

athos shrugged his shoulders, and followed his guards silently, while m.
bonacieux uttered lamentations enough 
 
 ___________________________
 
carcely ever; she had business to transact with linen drapers, to
whose houses i conducted her."

"and how many were there of these linen drapers?"

"two, monseigneur."

"and where did they live?"

"one in rue de vaugirard, the other rue de la harpe."

"did you go into these houses with her?"

"never, monseigneur; i waited at the door."

"and what excuse did she give you for entering all alone?"

"she gave me none; she told me to wait, and i waited."

"you are a very complacent husband, my dear monsieur bonacieux," said
the cardinal.

"he calls me his dear monsieur," said the mercer to himself. "peste!
matters are going all right."

"should you know those doors again?"

"yes."

"do you know the numbers?"

"yes."

"what are they?"

"no. 25 in the rue de vaugirard; 75 in the rue de la harpe."

"that’s well," said the cardinal.

at these words he took up a silver bell, and rang it; the officer
entered.

"go," said he, in a subdued voice, "and find rochefort. tell him to come
to me immediately, if he has 
 
 ___________________________
 
you have been unjustly suspected, well, you must be indemnified.
here, take this purse of a hundred pistoles, and pardon me."

"i pardon you, monseigneur!" said bonacieux, hesitating to take the
purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but a
pleasantry. "but you are able to have me arrested, you are able to have
me tortured, you are able to have me hanged; you are the master, and i
could not have the least word to say. pardon you, monseigneur! you
cannot mean that!"

"ah, my dear monsieur bonacieux, you are generous in this matter. i see
it and i thank you for it. thus, then, you will take this bag, and you
will go away without being too malcontent."

"i go away enchanted."

"farewell, then, or rather, au revoir!"

"whenever monseigneur wishes, i shall be firmly at the orders of his
eminence."

"that will be often, be assured, for i have found your conversation
quite charming."

"oh! monseigneur!"

"au revoir, monsieur bonacieux, au revoir."

and the cardinal made him a sign with his hand
 
 ___________________________
 
 the part of the queen," said he, "and i--i will
appeal to his eminence."

at once mme. bonacieux saw that she had gone too far, and she was
terrified at having communicated so much. she for a moment contemplated
with fright that stupid countenance, impressed with the invincible
resolution of a fool that is overcome by fear.

"well, be it so!" said she. "perhaps, when all is considered, you are
right. in the long run, a man knows more about politics than a woman,
particularly such as, like you, monsieur bonacieux, have conversed with
the cardinal. and yet it is very hard," added she, "that a man upon
whose affection i thought i might depend, treats me thus unkindly and
will not comply with any of my fancies."

"that is because your fancies go too far," replied the triumphant
bonacieux, "and i mistrust them."

"well, i will give it up, then," said the young woman, sighing. "it is
well as it is; say no more about it."

"at least you should tell me what i should have to do in london,"
replied bonacieux, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
t in the world."

"till then, then?"

"till then."

bonacieux kissed his wife’s hand, and set off at a quick pace.

"well," said mme. bonacieux, when her husband had shut the street door
and she found herself alone; "that imbecile lacked but one thing: to
become a cardinalist. and i, who have answered for him to the queen--i,
who have promised my poor mistress--ah, my god, my god! she will take me
for one of those wretches with whom the palace swarms and who are placed
about her as spies! ah, monsieur bonacieux, i never did love you much,
but now it is worse than ever. i hate you, and on my word you shall pay
for this!"

at the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made her raise
her head, and a voice which reached her through the ceiling cried, "dear
madame bonacieux, open for me the little door on the alley, and i will
come down to you."




18 lover and husband


ah, madame," said d’artagnan, entering by the door which the young woman
opened for him, "allow me to tell you that you hav
 
 ___________________________
 
, their
captain?"

"oh, yes, him! i know him; not personally, but from having heard the
queen speak of him more than once as a brave and loyal gentleman."

"you do not fear lest he should betray you to the cardinal?"

"oh, no, certainly not!"

"well, reveal your secret to him, and ask him whether, however
important, however valuable, however terrible it may be, you may not
confide it to me."

"but this secret is not mine, and i cannot reveal it in this manner."

"you were about to confide it to monsieur bonacieux," said d’artagnan,
with chagrin.

"as one confides a letter to the hollow of a tree, to the wing of a
pigeon, to the collar of a dog."

"and yet, me--you see plainly that i love you."

"you say so."

"i am an honorable man."

"you say so."

"i am a gallant fellow."

"i believe it."

"i am brave."

"oh, i am sure of that!"

"then, put me to the proof."

mme. bonacieux looked at the young man, restrained for a minute by a
last hesitation; but there was such an ardor in his eyes, such
persuasion
 
 ___________________________
 
tune of having made your acquaintance."

"ah!" said bonacieux, "they took good care not to tell me that; and my
wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that’s sacred that she does
not know. but you," continued m. bonacieux, in a tone of perfect good
fellowship, "what has become of you all these days? i have not seen you
nor your friends, and i don’t think you could gather all that dust that
i saw planchet brush off your boots yesterday from the pavement of
paris."

"you are right, my dear monsieur bonacieux, my friends and i have been
on a little journey."

"far from here?"

"oh, lord, no! about forty leagues only. we went to take monsieur athos
to the waters of forges, where my friends still remain."

"and you have returned, have you not?" replied m. bonacieux, giving to
his countenance a most sly air. "a handsome young fellow like you does
not obtain long leaves of absence from his mistress; and we were
impatiently waited for at paris, were we not?"

"my faith!" said the young man, laughing, "i 
 
 ___________________________
 
d after them of their mistresses, but he was neither acquainted
with porthos’s nor aramis’s, and as to athos, he had none.

as he passed the hotel des gardes, he took a glance in to the stables.
three of the four horses had already arrived. planchet, all
astonishment, was busy grooming them, and had already finished two.

"ah, monsieur," said planchet, on perceiving d’artagnan, "how glad i am
to see you."

"why so, planchet?" asked the young man.

"do you place confidence in our landlord--monsieur bonacieux?"

"i? not the least in the world."

"oh, you do quite right, monsieur."

"but why this question?"

"because, while you were talking with him, i watched you without
listening to you; and, monsieur, his countenance changed color two or
three times!"

"bah!"

"preoccupied as monsieur was with the letter he had received, he did not
observe that; but i, whom the strange fashion in which that letter came
into the house had placed on my guard--i did not lose a movement of his
features."

"and you fou
 
 ___________________________
 
nd it?"

"traitorous, monsieur."

"indeed!"

"still more; as soon as monsieur had left and disappeared round the
corner of the street, monsieur bonacieux took his hat, shut his door,
and set off at a quick pace in an opposite direction."

"it seems you are right, planchet; all this appears to be a little
mysterious; and be assured that we will not pay him our rent until the
matter shall be categorically explained to us."

"monsieur jests, but monsieur will see."

"what would you have, planchet? what must come is written."

"monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening?"

"quite the contrary, planchet; the more ill will i have t
 
 ___________________________
 
, what is the matter with us now?"

"don’t you think, monsieur, that woods are like churches?"

"how so, planchet?"

"because we dare not speak aloud in one or the other."

"but why did you not dare to speak aloud, planchet--because you are
afraid?"

"afraid of being heard? yes, monsieur."

"afraid of being heard! why, there is nothing improper in our
conversation, my dear planchet, and no one could find fault with it."

"ah, monsieur!" replied planchet, recurring to his besetting idea, "that
monsieur bonacieux has something vicious in his eyebrows, and something
very unpleasant in the play of his lips."

"what the devil makes you think of bonacieux?"

"monsieur, we think of what we can, and not of what we will."

"because you are a coward, planchet."

"monsieur, we must not confound prudence with cowardice; prudence is a
virtue."

"and you are very virtuous, are you not, planchet?"

"monsieur, is not that the barrel of a musket which glitters yonder? had
we not better lower our heads?"

"in truth," m
 
 ___________________________
 
. bonacieux wore a mask, and
likewise that that mask was most disagreeable to look upon. in
consequence of this feeling of repugnance, he was about to pass without
speaking to him, but, as he had done the day before, m. bonacieux
accosted him.

"well, young man," said he, "we appear to pass rather gay nights! seven
o’clock in the morning! peste! you seem to reverse ordinary customs, and
come home at the hour when other people are going out."

"no one can reproach you for anything of the kind, monsieur bonacieux,"
said the young man; "you are a model for regular people. it is true that
when a man possesses a young and pretty wife, he has no need to seek
happiness elsewhere. happiness comes to meet him, does it not, monsieur
bonacieux?"

bonacieux became as pale as death, and grinned a ghastly smile.

"ah, ah!" said bonacieux, "you are a jocular companion! but where the
devil were you gladding last night, my young master? it does not appear
to be very clean in the crossroads."

d’artagnan glanced down
 
 ___________________________
 
ed himself. however, the revolution which appeared
upon his countenance was so visible that bonacieux was terrified at it,
and he endeavored to draw back a step or two; but as he was standing
before the half of the door which was shut, the obstacle compelled him
to keep his place.

"ah, but you are joking, my worthy man!" said d’artagnan. "it appears to
me that if my boots need a sponge, your stockings and shoes stand in
equal need of a brush. may you not have been philandering a little also,
monsieur bonacieux? oh, the devil! that’s unpardonable in a man of your
age, and who besides, has such a pretty wife as yours."

"oh, lord! no," said bonacieux, "but yesterday i went to st. mande to
make some inquiries after a servant, as i cannot possibly do without
one; and the roads were so bad that i brought back all this mud, which i
have not yet had time to remove."

the place named by bonacieux as that which had been the object of his
journey was a fresh proof in support of the suspicions d’artagnan ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d
conceived. bonacieux had named mande because mande was in an exactly
opposite direction from st. cloud. this probability afforded him his
first consolation. if bonacieux knew where his wife was, one might, by
extreme means, force the mercer to open his teeth and let his secret
escape. the question, then, was how to change this probability into a
certainty.

"pardon, my dear monsieur bonacieux, if i don’t stand upon ceremony,"
said d’artagnan, "but nothing makes one so thirsty as want of sleep. i
am parched with thirst. allow me to take a glass of water in your
apartment; you know that is never refused among neighbors."

without waiting for the permission of his host, d’artagnan went quickly
into the house, and cast a rapid glance at the bed. it had not been
used. bonacieux had not been abed. he had only been back an hour or two;
he had accompanied his wife to the place of her 
 
 ___________________________
 
confinement, or else at
least to the first relay.

"thanks, monsieur bonacieux," said d’artagnan, emptying his glass, "that
is all i wanted of you. i will now go up into my apartment. i will make
planchet brush my boots; and when he has done, i will, if you like, send
him to you to brush your shoes."

he left the mercer quite astonished at his singular farewell, and asking
himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate.

at the top of the stairs he found planchet in a great fright.

"ah, monsieur!" cried planchet, as soon as he perceived his master,
"here is more tro