clothes and
cast-off cloaks for mousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent tailor,
who made his clothes look as good as new by turning them, and whose wife
was suspected of wishing to make porthos descend from his aristocratic
habits, mousqueton made a very good figure when attending on his master.

as for aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explained the
character--a character which, like that of his companions, we shall be
able to follow in its development--his lackey was called bazin. thanks
to the hopes which his master entertained of someday entering into
orders, he was always clothed in black, as became the servant of a
churchman. he was a berrichon, thirty-five or forty years old, mild,
peaceable, sleek, employing the leisure his master left him in the
perusal of pious works, providing rigorously for two a dinner of few
dishes, but excellent. for the rest, he was dumb, blind, and deaf, and
of unimpeachable fidelity.

and now that we are acquainted, superficially at leas
 
 ___________________________
 
st; and aramis contended that a
master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.

"this is all very easy for you to say," replied d’artagnan, "for you,
athos, who live like a dumb man with grimaud, who forbid him to speak,
and consequently never exchange ill words with him; for you, porthos,
who carry matters in such a magnificent style, and are a god to your
valet, mousqueton; and for you, aramis, who, always abstracted by your
theological studies, inspire your servant, bazin, a mild, religious man,
with a profound respect; but for me, who am without any settled means
and without resources--for me, who am neither a musketeer nor even a
guardsman, what am i to do to inspire either the affection, the terror,
or the respect in planchet?"

"this is serious," answered the three friends; "it is a family affair.
it is with valets as with wives, they must be placed at once upon the
footing in which you wish them to remain. reflect upon it."

d’artagnan did reflect, and re
 
 ___________________________
 
manded aramis.

"oh, you’ll know it someday, aramis; but at present i must imitate the
discretion of ’the doctor’s niece.’"

aramis smiled, as he remembered the tale he had told his friends on a
certain evening. "well, then, since she has left paris, and you are sure
of it, d’artagnan, nothing prevents me, and i am ready to follow you.
you say we are going--"

"to see athos now, and if you will come thither, i beg you to make
haste, for we have lost much time already. a propos, inform bazin."

"will bazin go with us?" asked aramis.

"perhaps so. at all events, it is best that he should follow us to
athos’s."

aramis called bazin, and, after having ordered him to join them at
athos’s residence, said "let us go then," at the same time taking his
cloak, sword, and three pistols, opening uselessly two or three drawers
to see if he could not find stray coin. when well assured this search
was superfluous, he followed d’artagnan, wondering to himself how this
young guardsman should
 
 ___________________________
 
 and get killed
where we are told to go. is life worth the trouble of so many questions?
d’artagnan, i am ready to follow you."

"and i also," said porthos.

"and i also," said aramis. "and, indeed, i am not sorry to quit paris; i
had need of distraction."

"well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured," said
d’artagnan.

"and, now, when are we to go?" asked athos.

"immediately," replied d’artagnan; "we have not a minute to lose."

"hello, grimaud! planchet! mousqueton! bazin!" cried the four young men,
calling their lackeys, "clean my boots, and fetch the horses from the
hotel."

each musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel, as at a
barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey. planchet, grimaud,
mousqueton, and bazin set off at full speed.

"now let us lay down the plan of campaign," said porthos. "where do we
go first?"

"to calais," said d’artagnan; "that is the most direct line to london."

"well," said porthos, "this is my advice--"

"speak!"
 
 ___________________________
 
 the horses
were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soon refuse
service.

the travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they might meet
with less interruption; but at crevecoeur, aramis declared he could
proceed no farther. in fact, it required all the courage which he
concealed beneath his elegant form and polished manners to bear him so
far. he grew more pale every minute, and they were obliged to support
him on his horse. they lifted him off at the door of a cabaret, left
bazin with him, who, besides, in a skirmish was more embarrassing than
useful, and set forward again in the hope of sleeping at amiens.

"morbleu," said athos, as soon as they were again in motion, "reduced to
two masters and grimaud and planchet! morbleu! i won’t be their dupe, i
will answer for it. i will neither open my mouth nor draw my sword
between this and calais. i swear by--"

"don’t waste time in swearing," said d’artagnan; "let us gallop, if our
horses will consent."

and the travele
 
 ___________________________
 
u were
not yet gone. the falsehood would then lie at my door, and as i am not a
gentleman, i may be allowed to lie."

"be of good heart, planchet, you shall preserve your reputation as a
veracious man. in a quarter of an hour we set off."

"that’s the advice i was about to give monsieur; and where are we going,
may i ask, without being too curious?"

"pardieu! in the opposite direction to that which you said i was gone.
besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of grimaud, mousqueton,
and bazin as i am to know what has become of athos, porthos, and
aramis?"

"yes, monsieur," said planchet, "and i will go as soon as you please.
indeed, i think provincial air will suit us much better just now than
the air of paris. so then--"

"so then, pack up our luggage, planchet, and let us be off. on my part,
i will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothing may be
suspected. you may join me at the hotel des gardes. by the way,
planchet, i think you are right with respect to our host, and tha
 
 ___________________________
 
ur still insists upon seeing him?"

"more than ever."

"well, monsieur has only to take the right-hand staircase in the
courtyard, and knock at number five on the second floor."

d’artagnan walked quickly in the direction indicated, and found one of
those exterior staircases that are still to be seen in the yards of our
old-fashioned taverns. but there was no getting at the place of sojourn
of the future abbe; the defiles of the chamber of aramis were as well
guarded as the gardens of armida. bazin was stationed in the corridor,
and barred his passage with the more intrepidity that, after many years
of trial, bazin found himself near a result of which he had ever been
ambitious.

in fact, the dream of poor bazin had always been to serve a churchman;
and he awaited with impatience the moment, always in the future, when
aramis would throw aside the uniform and assume the cassock. the
daily-renewed promise of the young man that the moment would not long be
delayed, had alone kept him in the 
 
 ___________________________
 
service of a musketeer--a service in
which, he said, his soul was in constant jeopardy.

bazin was then at the height of joy. in all probability, this time his
master would not retract. the union of physical pain with moral
uneasiness had produced the effect so long desired. aramis, suffering at
once in body and mind, had at length fixed his eyes and his thoughts
upon religion, and he had considered as a warning from heaven the double
accident which had happened to him; that is to say, the sudden
disappearance of his mistress and the wound in his shoulder.

it may be easily understood th
 
 ___________________________
 
at in the present disposition of his
master nothing could be more disagreeable to bazin than the arrival of
d’artagnan, which might cast his master back again into that vortex of
mundane affairs which had so long carried him away. he resolved, then,
to defend the door bravely; and as, betrayed by the mistress of the inn,
he could not say that aramis was absent, he endeavored to prove to the
newcomer that it would be the height of indiscretion to disturb his
master in his pious conference, which had commenced with the morning and
would not, as bazin said, terminate before night.

 
 ___________________________
 

but d’artagnan took very little heed of the eloquent discourse of m.
bazin; and as he had no desire to support a polemic discussion with his
friend’s valet, he simply moved him out of the way with one hand, and
with the other turned the handle of the door of number five. the door
opened, and d’artagnan went into the chamber.

aramis, in a black gown, his head enveloped in a sort of round flat cap,
not much unlike a calotte, was seated before an oblong table, covered
with rolls of paper and enormous volumes in folio. at his right hand was
placed the superior of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 jesuits, and on his left the curate of
montdidier. the curtains were half drawn, and only admitted the
mysterious light calculated for beatific reveries. all the mundane
objects that generally strike the eye on entering the room of a young
man, particularly when that young man is a musketeer, had disappeared as
if by enchantment; and for fear, no doubt, that the sight of them might
bring his master back to ideas of this world, bazin had laid his hands
upon sword, pistols, plumed hat, and embroideries and laces of all kinds
and sorts. in their stead d’artagnan thought he perceived in an obscure
corner a discipline cord suspended from a nail in the wall.

at the noise made by d’artagnan in entering, aramis lifted up his head,
and beheld his friend; but to the great astonishment of the young man,
the sight of him did not produce much effect upon the musketeer, so
completely was his mind detached from the things of this wo
 
 ___________________________
 
ith the knowledge of these
gentlemen."

the two men in black bowed in their turn.

"on the contrary," replied aramis, "your opinion will be very valuable.
the question is this: monsieur the principal thinks that my thesis ought
to be dogmatic and didactic."

"your thesis! are you then making a thesis?"

"without doubt," replied the jesuit. "in the examination which precedes
ordination, a thesis is always a requisite."

"ordination!" cried d’artagnan, who could not believe what the hostess
and bazin had successively told him; and he gazed, half stupefied, upon
the three persons before him.

"now," continued aramis, taking the same graceful position in his easy
chair that he would have assumed in bed, and complacently examining his
hand, which was as white and plump as that of a woman, and which he held
in the air to cause the blood to descend, "now, as you have heard,
d’artagnan, monsieur the principal is desirous that my thesis should be
dogmatic, while i, for my part, would rather it s
 
 ___________________________
 
our latin!" said d’artagnan, who began to feel
all his patience exhausted.

"farewell, my son," said the curate, "till tomorrow."

"till tomorrow, rash youth," said the jesuit. "you promise to become one
of the lights of the church. heaven grant that this light prove not a
devouring fire!"

d’artagnan, who for an hour past had been gnawing his nails with
impatience, was beginning to attack the quick.

the two men in black rose, bowed to aramis and d’artagnan, and advanced
toward the door. bazin, who had been standing listening to all this
controversy with a pious jubilation, sprang toward them, took the
breviary of the curate and the missal of the jesuit, and walked
respectfully before them to clear their way.

aramis conducted them to the foot of the stairs, and then immediately
came up again to d’artagnan, whose senses were still in a state of
confusion.

when left alone, the two friends at first kept an embarrassed silence.
it however became necessary for one of them to break it 
 
 ___________________________
 
ance radiant.

"this same waiting maid seems to have an agreeable style," said the
messenger, carelessly.

"thanks, d’artagnan, thanks!" cried aramis, almost in a state of
delirium. "she was forced to return to tours; she is not faithless; she
still loves me! come, my friend, come, let me embrace you. happiness
almost stifles me!"

the two friends began to dance around the venerable st. chrysostom,
kicking about famously the sheets of the thesis, which had fallen on the
floor.

at that moment bazin entered with the spinach and the omelet.

"be off, you wretch!" cried aramis, throwing his skullcap in his face.
"return whence you came; take back those horrible vegetables, and that
poor kickshaw! order a larded hare, a fat capon, mutton leg dressed with
garlic, and four bottles of old burgundy."

bazin, who looked at his master, without comprehending the cause of this
change, in a melancholy manner, allowed the omelet to slip into the
spinach, and the spinach onto the floor.

"now this is th
 
 ___________________________
 
ongs to athos."

"peste! they are three superb animals!"

"i am glad they please you."

"why, it must have been the king who made you such a present."

"certainly it was not the cardinal; but don’t trouble yourself whence
they come, think only that one of the three is your property."

"i choose that which the red-headed boy is leading."

"it is yours!"

"good heaven! that is enough to drive away all my pains; i could mount
him with thirty balls in my body. on my soul, handsome stirrups! hola,
bazin, come here this minute."

bazin appeared on the threshold, dull and spiritless.

"that last order is useless," interrupted d’artagnan; "there are loaded
pistols in your holsters."

bazin sighed.

"come, monsieur bazin, make yourself easy," said d’artagnan; "people of
all conditions gain the kingdom of heaven."

"monsieur was already such a good theologian," said bazin, almost
weeping; "he might have become a bishop, and perhaps a cardinal."

"well, but my poor bazin, reflect a little. of wh
 
 ___________________________
 
at use is it to be a
churchman, pray? you do not avoid going to war by that means; you see,
the cardinal is about to make the next campaign, helm on head and
partisan in hand. and monsieur de nogaret de la valette, what do you say
of him? he is a cardinal likewise. ask his lackey how often he has had
to prepare lint of him."

"alas!" sighed bazin. "i know it, monsieur; everything is turned
topsy-turvy in the world nowadays."

while this dialogue was going on, the two young men and the poor lackey
descended.

"hold my stirrup, bazin," cried aramis; and aramis sprang into the
saddle with his usual grace and agility, but after a few vaults and
curvets of the noble animal his rider felt his pains come on so
insupportably that he turned pale and became unsteady in his seat.
d’artagnan, who, foreseeing such an event, had kept his eye on him
 
 ___________________________
 
im to his
chamber.

"that’s all right, my dear aramis, take care of yourself," said he; "i
will go alone in search of athos."

"you are a man of brass," replied aramis.

"no, i have good luck, that is all. but how do you mean to pass your
time till i come back? no more theses, no more glosses upon the fingers
or upon benedictions, hey?"

aramis smiled. "i will make verses," said he.

"yes, i dare say; verses perfumed with the odor of the billet from the
attendant of madame de chevreuse. teach bazin prosody; that will console
him. as to the horse, ride him a little every day, and that will
accustom you to his maneuvers."

"oh, make yourself easy on that head," replied aramis. "you will find me
ready to follow you."

they took leave of each other, and in ten minutes, after having
commended his friend to the cares of the hostess and bazin, d’artagnan
was trotting along in the direction of amiens.

how was he going to find athos? should he find him at all? the position
in which he had left 
 
 ___________________________
 
t cart, which some minutes before had
appeared upon the amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and planchet and
grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads. the cart was
returning empty to paris, and the two lackeys had agreed, for their
transport, to slake the wagoner’s thirst along the route.

"what is this?" said aramis, on seeing them arrive. "nothing but
saddles?"

"now do you understand?" said athos.

"my friends, that’s exactly like me! i retained my harness by instinct.
hola, bazin! bring my new saddle and carry it along with those of these
gentlemen."

"and what have you done with your ecclesiastics?" asked d’artagnan.

"my dear fellow, i invited them to a dinner the next day," replied
aramis. "they have some capital wine here--please to observe that in
passing. i did my best to make them drunk. then the curate forbade me to
quit my uniform, and the jesuit entreated me to get him made a
musketeer."

"without a thesis?" cried d’artagnan, "without a thesis? i demand th
 
 ___________________________
 
eturn to paris? bravo! i am ready. we
are going to rejoin that good fellow, porthos. so much the better. you
can’t think how i have missed him, the great simpleton. to see him so
self-satisfied reconciles me with myself. he would not sell his horse;
not for a kingdom! i think i can see him now, mounted upon his superb
animal and seated in his handsome saddle. i am sure he will look like
the great mogul!"

they made a halt for an hour to refresh their horses. aramis discharged
his bill, placed bazin in the cart with his comrades, and they set
forward to join porthos.

they found him up, less pale than when d’artagnan left him after his
first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he was alone, was
spread enough for four persons. this dinner consisted of meats nicely
dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit.

"ah, pardieu!" said he, rising, "you come in the nick of time,
gentlemen. i was just beginning the soup, and you will dine with me."

"oh, oh!" said d’artagnan, "mousqueton h
 
 ___________________________
 
 lackeys we will make two for the
masters, for which we will draw lots. with the four hundred livres we
will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and then we will
give the turnings out of our pockets to d’artagnan, who has a steady
hand, and will go and play in the first gaming house we come to. there!"

"let us dine, then," said porthos; "it is getting cold."

the friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the repast,
the remains of which were abandoned to mousqueton, bazin, planchet, and
grimaud.

on arriving in paris, d’artagnan found a letter from m. de treville,
which informed him that, at his request, the king had promised that he
should enter the company of the musketeers.

as this was the height of d’artagnan’s worldly ambition--apart, be it
well understood, from his desire of finding mme. bonacieux--he ran, full
of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had left only half an hour before,
but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied. they were assemb
 
 ___________________________
 
 i died for the king; so that i shall have
performed my duty without the expense of an outfit."

porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him, tossing his
head and repeating, "i shall follow up on my idea."

aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.

it may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in
the community.

the lackeys on their part, like the coursers of hippolytus, shared the
sadness of their masters. mousqueton collected a store of crusts; bazin,
who had always been inclined to devotion, never quit the churches;
planchet watched the flight of flies; and grimaud, whom the general
distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master,
heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.

the three friends--for, as we have said, athos had sworn not to stir a
foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, and returned late
at night. they wandered about the streets, looking at the pavement as if
to see whether the passengers had 
 
 ___________________________
 
 d’artagnan, "let us give the money to the lackeys, as lord
de winter desired us to do."

"yes," said athos; "let us give the money to the lackeys--not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the englishmen."

athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. "for
you and your comrades."

this greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
porthos; and this french generosity, repeated by lord de winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by mm grimaud, bazin, mousqueton
and planchet.

lord de winter, on quitting d’artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
she lived in the place royale--then the fashionable quarter--at number
6, and he undertook to call and take d’artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. d’artagnan appointed eight o’clock at athos’s residence.

this introduction to milady clarik occupied the head of our gascon
greatly. he remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto
been mixed up in his destiny. accordi
 
 ___________________________
 
; that of athos, carelessness.

at the end of a moment’s conversation, in which porthos hinted that a
lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his
embarrassment, mousqueton entered. he came to request his master to
return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously
said.

"is it my equipment?"

"yes and no," replied mousqueton.

"well, but can’t you speak?"

"come, monsieur."

porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed mousqueton. an instant
after, bazin made his appearance at the door.

"what do you want with me, my friend?" said aramis, with that mildness
of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were
directed toward the church.

"a man wishes to see monsieur at home," replied bazin.

"a man! what man?"

"a mendicant."

"give him alms, bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner."

"this mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends that you will
be very glad to see him."

"has he sent no particular message for me
 
 ___________________________
 
r had devised for milady, he
was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this
puritan. he was therefore silent; and as athos was the least inquisitive
of any man on earth, d’artagnan’s confidence stopped there. we will
therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing important to say to
each other, and follow aramis.

upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came from
tours, we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed, or rather
went before, bazin; he ran without stopping from the rue ferou to the
rue de vaugirard. on entering he found a man of short stature and
intelligent eyes, but covered with rags.

"you have asked for me?" said the musketeer.

"i wish to speak with monsieur aramis. is that your name, monsieur?"

"my very own. you have brought me something?"

"yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief."

"here it is," said aramis, taking a small key from his breast and
opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pea
 
 ___________________________
 
rl, "here it is.
look."

"that is right," replied the mendicant; "dismiss your lackey."

in fact, bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could want with his
master, kept pace with him as well as he could, and arrived almost at
the same time he did; but his quickness was not of much use to him. at
the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he
was obliged to obey.

bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be
sure that nobody could either see or hear him, and opening his ragged
vest, badly held together by a leather strap, he began to rip the upper
part of his doublet, from which he drew a letter.

aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed the
superscription with an almost religious respect, and opened the epistle,
which contained what follows:

"my friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still for some tim
 
 ___________________________
 
ied by his letter, had ventured to address a word to him.

aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a postscript:

ps. you may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count and a grandee
of spain!

"golden dreams!" cried aramis. "oh, beautiful life! yes, we are young;
yes, we shall yet have happy days! my love, my blood, my life! all, all,
all, are thine, my adored mistress!"

and he kissed the letter with passion, without even vouchsafing a look
at the gold which sparkled on the table.

bazin scratched at the door, and as aramis had no longer any reason to
exclude him, he bade him come in.

bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot that he came to
announce d’artagnan, who, curious to know who the mendicant could be,
came to aramis on leaving athos.

now, as d’artagnan used no ceremony with aramis, seeing that bazin
forgot to announce him, he announced himself.

"the devil! my dear aramis," said d’artagnan, "if these are the prunes
that are sent to you from tours
 
 ___________________________
 
, i beg you will make my compliments to
the gardener who gathers them."

"you are mistaken, friend d’artagnan," said aramis, always on his guard;
"this is from my publisher, who has just sent me the price of that poem
in one-syllable verse which i began yonder."

"ah, indeed," said d’artagnan. "well, your publisher is very generous,
my dear aramis, that’s all i can say."

"how, monsieur?" cried bazin, "a poem sell so dear as that! it is
incredible! oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you like; you may
become equal to monsieur de voiture and monsieur de benserade. i like
that. a poet is as good as an abbe. ah! monsieur aramis, become a poet,
i beg of you."

"bazin, my friend," said aramis, "i believe you meddle with my
conversation."

bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.

"ah!" said d’artagnan with a smile, "you sell your productions at their
weight in gold. you are very
 
 ___________________________
 
et.

"send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the musketeers, and your horse
can be brought back with ours."

"very well; but it is already five o’clock, so make haste."

a quarter of an hour afterward porthos appeared at the end of the rue
ferou on a very handsome genet. mousqueton followed him upon an auvergne
horse, small but very handsome. porthos was resplendent with joy and
pride.

at the same time, aramis made his appearance at the other end of the
street upon a superb english charger. bazin followed him upon a roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous mecklenburg horse; this was
d’artagnan’s mount.

the two musketeers met at the gate. athos and d’artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

"the devil!" cried aramis, "you have a magnificent horse there,
porthos."

"yes," replied porthos, "it is the one that ought to have been sent to
me at first. a bad joke of the husband’s substituted the other; but the
husband has been punished since, and i have obtained full satisfact
 
 ___________________________
 
 the repentant daughters. he must place his sister in
one of these, and we shall be in peace."

"yes," said d’artagnan, "till she comes out."

"ah, my faith!" said athos, "you require too much, d’artagnan. i have
given you all i have, and i beg leave to tell you that this is the
bottom of my sack."

"but i think it would be still better," said aramis, "to inform the
queen and lord de winter at the same time."

"yes; but who is to carry the letter to tours, and who to london?"

"i answer for bazin," said aramis.

"and i for planchet," said d’artagnan.

"ay," said porthos, "if we cannot leave the camp, our lackeys may."

"to be sure they may; and this very day we will write the letters," said
aramis. "give the lackeys money, and they will start."

"we will give them money?" replied athos. "have you any money?"

the four friends looked at one another, and a cloud came over the brows
which but lately had been so cheerful.

"look out!" cried d’artagnan, "i see black points and red points
 
 ___________________________
 
d hour, the four friends met. there only
remained three things to decide--what they should write to milady’s
brother; what they should write to the clever person at tours; and which
should be the lackeys to carry the letters.

everyone offered his own. athos talked of the discretion of grimaud, who
never spoke a word but when his master unlocked his mouth. porthos
boasted of the strength of mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four
men of ordinary size. aramis, confiding in the address of bazin, made a
pompous eulogium on his candidate. finally, d’artagnan had entire faith
in the bravery of planchet, and reminded them of the manner in which he
had conducted himself in the ticklish affair of boulogne.

these four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time, and gave
birth to magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they
should be deemed too long.

"unfortunately," said athos, "he whom we send must possess in himself
alone the four qualities united."

"but where i
 
 ___________________________
 
s such a lackey to be found?"

"not to be found!" cried athos. "i know it well, so take grimaud."

"take mousqueton."

"take bazin."

"take planchet. planchet is brave and shrewd; they are two qualities out
of the four."

"gentlemen," said aramis, "the principal question is not to know which
of our four lackeys is the most discreet, the most strong, the most
clever, or the most brave; the principal thing is to know which loves
money the best."

"what aramis says is very sensible," replied athos; "we must speculate
upon the faults of people, and not upon their virtues. monsieur abbe,
you are a great moralist."

"doubtless,"
 
 ___________________________
 
e soon return."

"capital!" cried athos; "you are the king of poets, my dear aramis. you
speak like the apocalypse, and you are as true as the gospel. there is
nothing now to do but to put the address to this letter."

"that is easily done," said aramis.

he folded the letter fancifully, and took up his pen and wrote:

"to mlle. michon, seamstress, tours."

the three friends looked at one another and laughed; they were caught.

"now," said aramis, "you will please to understand, gentlemen, that
bazin alone can carry this letter to tours. my cousin knows nobody but
bazin, and places confidence in nobody but him; any other person would
fail. besides, bazin is ambitious and learned; bazin has read history,
gentlemen, he knows that sixtus the fifth became pope after having kept
pigs. well, as he means to enter the church at the same time as myself,
he does not despair of becoming pope in his turn, or at least a
cardinal. you can understand that a man who has such views will never
allow himself 
 
 ___________________________
 
to be taken, or if taken, will undergo martyrdom rather
than speak."

"very well," said d’artagnan, "i consent to bazin with all my heart, but
grant me planchet. milady had him one day turned out of doors, with
sundry blows of a good stick to accelerate his motions. now, planchet
has an excellent memory; and i will be bound that sooner than relinquish
any possible means of vengeance, he will allow himself to be beaten to
death. if your arrangements at tours are your arrangements, aramis,
those of london are mine. i request, then, that planchet may be chosen,
more particularly as he has already been to london wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h me, and knows
how to speak correctly: london, sir, if you please, and my master, lord
d’artagnan. with that you may be satisfied he can make his way, both
going and returning."

"in that case," said athos, "planchet must receive seven hundred livres
for going, and seven hundred livres for coming back; and bazin, three
hundred livres for going, and three hundred livres for returning--that
will reduce the sum to five thousand livres. we will each take a
thousand livres to be employed as seems good, and we will leave a fund
of a thousand livres under the guardianship of monsieur abbe here, for
extraordinary occasions or common wants. will that do?"

"my dear athos," said aramis, "you speak like nestor, who was, as
everyone knows, the wisest among the greeks."

"well, then," said athos, "it is agreed. pla
 
 ___________________________
 
nchet and bazin shall go.
everything considered, i am not sorry to retain grimaud; he is
accustomed to my ways, and i am particular. yesterday’s affair must have
shaken him a little; his voyage would upset him quite."

planchet was sent for, and instructions were given him. the matter had
been named to him by d’artagnan, who in the first place pointed out the
money to him, then the glory, and then the danger.

"i will carry the letter in the lining of my coat," said planchet; "and
if i am taken i will swal
 
 ___________________________
 
portant that i have not informed my
friends that i would entrust this secret to you; and for a captain’s
commission i would not write it."

"be satisfied, monsieur," said planchet, "you shall see if confidence
can be placed in me."

mounted on an excellent horse, which he was to leave at the end of
twenty leagues in order to take the post, planchet set off at a gallop,
his spirits a little depressed by the triple promise made him by the
musketeers, but otherwise as light-hearted as possible.

bazin set out the next day for tours, and was allowed eight days for
performing his commission.

the four friends, during the period of these two absences, had, as may
well be supposed, the eye on the watch, the nose to the wind, and the
ear on the hark. their days were passed in endeavoring to catch all that
was said, in observing the proceeding of the cardinal, and in looking
out for all the couriers who arrived. more than once an involuntary
trembling seized them when called upon for some unexpect
 
 ___________________________
 
ed service. they
had, besides, to look constantly to their own proper safety; milady was
a phantom which, when it had once appeared to people, did not allow them
to sleep very quietly.

on the morning of the eighth day, bazin, fresh as ever, and smiling,
according to custom, entered the cabaret of the parpaillot as the four
friends were sitting down to breakfast, saying, as had been agreed upon:
"monsieur aramis, the answer from your cousin."

the four friends exchanged a joyful glance; half of the work was done.
it is true, however, that it was the shorter and easier part.

aramis, blushing in spite of himself, took the letter, which was in a
large, coarse hand and not particular for its orthography.

"good god!" c
 
 ___________________________
 
 was only this: i had a dream, and i
related it to her."

"yez, yez," said the swiss; "it’s simple enough to dell a dream, but i
neffer dream."

"you are very fortunate," said athos, rising; "i wish i could say as
much!"

"neffer," replied the swiss, enchanted that a man like athos could envy
him anything. "neffer, neffer!"

d’artagnan, seeing athos rise, did likewise, took his arm, and went out.

porthos and aramis remained behind to encounter the jokes of the dragoon
and the swiss.

as to bazin, he went and lay down on a truss of straw; and as he had
more imagination than the swiss, he dreamed that aramis, having become
pope, adorned his head with a cardinal’s hat.

but, as we have said, bazin had not, by his fortunate return, removed
more than a part of the uneasiness which weighed upon the four friends.
the days of expectation are long, and d’artagnan, in particular, would
have wagered that the days were forty-four hours. he forgot the
necessary slowness of navigation; he exagge
 
 ___________________________
 
athos had given place to a concentrated grief which only
rendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinary
man.

possessed by one single thought--that of the promise he had made, and of
the responsibility he had taken--he retired last to his chamber, begged
the host to procure him a map of the province, bent over it, examined
every line traced upon it, perceived that there were four different
roads from bethune to armentieres, and summoned the lackeys.

planchet, grimaud, bazin, and mousqueton presented themselves, and
received clear, positive, and serious orders from athos.

they must set out the next morning at daybreak, and go to
armentieres--each by a different route. planchet, the most intelligent
of the four, was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon
which the four friends had fired, and which was accompanied, as may be
remembered, by rochefort’s servant.

athos set the lackeys to work first because, since these men had been in
the service of hims
 
 ___________________________
 


and the troop continued their route.

another flash illuminated all around them. grimaud extended his arm, and
by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished a little
isolated house on the banks of the river, within a hundred paces of a
ferry.

one window was lighted.

"here we are!" said athos.

at this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up and
came towards them. it was mousqueton. he pointed his finger to the
lighted window.

"she is there," said he.

"and bazin?" asked athos.

"while i watched the window, he guarded the door."

"good!" said athos. "you are good and faithful servants."

athos sprang from his horse, gave the bridle to grimaud, and advanced
toward the window, after having made a sign to the rest of the troop to
go toward the door.

the little house was surrounded by a low, quickset hedge, two or three
feet high. athos sprang over the hedge and went up to the window, which
was without shutters, but had the half-curtains closely drawn.

he
 
 ___________________________
 
le scimitar divided the heavens and the waters into two
parts. not a breath of wind now disturbed the heavy atmosphere. a
deathlike silence oppressed all nature. the soil was humid and
glittering with the rain which had recently fallen, and the refreshed
herbs sent forth their perfume with additional energy.

two lackeys dragged milady, whom each held by one arm. the executioner
walked behind them, and lord de winter, d’artagnan, porthos, and aramis
walked behind the executioner. planchet and bazin came last.

the two lackeys conducted milady to the bank of the river. her mouth was
mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence,
supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.

being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, "a thousand
pistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if you
deliver me up to your masters, i have near at hand avengers who will
make you pay dearly for my death."

grimaud hesitated. mousqueton trembled in all his memb
 
 ___________________________
 
ers.

athos, who heard milady’s voice, came sharply up. lord de winter did the
same.

"change these lackeys," said he; "she has spoken to them. they are no
longer sure."

planchet and bazin were called, and took the places of grimaud and
mousqueton.

on the bank of the river the executioner approached milady, and bound
her hands and feet.

then she broke the silence to cry out, "you are cowards, miserable
assassins--ten men combined to murder one woman. beware! if i am not
saved i shall be avenged."

"you are not a woman," said athos, coldly and sternly. "you do not
belong to the human species; you are a demon escaped from hell, whither
we send you back again."

"ah, you virtuous 
 
 ___________________________
 
eted contained eight hundred thousand livres.

mousqueton had a magnificent livery, and enjoyed the satisfaction of
which he had been ambitious all his life--that of standing behind a
gilded carriage.

aramis, after a journey into lorraine, disappeared all at once, and
ceased to write to his friends; they learned at a later period through
mme. de chevreuse, who told it to two or three of her intimates, that,
yielding to his vocation, he had retired into a convent--only into
which, nobody knew.

bazin became a lay brother.

athos remained a musketeer under the command of d’artagnan till the year
1633, at which period, after a journey he made to touraine, he also quit
the service, under the pretext of having inherited a small property in
roussillon.

grimaud followed athos.

d’artagnan fought three times with rochefort, and wounded him three
times.

"i shall probably kill you the fourth," said he to him, holding out his
hand to assist him to rise.

"it is much better both for you and for 