e a lesson, porthos?" cried aramis, from whose
usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning.

"my dear fellow, be a musketeer or an abbe. be one or the other, but not
both," replied porthos. "you know what athos told you the other day; you
eat at everybody’s mess. ah, don’t be angry, i beg of you, that would be
useless; you know what is agreed upon between you, athos and me. you go
to madame d’aguillon’s, and you pay your court to her; you go to madame
de bois-tracy’s, the cousin of madame de chevreuse, and you pass for
being far advanced in the good graces of that lady. oh, good lord! don’t
trouble yourself to reveal your good luck; no one asks for your
secret-all the world knows your discretion. but since you possess that
virtue, why the devil don’t you make use of it with respect to her
majesty? let whoever likes talk of the king and the cardinal, and how he
likes; but the queen is sacred, and if anyone speaks of her, let it be
respectfully."

"porthos, you are as vain as narcissus; i 
 
 ___________________________
 
, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and i will have
confidence in you. i believe, then, that it is not on account of any
intrigues of her own that my wife has been arrested, but because of
those of a lady much greater than herself."

"ah, ah! can it be on account of the amours of madame de bois-tracy?"
said d’artagnan, wishing to have the air, in the eyes of the citizen, of
being posted as to court affairs.

"higher, monsieur, higher."

"of madame d’aiguillon?"

"still higher."

"of madame de chevreuse?"

"of the--" d’artagnan checked himself.

"yes, monsieur," replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so low that he
was scarcely audible.

"and with whom?"

"with whom can it be, if not the duke of--"

"the duke of--"

"yes, monsieur," replied the citizen, giving a still fainter intonation
to his voice.

"but how do you know all this?"

"how do i know it?"

"yes, how do you know it? no half-confidence, or--you understand!"

"i know it from my wife, monsieur--from my wife herself."

"who learn
 
 ___________________________
 
 having so well preserved her portrait in his
heart, "what folly to feed a useless passion with such remembrances!"

"and upon what then must i live? i have nothing but memory. it is my
happiness, my treasure, my hope. every time i see you is a fresh diamond
which i enclose in the casket of my heart. this is the fourth which you
have let fall and i have picked up; for in three years, madame, i have
only seen you four times--the first, which i have described to you; the
second, at the mansion of madame de chevreuse; the third, in the gardens
of amiens."

"duke," said the queen, blushing, "never speak of that evening."

"oh, let us speak of it; on the contrary, let us speak of it! that is
the most happy and brilliant evening of my life! you remember what a
beautiful night it was? how soft and perfumed was the air; how lovely
the blue heavens and star-enameled sky! ah, then, madame, i was able for
one instant to be alone with you. then you were about to tell me
all--the isolation of your life, the griefs of
 
 ___________________________
 
he
world, or all the kings of the earth! eight days after, i was back
again, madame. that time you had nothing to say to me; i had risked my
life and favor to see you but for a second. i did not even touch your
hand, and you pardoned me on seeing me so submissive and so repentant."

"yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which i took no part,
as you well know, my lord. the king, excited by the cardinal, made a
terrible clamor. madame de vernet was driven from me, putange was
exiled, madame de chevreuse fell into disgrace, and when you wished to
come back as ambassador to france, the king himself--remember, my
lord--the king himself opposed it."

"yes, and france is about to pay for her king’s refusal with a war. i am
not allowed to see you, madame, but you shall every day hear of me. what
object, think you, have this expedition to re and this league with the
protestants of la rochelle which i am projecting? the pleasure of seeing
you. i have no hope of penetrating, sword in hand, to paris, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ded i see
you again! all this is perhaps folly--perhaps insanity; but tell me what
woman has a lover more truly in love; what queen a servant more ardent?"

"my lord, my lord, you invoke in your defense things which accuse you
more strongly. all these proofs of love which you would give me are
almost crimes."

"because you do not love me, madame! if you loved me, you would view all
this otherwise. if you loved me, oh, if you loved me, that would be too
great happiness, and i should run mad. ah, madame de chevreuse was less
cruel than you. holland loved her, and she responded to his love."

"madame de chevreuse was not queen," murmured anne of austria, overcome,
in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound a passion.

"you would love me, then, if you were not queen! madame, say that you
would love me then! i can believe that it is the dignity of your rank
alone which makes you cruel to me; i can believe that, had you been
madame de chevreuse, poor buckingham might have hoped. thanks for those
swe
 
 ___________________________
 

at the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of examination, the
cardinal was satisfied.

"that head has never conspired," murmured he, "but it matters not; we
will see."

"you are accused of high treason," said the cardinal, slowly.

"so i have been told already, monseigneur," cried bonacieux, giving his
interrogator the title he had heard the officer give him, "but i swear
to you that i know nothing about it."

the cardinal repressed a smile.

"you have conspired with your wife, with madame de chevreuse, and with
my lord duke of buckingham."

"indeed, monseigneur," responded the mercer, "i have heard her pronounce
all those names."

"and on what occasion?"

"she said that the cardinal de richelieu had drawn the duke of
buckingham to paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen."

"she said that?" cried the cardinal, with violence.

"yes, monseigneur, but i told her she was wrong to talk about such
things; and that his eminence was incapable--"

"hold your tongue! you are stupid," replied the cardin
 
 ___________________________
 
ning."




16 in which m. seguier, keeper of the seals, looks more than once for
the bell


it is impossible to form an idea of the impression these few words made
upon louis xiii. he grew pale and red alternately; and the cardinal saw
at once that he had recovered by a single blow all the ground he had
lost.

"buckingham in paris!" cried he, "and why does he come?"

"to conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the huguenots and the
spaniards."

"no, pardieu, no! to conspire against my honor with madame de chevreuse,
madame de longueville, and the condes."

"oh, sire, what an idea! the queen is too virtuous; and besides, loves
your majesty too well."

"woman is weak, monsieur cardinal," said the king; "and as to loving me
much, i have my own opinion as to that love."

"i not the less maintain," said the cardinal, "that the duke of
buckingham came to paris for a project wholly political."

"and i am sure that he came for quite another purpose, monsieur
cardinal; but if the queen be guilty, let her tremble!"
 
 ___________________________
 
ach other?"

"i believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty, sire."

"but they have corresponded; it is to him that the queen has been
writing all the day. monsieur duke, i must have those letters!"

"sire, notwithstanding--"

"monsieur duke, at whatever price it may be, i will have them."

"i would, however, beg your majesty to observe--"

"do you, then, also join in betraying me, monsieur cardinal, by thus
always opposing my will? are you also in accord with spain and england,
with madame de chevreuse and the queen?"

"sire," replied the cardinal, sighing, "i believed myself secure from
such a suspicion."

"monsieur cardinal, you have heard me; i will have those letters."

"there is but one way."

"what is that?"

"that would be to charge monsieur de seguier, the keeper of the seals,
with this mission. the matter enters completely into the duties of the
post."

"let him be sent for instantly."

"he is most likely at my hotel. i requested him to call, and when i came
to the louvre i left orde
 
 ___________________________
 
d you think that your wife--"

"has returned to the louvre."

"without speaking to anyone but yourself?"

"i am sure of it."

"that is an important point, do you understand?"

"then the news i brought you is of value?"

"the greatest, my dear bonacieux; i don’t conceal this from you."

"then the cardinal will be pleased with me?"

"i have no doubt of it."

"the great cardinal!"

"are you sure, in her conversation with you, that your wife mentioned no
names?"

"i think not."

"she did not name madame de chevreuse, the duke of buckingham, or madame
de vernet?"

"no; she only told me she wished to send me to london to serve the
interests of an illustrious personage."

"the traitor!" murmured mme. bonacieux.

"silence!" said d’artagnan, taking her hand, which, without thinking of
it, she abandoned to him.

"never mind," continued the man in the cloak; "you were a fool not to
have pretended to accept the mission. you would then be in present
possession of the letter. the state, which is now threatened, wo
 
 ___________________________
 
er!’"

"alas, you will find it so yourself," said aramis, with a sigh.

"well, then, let us say no more about it," said d’artagnan; "and let us
burn this letter, which, no doubt, announces to you some fresh
infidelity of your grisette or your chambermaid."

"what letter?" cried aramis, eagerly.

"a letter which was sent to your abode in your absence, and which was
given to me for you."

"but from whom is that letter?"

"oh, from some heartbroken waiting woman, some desponding grisette; from
madame de chevreuse’s chambermaid, perhaps, who was obliged to return to
tours with her mistress, and who, in order to appear smart and
attractive, stole some perfumed paper, and sealed her letter with a
duchess’s coronet."

"what do you say?"

"hold! i must have lost it," said the young man maliciously, pretending
to search for it. "but fortunately the world is a sepulcher; the men,
and consequently the women, are but shadows, and love is a sentiment to
which you cry, ’fie! fie!’"

"d’artagnan, d’arta
 
 ___________________________
 
in his arms, and assisted him to his
chamber.

"that’s all right, my dear aramis, take care of yourself," said he; "i
will go alone in search of athos."

"you are a man of brass," replied aramis.

"no, i have good luck, that is all. but how do you mean to pass your
time till i come back? no more theses, no more glosses upon the fingers
or upon benedictions, hey?"

aramis smiled. "i will make verses," said he.

"yes, i dare say; verses perfumed with the odor of the billet from the
attendant of madame de chevreuse. teach bazin prosody; that will console
him. as to the horse, ride him a little every day, and that will
accustom you to his maneuvers."

"oh, make yourself easy on that head," replied aramis. "you will find me
ready to follow you."

they took leave of each other, and in ten minutes, after having
commended his friend to the cares of the hostess and bazin, d’artagnan
was trotting along in the direction of amiens.

how was he going to find athos? should he find him at all? the position
in which
 
 ___________________________
 
n of the garden and portraits of the principal
actors in that nocturnal romance."

"i will tell him that."

"tell him further that i hold montague in my power; that montague is in
the bastille; that no letters were found upon him, it is true, but that
torture may make him tell much of what he knows, and even what he does
not know."

"exactly."

"then add that his grace has, in the precipitation with which he quit
the isle of re, forgotten and left behind him in his lodging a certain
letter from madame de chevreuse which singularly compromises the queen,
inasmuch as it proves not only that her majesty can love the enemies of
the king but that she can conspire with the enemies of france. you
recollect perfectly all i have told you, do you not?"

"your eminence will judge: the ball of madame the constable; the night
at the louvre; the evening at amiens; the arrest of montague; the letter
of madame de chevreuse."

"that’s it," said the cardinal, "that’s it. you have an excellent
memory, milady."

"but," 
 
 ___________________________
 
 do you expect news from him?"

"i expect himself."

"himself? d’artagnan here?"

"himself!"

"but that’s impossible! he is at the siege of la rochelle with the
cardinal. he will not return till after the taking of the city."

"ah, you fancy so! but is there anything impossible for my d’artagnan,
the noble and loyal gentleman?"

"oh, i cannot believe you!"

"well, read, then!" said the unhappy young woman, in the excess of her
pride and joy, presenting a letter to milady.

"the writing of madame de chevreuse!" said milady to herself. "ah, i
always thought there was some secret understanding in that quarter!" and
she greedily read the following few lines:

my dear child, hold yourself ready. our friend will see you soon, and he
will only see you to release you from that imprisonment in which your
safety required you should be concealed. prepare, then, for your
departure, and never despair of us.

our charming gascon has just proved himself as brave and faithful as
ever. tell him that certain parties
 
 ___________________________
 
him that our conversation at
the inn of the red dovecot was overheard by these four men; tell him
that after his departure one of them came up to me and took from me by
violence the safe-conduct which he had given me; tell him they warned
lord de winter of my journey to england; that this time they nearly
foiled my mission as they foiled the affair of the studs; tell him that
among these four men two only are to be feared--d’artagnan and athos;
tell him that the third, aramis, is the lover of madame de chevreuse--he
may be left alone, we know his secret, and it may be useful; as to the
fourth, porthos, he is a fool, a simpleton, a blustering booby, not
worth troubling himself about."

"but these four men must be now at the siege of la rochelle?"

"i thought so, too; but a letter which madame bonacieux has received
from madame the constable, and which she has had the imprudence to show
me, leads me to believe that these four men, on the contrary, are on the
road hither to take her away."

"the devil! wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ise myself."

"well," said rochefort, taking the paper from milady, folding it, and
placing it in the lining of his hat, "you may be easy. i will do as
children do, for fear of losing the paper--repeat the name along the
route. now, is that all?"

"i believe so."

"let us see: buckingham dead or grievously wounded; your conversation
with the cardinal overheard by the four musketeers; lord de winter
warned of your arrival at portsmouth; d’artagnan and athos to the
bastille; aramis the lover of madame de chevreuse; porthos an ass;
madame bonacieux found again; to send you the chaise as soon as
possible; to place my lackey at your disposal; to make you out a victim
of the cardinal in order that the abbess may entertain no suspicion;
armentieres, on the banks of the lys. is that all, then?"

"in truth, my dear chevalier, you are a miracle of memory. a propos, add
one thing--"

"what?"

"i saw some very pretty woods which almost touch the convent garden. say
that i am permitted to walk in those woods. who k
 
 ___________________________
 
 resisted; my brother killed him."

"oh!" said mme. bonacieux, shuddering.

"remember, that was the only means. then my brother determined to
substitute cunning for force. he took the papers, and presented himself
here as the emissary of the cardinal, and in an hour or two a carriage
will come to take me away by the orders of his eminence."

"i understand. it is your brother who sends this carriage."

"exactly; but that is not all. that letter you have received, and which
you believe to be from madame de chevreuse--"

"well?"

"it is a forgery."

"how can that be?"

"yes, a forgery; it is a snare to prevent your making any resistance
when they come to fetch you."

"but it is d’artagnan that will come."

"do not deceive yourself. d’artagnan and his friends are detained at the
siege of la rochelle."

"how do you know that?"

"my brother met some emissaries of the cardinal in the uniform of
musketeers. you would have been summoned to the gate; you would have
believed yourself about to meet friends; you 