premature meditation and a long sojourn among the puritans.

when he compared the public crimes of this minister--startling crimes,
european crimes, if so we may say--with the private and unknown crimes
with which milady had charged him, felton found that the more culpable
of the two men which formed the character of buckingham was the one of
whom the public knew not the life. this was because his love, so
strange, so new, and so ardent, made him view the infamous and imaginary
accusations of milady de winter as, through a magnifying glass, one
views as frightful monsters atoms in reality imperceptible by the side
of an ant.

the rapidity of his walk heated his blood still more; the idea that he
left behind him, exposed to a frightful vengeance, the woman he loved,
or rather whom he adored as a saint, the emotion he had experienced,
present fatigue--all together exalted his mind above human feeling.

he entered portsmouth about eight o’clock in the morning. the whole
population was on foot; drums 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng woman?"

"yes, sir, i know it," replied the duke, dipping the quill in the ink.

"then your grace knows her real name?" asked felton, in a sharp tone.

"i know it"; and the duke put the quill to the paper. felton grew pale.

"and knowing that real name, my lord," replied felton, "will you sign it
all the same?"

"doubtless," said buckingham, "and rather twice than once."

"i cannot believe," continued felton, in a voice that became more sharp
and rough, "that your grace knows that it is to milady de winter this
relates."

"i know it perfectly, although i am astonished that you know it."

"and will your grace sign that order without remorse?"

buckingham looked at the young man haughtily.

"do you know, sir, that you are asking me very strange questions, and
that i am very foolish to answer them?"

"reply to them, my lord," said felton; "the circumstances are more
serious than you perhaps believe."

buckingham reflected that the young man, coming from lord de winter,
undoubtedly spoke in his name,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and softened.

"without remorse," said he. "the baron knows, as well as myself, that
milady de winter is a very guilty woman, and it is treating her very
favorably to commute her punishment to transportation." the duke put his
pen to the paper.

"you will not sign that order, my lord!" said felton, making a step
toward the duke.

"i will not sign this order! and why not?"

"because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to the
lady."

"i should do her justice by sending her to tyburn," said buckingham.
"this lady is infamous."

"my lord, milady de winter is an angel; you know that
 
 ___________________________
 
d
them.

"my lord," continued felton, becoming more excited as he spoke, "my
lord, beware! all england is tired of your iniquities; my lord, you have
abused the royal power, which you have almost usurped; my lord, you are
held in horror by god and men. god will punish you hereafter, but i will
punish you here!"

"ah, this is too much!" cried buckingham, making a step toward the door.

felton barred his passage.

"i ask it humbly of you, my lord," said he; "sign the order for the
liberation of milady de winter. remember that she is a woman whom you
have dishonored."

"withdraw, sir," said buckingham, "or i will call my attendant, and have
you placed in irons."

"you shall not call," said felton, throwing himself between the duke and
the bell placed on a stand encrusted with silver. "beware, my lord, you
are in the hands of god!"

"in the hands of the devil, you mean!" cried buckingham, raising his
voice so as to attract the notice of his people, without absolutely
shouting.

"sign, my lord; sign the 
 
 ___________________________
 
liberation of milady de winter," said felton,
holding out a paper to the duke.

"by force? you are joking! holloa, patrick!"

"sign, my lord!"

"never."

"never?"

"help!" shouted the duke; and at the same time he sprang toward his
sword.

but felton did not give him time to draw it. he held the knife with
which milady had stabbed herself, open in his bosom; at one bound he was
upon the duke.

at that moment patrick entered the room, crying, "a letter from france,
my lord."

"from france!" cried buckingham, forgetting everyt
 
 ___________________________
 
 the powerful
gesture of a judge sent by the lord himself. behind d’artagnan entered
porthos, aramis, lord de winter, and the man in the red cloak.

the four lackeys guarded the door and the window.

milady had sunk into a chair, with her hands extended, as if to conjure
this terrible apparition. perceiving her brother-in-law, she uttered a
terrible cry.

"what do you want?" screamed milady.

"we want," said athos, "charlotte backson, who first was called comtesse
de la fere, and afterwards milady de winter, baroness of sheffield."

"that is i! that is i!" murmured milady, in extreme terror; "what do you
want?"

"we wish to judge you according to your crime," said athos; "you shall
be free to defend yourself. justify yourself if you can. m. d’artagnan,
it is for you to accuse her first."

d’artagnan advanced.

"before god and before men," said he, "i accuse this woman of having
poisoned constance bonacieux, who died yesterday evening."

he turned towards porthos and aramis.

"we bear witness t
 
 ___________________________
 
 "what is the penalty you demand
against this woman?"

"the punishment of death," replied lord de winter.

"messieurs porthos and aramis," repeated athos, "you who are her judges,
what is the sentence you pronounce upon this woman?"

"the punishment of death," replied the musketeers, in a hollow voice.

milady uttered a frightful shriek, and dragged herself along several
paces upon her knees toward her judges.

athos stretched out his hand toward her.

"charlotte backson, comtesse de la fere, milady de winter," said he,
"your crimes have wearied men on earth and god in heaven. if you know a
prayer, say it--for you are condemned, and you shall die."

at these words, which left no hope, milady raised herself in all her
pride, and wished to speak; but her strength failed her. she felt that a
powerful and implacable hand seized her by the hair, and dragged her
away as irrevocably as fatality drags humanity. she did not, therefore,
even attempt the least resistance, and went out of the cottage.

lord de 
 
 ___________________________
 
charged with having tried to thwart the plans of your general."

"and who charges me with this, monseigneur?" said d’artagnan, who had no
doubt the accusation came from milady, "a woman branded by the justice
of the country; a woman who has espoused one man in france and another
in england; a woman who poisoned her second husband and who attempted
both to poison and assassinate me!"

"what do you say, monsieur?" cried the cardinal, astonished; "and of
what woman are you speaking thus?"

"of milady de winter," replied d’artagnan, "yes, of milady de winter, of
whose crimes your eminence is doubtless ignorant, since you have honored
her with your confidence."

"monsieur," said the cardinal, "if milady de winter has committed the
crimes you lay to her charge, she shall be punished."

"she has been punished, monseigneur."

"and who has punished her?"

"we."

"she is in prison?"

"she is dead."

"dead!" repeated the cardinal, who could not believe what he heard,
"dead! did you not say she was dead?"

