o find her way alone to the
blue room, where the miss lammeters' bandboxes had been deposited on
their arrival in the morning.

there was hardly a bedroom in the house where feminine compliments were
not passing and feminine toilettes going forward, in various stages, in
space made scanty by extra beds spread upon the floor; and miss nancy,
as she entered the blue room, had to make her little formal curtsy to a
group of six.  on the one hand, there were ladies no less important
than the two miss gunns, the wine merchant's daughters from lytherly,
dressed in the height of fashion, with the tightest skirts and the
shortest waists, and gazed at by miss ladbrook (of the old pastures)
with a shyness not unsustained by inward criticism.  partly, miss
ladbrook felt that her own skirt must be regarded as unduly lax by the
miss gunns, and partly, that it was a pity the miss gunns did not show
that judgment which she herself would show if she were in their place,
by stopping a little on this side of t
 
 ___________________________
 
ope i see you the same."

"thank you, niece; i keep my health for the present.  and how is my
brother-in-law?"

these dutiful questions and answers were continued until it was
ascertained in detail that the lammeters were all as well as usual, and
the osgoods likewise, also that niece priscilla must certainly arrive
shortly, and that travelling on pillions in snowy weather was
unpleasant, though a joseph was a great protection.  then nancy was
formally introduced to her aunt's visitors, the miss gunns, as being
the daughters of a mother known to _their_ mother, though now for the
first time induced to make a journey into these parts; and these ladies
were so taken by surprise at finding such a lovely face and figure in
an out-of-the-way country place, that they began to feel some curiosity
about the dress she would put on when she took off her joseph.  miss
nancy, whose thoughts were always conducted with the propriety and
moderation conspicuous in her manners, remarked to herself that the
m
 
 ___________________________
 
iss gunns were rather hard-featured than otherwise, and that such very
low dresses as they wore might have been attributed to vanity if their
shoulders had been pretty, but that, being as they were, it was not
reasonable to suppose that they showed their necks from a love of
display, but rather from some obligation not inconsistent with sense
and modesty.  she felt convinced, as she opened her box, that this must
be her aunt osgood's opinion, for miss nancy's mind resembled her
aunt's to a degree that ev
 
 ___________________________
 
might not have
supposed it from the formality of their greeting, there was a devoted
attachment and mutual admiration between aunt and niece.  even miss
nancy's refusal of her cousin gilbert osgood (on the ground solely that
he was her cousin), though it had grieved her aunt greatly, had not in
the least cooled the preference which had determined her to leave nancy
several of her hereditary ornaments, let gilbert's future wife be whom
she might.

three of the ladies quickly retired, but the miss gunns were quite
content that mrs. osgood's inclination to remain with her niece gave
them also a reason for staying to see the rustic beauty's toilette. and
it was really a pleasure--from the first opening of the bandbox, where
everything smelt of lavender and rose-leaves, to the clasping of the
small coral necklace that fitted closely round her little white neck.
everything belonging to miss nancy was of delicate purity and
nattiness: not a crease was where it had no business to be, not a bit
of he
 
 ___________________________
 
as for her own person, it
gave the same idea of perfect unvarying neatness as the body of a
little bird.  it is true that her light-brown hair was cropped behind
like a boy's, and was dressed in front in a number of flat rings, that
lay quite away from her face; but there was no sort of coiffure that
could make miss nancy's cheek and neck look otherwise than pretty; and
when at last she stood complete in her silvery twilled silk, her lace
tucker, her coral necklace, and coral ear-drops, the miss gunns could
see nothing to criticise except her hands, which bore the traces of
butter-making, cheese-crushing, and even still coarser work.  but miss
nancy was not ashamed of that, for even while she was dressing she
narrated to her aunt how she and priscilla had packed their boxes
yesterday, because this morning was baking morning, and since they were
leaving home, it was desirable to make a good supply of meat-pies for
the kitchen; and as she concluded this judicious remark, she turned to
the miss
 
 ___________________________
 
 gunns that she might not commit the rudeness of not including
them in the conversation.  the miss gunns smiled stiffly, and thought
what a pity it was that these rich country people, who could afford to
buy such good clothes (really miss nancy's lace and silk were very
costly), should be brought up in utter ignorance and vulgarity.  she
actually said "mate" for "meat", "'appen" for "perhaps", and "oss" for
"horse", which, to young ladies living in good lytherly society, who
habitually said 'orse, even in domestic privacy, and only said 'appen
on the right occasions, was necessarily shocking.  mis
 
 ___________________________
 
scilla too rough.

"i'm obliged to have the same as nancy, you know, for all i'm five
years older, and it makes me look yallow; for she never _will_ have
anything without i have mine just like it, because she wants us to look
like sisters.  and i tell her, folks 'ull think it's my weakness makes
me fancy as i shall look pretty in what she looks pretty in.  for i
_am_ ugly--there's no denying that: i feature my father's family.  but,
law!  i don't mind, do you?"  priscilla here turned to the miss gunns,
rattling on in too much preoccupation with the delight of talking, to
notice that her candour was not appreciated.  "the pretty uns do for
fly-catchers--they keep the men off us.  i've no opinion o' the men,
miss gunn--i don't know what _you_ have.  and as for fretting and
stewing about what _they_'ll think of you from morning till night, and
making your life uneasy about what they're doing when they're out o'
your sight--as i tell nancy, it's a folly no woman need be guilty of,
if she's got a
 
 ___________________________
 
de, or to sit down by yourself to
a scrag or a knuckle; but, thank god!  my father's a sober man and
likely to live; and if you've got a man by the chimney-corner, it
doesn't matter if he's childish--the business needn't be broke up."

the delicate process of getting her narrow gown over her head without
injury to her smooth curls, obliged miss priscilla to pause in this
rapid survey of life, and mrs. osgood seized the opportunity of rising
and saying--

"well, niece, you'll follow us.  the miss gunns will like to go down."

"sister," said nancy, when they were alone, "you've offended the miss
gunns, i'm sure."

"what have i done, child?"  said priscilla, in some alarm.

"why, you asked them if they minded about being ugly--you're so very
blunt."

"law, did i?  well, it popped out: it's a mercy i said no more, for i'm
a bad un to live with folks when they don't like the truth.  but as for
being ugly, look at me, child, in this silver-coloured silk--i told you
how it 'ud be--i look as yallow 