.  such
colloquies have occupied many a pair of pale-faced weavers, whose
unnurtured souls have been like young winged things, fluttering
forsaken in the twilight.

it had seemed to the unsuspecting silas that the friendship had
suffered no chill even from his formation of another attachment of a
closer kind.  for some months he had been engaged to a young
servant-woman, waiting only for a little increase to their mutual
savings in order to their marriage; and it was a great delight to him
that sarah did not object to william's occasional presence in their
sunday interviews.  it was at this point in their history that silas's
cataleptic fit occurred during the prayer-meeting; and amidst the
various queries and expressions of interest addressed to him by his
fellow-members, william's suggestion alone jarred with the general
sympathy towards a brother thus singled out for special dealings.  he
observed that, to him, this trance looked more like a visitation of
satan than a proof of divine fav
 
 ___________________________
 
our, and exhorted his friend to see
that he hid no accursed thing within his soul.  silas, feeling bound to
accept rebuke and admonition as a brotherly office, felt no resentment,
but only pain, at his friend's doubts concerning him; and to this was
soon added some anxiety at the perception that sarah's manner towards
him began to exhibit a strange fluctuation between an effort at an
increased manifestation of regard and involuntary signs of shrinking
and dislike.  he asked her if she wished to break off their engagement;
but she denied this: their engagement was known to the church, and had
been recognized in the prayer-meetings; it could not be broken off
without strict investigation, and sarah could render no reason that
would be sanctioned by the feeling of the community.  at this time t
 
 ___________________________
 
wing
lots; but to him this would have been an effort of independent thought
such as he had never known; and he must have made the effort at a
moment when all his energies were turned into the anguish of
disappointed faith.  if there is an angel who records the sorrows of
men as well as their sins, he knows how many and deep are the sorrows
that spring from false ideas for which no man is culpable.

marner went home, and for a whole day sat alone, stunned by despair,
without any impulse to go to sarah and attempt to win her belief in his
innocence.  the second day he took refuge from benumbing unbelief, by
getting into his loom and working away as usual; and before many hours
were past, the minister and one of the deacons came to him with the
message from sarah, that she held her engagement to him at an end.
silas received the message mutely, and then turned away from the
messengers to work at his loom again.  in little more than a month from
that time, sarah was married to william dane; and