weet"; lazy mothers,
who knew what it was to be interrupted in folding their arms and
scratching their elbows by the mischievous propensities of children
just firm on their legs, were equally interested in conjecturing how a
lone man would manage with a two-year-old child on his hands, and were
equally ready with their suggestions: the notable chiefly telling him
what he had better do, and the lazy ones being emphatic in telling him
what he would never be able to do.

among the notable mothers, dolly winthrop was the one whose neighbourly
offices were the most acceptable to marner, for they were rendered
without any show of bustling instruction.  silas had shown her the
half-guinea given to him by godfrey, and had asked her what he should
do about getting some clothes for the child.

"eh, master marner," said dolly, "there's no call to buy, no more nor a
pair o' shoes; for i've got the little petticoats as aaron wore five
years ago, and it's ill spending the money on them baby-clothes, for
the child
 
 ___________________________
 
 more
distinct answers; shapes and sounds grew clearer for eppie's eyes and
ears, and there was more that "dad-dad" was imperatively required to
notice and account for.  also, by the time eppie was three years old,
she developed a fine capacity for mischief, and for devising ingenious
ways of being troublesome, which found much exercise, not only for
silas's patience, but for his watchfulness and penetration.  sorely was
poor silas puzzled on such occasions by the incompatible demands of
love.  dolly winthrop told him that punishment was good for eppie, and
that, as for rearing a child without making it tingle a little in soft
and safe places now and then, it was not to be done.

"to be sure, there's another thing you might do, master marner," added
dolly, meditatively: "you might shut her up once i' the coal-hole.
that was what i did wi' aaron; for i was that silly wi' the youngest
lad, as i could never bear to smack him.  not as i could find i' my
heart to let him stay i' the coal-hole more nor a 
 
 ___________________________
 
th as sets 'em on, that's what it is."

so eppie was reared without punishment, the burden of her misdeeds
being borne vicariously by father silas.  the stone hut was made a soft
nest for her, lined with downy patience: and also in the world that lay
beyond the stone hut she knew nothing of frowns and denials.

notwithstanding the difficulty of carrying her and his yarn or linen at
the same time, silas took her with him in most of his journeys to the
farmhouses, unwilling to leave her behind at dolly winthrop's, who was
always ready to take care of her; and little curly-headed eppie, the
weaver's child, became an object of interest at several outlying
homesteads, as well as in the village.  hitherto he had been treated
very much as if he had been a useful gnome or brownie--a queer and
unaccountable creature, who must necessarily be looked at with
wondering curiosity and repulsion, and with whom one would be glad to
make all greetings and bargains as brief as possible, but who must be
dealt with in a
 
 ___________________________
 
 my duty by this feeble creature, you
perceive"; while the lady-mother of the kitten sat sunning her white
bosom in the window, and looked round with a sleepy air of expecting
caresses, though she was not going to take any trouble for them.

the presence of this happy animal life was not the only change which
had come over the interior of the stone cottage.  there was no bed now
in the living-room, and the small space was well filled with decent
furniture, all bright and clean enough to satisfy dolly winthrop's eye.
the oaken table and three-cornered oaken chair were hardly what was
likely to be seen in so poor a cottage: they had come, with the beds
and other things, from the red house; for mr. godfrey cass, as every
one said in the village, did very kindly by the weaver; and it was
nothing but right a man should be looked on and helped by those who
could afford it, when he had brought up an orphan child, and been
father and mother to her--and had lost his money too, so as he had
nothing but what h
 
 ___________________________
 
ties, memory also reawakened, he had begun to
ponder over the elements of his old faith, and blend them with his new
impressions, till he recovered a consciousness of unity between his
past and present. the sense of presiding goodness and the human trust
which come with all pure peace and joy, had given him a dim impression
that there had been some error, some mistake, which had thrown that
dark shadow over the days of his best years; and as it grew more and
more easy to him to open his mind to dolly winthrop, he gradually
communicated to her all he could describe of his early life.  the
communication was necessarily a slow and difficult process, for silas's
meagre power of explanation was not aided by any readiness of
interpretation in dolly, whose narrow outward experience gave her no
key to strange customs, and made every novelty a source of wonder that
arrested them at every step of the narrative.  it was only by
fragments, and at intervals which left dolly time to revolve what she
had heard til
 
 ___________________________
 
brush-shop and sit down, father--they'll let you
sit down," said eppie, always on the watch lest one of her father's
strange attacks should come on.  "perhaps the people can tell you all
about it."

but neither from the brush-maker, who had come to shoe lane only ten
years ago, when the factory was already built, nor from any other
source within his reach, could silas learn anything of the old lantern
yard friends, or of mr. paston the minister.

"the old place is all swep' away," silas said to dolly winthrop on the
night of his return--"the little graveyard and everything. the old
home's gone; i've no home but this now.  i shall never know whether
they got at the truth o' the robbery, nor whether mr. paston could ha'
given me any light about the drawing o' the lots.  it's dark to me,
mrs. winthrop, that is; i doubt it'll be dark to the last."

"well, yes, master marner," said dolly, who sat with a placid listening
face, now bordered by grey hairs; "i doubt it may.  it's the will o'
them above as a 
 
 ___________________________
 
ose what it should be, previous
meditation had enabled her to give a decided answer at once.

seen at a little distance as she walked across the churchyard and down
the village, she seemed to be attired in pure white, and her hair
looked like the dash of gold on a lily.  one hand was on her husband's
arm, and with the other she clasped the hand of her father silas.

"you won't be giving me away, father," she had said before they went to
church; "you'll only be taking aaron to be a son to you."

dolly winthrop walked behind with her husband; and there ended the
little bridal procession.

there were many eyes to look at it, and miss priscilla lammeter was
glad that she and her father had happened to drive up to the door of
the red house just in time to see this pretty sight.  they had come to
keep nancy company to-day, because mr. cass had had to go away to
lytherley, for special reasons.  that seemed to be a pity, for
otherwise he might have gone, as mr. crackenthorp and mr. osgood
certainly would, t
 
 ___________________________
 
p," said priscilla to her father, as they sat in the
gig; "i should ha' had something young to think of then, besides the
lambs and the calves."

"yes, my dear, yes," said mr. lammeter; "one feels that as one gets
older.  things look dim to old folks: they'd need have some young eyes
about 'em, to let 'em know the world's the same as it used to be."

nancy came out now to welcome her father and sister; and the wedding
group had passed on beyond the red house to the humbler part of the
village.

dolly winthrop was the first to divine that old mr. macey, who had been
set in his arm-chair outside his own door, would expect some special
notice as they passed, since he was too old to be at the wedding-feast.

"mr. macey's looking for a word from us," said dolly; "he'll be hurt if
we pass him and say nothing--and him so racked with rheumatiz."

so they turned aside to shake hands with the old man.  he had looked
forward to the occasion, and had his premeditated speech.

"well, master marner," he said, in 