to drink a pint at the rainbow, or to gossip at the
wheelwright's: he sought no man or woman, save for the purposes of his
calling, or in order to supply himself with necessaries; and it was
soon clear to the raveloe lasses that he would never urge one of them
to accept him against her will--quite as if he had heard them declare
that they would never marry a dead man come to life again.  this view
of marner's personality was not without another ground than his pale
face and unexampled eyes; for jem rodney, the mole-catcher, averred
that one evening as he was returning homeward, he saw silas marner
leaning against a stile with a heavy bag on his back, instead of
resting the bag on the stile as a man in his senses would have done;
and that, on coming up to him, he saw that marner's eyes were set like
a dead man's, and he spoke to him, and shook him, and his limbs were
stiff, and his hands clutched the bag as if they'd been made of iron;
but just as he had made up his mind that the weaver was dead,
 
 ___________________________
 
the shafts, and then walk off as soon as you can say "gee!"
but there might be such a thing as a man's soul being loose from his
body, and going out and in, like a bird out of its nest and back; and
that was how folks got over-wise, for they went to school in this
shell-less state to those who could teach them more than their
neighbours could learn with their five senses and the parson.  and
where did master marner get his knowledge of herbs from--and charms
too, if he liked to give them away?  jem rodney's story was no more
than what might have been expected by anybody who had seen how marner
had cured sally oates, and made her sleep like a baby, when her heart
had been beating enough to burst her body, for two months and more,
while she had been under the doctor's care.  he might cure more folks
if he would; but he was worth speaking fair, if it was only to keep him
from doing you a mischief.

it was partly to this vague fear that marner was indebted for
protecting him from the persecution tha
 
 ___________________________
 
the sand and bricks looked as if they had not
been moved.  _was_ it a thief who had taken the bags?  or was it a
cruel power that no hands could reach, which had delighted in making
him a second time desolate?  he shrank from this vaguer dread, and
fixed his mind with struggling effort on the robber with hands, who
could be reached by hands.  his thoughts glanced at all the neighbours
who had made any remarks, or asked any questions which he might now
regard as a ground of suspicion.  there was jem rodney, a known
poacher, and otherwise disreputable: he had often met marner in his
journeys across the fields, and had said something jestingly about the
weaver's money; nay, he had once irritated marner, by lingering at the
fire when he called to light his pipe, instead of going about his
business.  jem rodney was the man--there was ease in the thought.  jem
could be found and made to restore the money: marner did not want to
punish him, but only to get back his gold which had gone from him, and
lef
 
 ___________________________
 
t his soul like a forlorn traveller on an unknown desert.  the
robber must be laid hold of.  marner's ideas of legal authority were
confused, but he felt that he must go and proclaim his loss; and the
great people in the village--the clergyman, the constable, and squire
cass--would make jem rodney, or somebody else, deliver up the stolen
money.  he rushed out in the rain, under the stimulus of this hope,
forgetting to cover his head, not caring to fasten his door; for he
felt as if he had nothing left to lose.  he ran swiftly, till want of
breath compelled him to slacken his pace as he was entering the village
at the turning close to the rainbow.

the rainbow, in marner's view, was a place of luxurious resort for rich
and stout husbands, whose wives had superfluous stores of linen; it wa
 
 ___________________________
 
n
not allowing him to speak.  the landlord, under the habitual sense that
he was bound to keep his house open to all company, and confident in
the protection of his unbroken neutrality, at last took on himself the
task of adjuring the ghost.

"master marner," he said, in a conciliatory tone, "what's lacking to
you?  what's your business here?"

"robbed!"  said silas, gaspingly.  "i've been robbed!  i want the
constable--and the justice--and squire cass--and mr. crackenthorp."

"lay hold on him, jem rodney," said the landlord, the idea of a ghost
subsiding; "he's off his head, i doubt.  he's wet through."

jem rodney was the outermost man, and sat conveniently near marner's
standing-place; but he declined to give his services.

"come and lay hold on him yourself, mr. snell, if you've a mind," said
jem, rather sullenly.  "he's been robbed, and murdered too, for what i
know," he added, in a muttering tone.

"jem rodney!"  said silas, turning and fixing his strange eyes on the
suspected man.

"aye, 
 
 ___________________________
 
cle and
in the direct rays of the fire.  the weaver, too feeble to have any
distinct purpose beyond that of getting help to recover his money,
submitted unresistingly.  the transient fears of the company were now
forgotten in their strong curiosity, and all faces were turned towards
silas, when the landlord, having seated himself again, said--

"now then, master marner, what's this you've got to say--as you've been
robbed?  speak out."

"he'd better not say again as it was me robbed him," cried jem rodney,
hastily.  "what could i ha' done with his money?  i could as easy steal
the parson's surplice, and wear it."

"hold your tongue, jem, and let's hear what he's got to say," said the
landlord.  "now then, master marner."

silas now told his story, under frequent questioning as the mysterious
character of the robbery became evident.

this strangely novel situation of opening his trouble to his raveloe
neighbours, of sitting in the warmth of a hearth not his own, and
feeling the presence of faces 
 
 ___________________________
 
tterly incalculable by mortal
agents, when silas would go away from home without locking his door,
the more probable conclusion seemed to be, that his disreputable
intimacy in that quarter, if it ever existed, had been broken up, and
that, in consequence, this ill turn had been done to marner by somebody
it was quite in vain to set the constable after.  why this
preternatural felon should be obliged to wait till the door was left
unlocked, was a question which did not present itself.

"it isn't jem rodney as has done this work, master marner," said the
landlord.  "you mustn't be a-casting your eye at poor jem. there may be
a bit of a reckoning against jem for the matter of a hare or so, if
anybody was bound to keep their eyes staring open, and niver to wink;
but jem's been a-sitting here drinking his can, like the decentest man
i' the parish, since before you left your house, master marner, by your
own account."

"aye, aye," said mr. macey; "let's have no accusing o' the innicent.
that isn't the