ng loose from his
body, and going out and in, like a bird out of its nest and back; and
that was how folks got over-wise, for they went to school in this
shell-less state to those who could teach them more than their
neighbours could learn with their five senses and the parson.  and
where did master marner get his knowledge of herbs from--and charms
too, if he liked to give them away?  jem rodney's story was no more
than what might have been expected by anybody who had seen how marner
had cured sally oates, and made her sleep like a baby, when her heart
had been beating enough to burst her body, for two months and more,
while she had been under the doctor's care.  he might cure more folks
if he would; but he was worth speaking fair, if it was only to keep him
from doing you a mischief.

it was partly to this vague fear that marner was indebted for
protecting him from the persecution that his singularities might have
drawn upon him, but still more to the fact that, the old linen-weaver
in the neig
 
 ___________________________
 
om.

about this time an incident happened which seemed to open a possibility
of some fellowship with his neighbours.  one day, taking a pair of
shoes to be mended, he saw the cobbler's wife seated by the fire,
suffering from the terrible symptoms of heart-disease and dropsy, which
he had witnessed as the precursors of his mother's death.  he felt a
rush of pity at the mingled sight and remembrance, and, recalling the
relief his mother had found from a simple preparation of foxglove, he
promised sally oates to bring her something that would ease her, since
the doctor did her no good.  in this office of charity, silas felt, for
the first time since he had come to raveloe, a sense of unity between
his past and present life, which might have been the beginning of his
rescue from the insect-like existence into which his nature had shrunk.
but sally oates's disease had raised her into a personage of much
interest and importance among the neighbours, and the fact of her
having found relief from drinking
 
 ___________________________
 
ral discourse.  when doctor kimble gave physic, it was
natural that it should have an effect; but when a weaver, who came from
nobody knew where, worked wonders with a bottle of brown waters, the
occult character of the process was evident.  such a sort of thing had
not been known since the wise woman at tarley died; and she had charms
as well as "stuff": everybody went to her when their children had fits.
silas marner must be a person of the same sort, for how did he know
what would bring back sally oates's breath, if he didn't know a fine
sight more than that?  the wise woman had words that she muttered to
herself, so that you couldn't hear what they were, and if she tied a
bit of red thread round the child's toe the while, it would keep off
the water in the head.  there were women in raveloe, at that present
time, who had worn one of the wise woman's little bags round their
necks, and, in consequence, had never had an idiot child, as ann
coulter had.  silas marner could very likely do as much,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and more; and
now it was all clear how he should have come from unknown parts, and be
so "comical-looking". but sally oates must mind and not tell the
doctor, for he would be sure to set his face against marner: he was
always angry about the wise woman, and used to threaten those who went
to her that they should have none of his help any more.

silas now found himself and his cottage suddenly beset by mothers who
wanted him to charm away the whooping-cough, or bring back the milk,
and by men who wanted stuff against the rheumatics or the knots in the
hands; and, to secure themselves against a refusal, the applicants
 
 ___________________________
 
he news of him as a wise man had spread even to
tarley, and it was long before people ceased to take long walks for the
sake of asking his aid.  but the hope in his wisdom was at length
changed into dread, for no one believed him when he said he knew no
charms and could work no cures, and every man and woman who had an
accident or a new attack after applying to him, set the misfortune down
to master marner's ill-will and irritated glances.  thus it came to
pass that his movement of pity towards sally oates, which had given him
a transient sense of brotherhood, heightened the repulsion between him
and his neighbours, and made his isolation more complete.

gradually the guineas, the crowns, and the half-crowns grew to a heap,
and marner drew less and less for his own wants, trying to solve the
problem of keeping himself strong enough to work sixteen hours a-day on
as small an outlay as possible.  have not men, shut up in solitary
imprisonment, found an interest in marking the moments by straight
st