ble name," said silas, old ideas recurring.

"then i've no call to speak again' it," said dolly, rather startled by
silas's knowledge on this head; "but you see i'm no scholard, and i'm
slow at catching the words.  my husband says i'm allays like as if i
was putting the haft for the handle--that's what he says--for he's very
sharp, god help him.  but it was awk'ard calling your little sister by
such a hard name, when you'd got nothing big to say, like--wasn't it,
master marner?"

"we called her eppie," said silas.

"well, if it was noways wrong to shorten the name, it 'ud be a deal
handier.  and so i'll go now, master marner, and i'll speak about the
christening afore dark; and i wish you the best o' luck, and it's my
belief as it'll come to you, if you do what's right by the orphin
child;--and there's the 'noculation to be seen to; and as to washing
its bits o' things, you need look to nobody but me, for i can do 'em
wi' one hand when i've got my suds about.  eh, the blessed angil!
you'll 
 
 ___________________________
 
ad no distinct idea about the baptism and the
church-going, except that dolly had said it was for the good of the
child; and in this way, as the weeks grew to months, the child created
fresh and fresh links between his life and the lives from which he had
hitherto shrunk continually into narrower isolation.  unlike the gold
which needed nothing, and must be worshipped in close-locked
solitude--which was hidden away from the daylight, was deaf to the song
of birds, and started to no human tones--eppie was a creature of
endless claims and ever-growing desires, seeking and loving sunshine,
and living sounds, and living movements; making trial of everything,
with trust in new joy, and stirring the human kindness in all eyes that
looked on her.  the gold had kept his thoughts in an ever-repeated
circle, leading to nothing beyond itself; but eppie was an object
compacted of changes and hopes that forced his thoughts onward, and
carried them far away from their old eager pacing towards the same
bl
 
 ___________________________
 
ank limit--carried them away to the new things that would come with
the coming years, when eppie would have learned to understand how her
father silas cared for her; and made him look for images of that time
in the ties and charities that bound together the families of his
neighbours. the gold had asked that he should sit weaving longer and
longer, deafened and blinded more and more to all things except the
monotony of his loom and the repetition of his web; but eppie called
him away from his weaving, and made him think all its pauses a holiday,
reawakening his senses with her fresh life, even to the old
winter-flies that came crawling forth in the early spring sunshine, and
warming him into joy because _she_ had joy.

and when the sunshine grew strong and lasting, so that the buttercups
were thick in the meadows, silas might be seen in the sunny midday, or
in the late afternoon when the shadows were lengthening under the
hedgerows, strolling out with uncove
 
 ___________________________
 
red head to carry eppie beyond the
stone-pits to where the flowers grew, till they reached some favourite
bank where he could sit down, while eppie toddled to pluck the flowers,
and make remarks to the winged things that murmured happily above the
bright petals, calling "dad-dad's" attention continually by bringing
him the flowers. then she would turn her ear to some sudden bird-note,
and silas learned to please her by making signs of hushed stillness,
that they might listen for the note to come again: so that when it
came, she set up her small back and laughed with gurgling triumph.
sitting on the banks in this way, silas began to look fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r the once
familiar herbs again; and as the leaves, with their unchanged outline
and markings, lay on his palm, there was a sense of crowding
remembrances from which he turned away timidly, taking refuge in
eppie's little world, that lay lightly on his enfeebled spirit.

as the child's mind was growing into knowledge, his mind was growing
into memory: as her life unfolded, his soul, long stupefied in a cold
narrow prison, was unfolding too, and trembling gradually into full
consciousness.

it was an influence which must gather force with every new year: the
tones that stirred silas's heart grew articulate, and called for more
distinct answers; shapes and sounds grew clearer for eppie's eyes and
ears, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d there was more that "dad-dad" was imperatively required to
notice and account for.  also, by the time eppie was three years old,
she developed a fine capacity for mischief, and for devising ingenious
ways of being troublesome, which found much exercise, not only for
silas's patience, but for his watchfulness and penetration.  sorely was
poor silas puzzled on such occasions by the incompatible demands of
love.  dolly winthrop told him that punishment was good for eppie, and
that, as for rearing a child without making it tingle a little in soft
and safe places now and then, it was not to be done.

"to be sure, there's another thing you might do, master marner," added
dolly, meditatively: "you might shut her up once i' the coal-hole.
that was what i did wi' aaron; for i was that silly wi' the youngest
lad, as i could never bear to smack him.  not as i could find i' my
heart to let him stay i' the coal-hole more nor a minute, but it was
enough to colly him all o
 
 ___________________________
 
ver, so as he must be new washed and dressed,
and it was as good as a rod to him--that was.  but i put it upo' your
conscience, master marner, as there's one of 'em you must
choose--ayther smacking or the coal-hole--else she'll get so masterful,
there'll be no holding her."

silas was impressed with the melancholy truth of this last remark; but
his force of mind failed before the only two penal methods open to him,
not only because it was painful to him to hurt eppie, but because he
trembled at a moment's contention with her, lest she should love him
the less for it.  let even an affectionate goliath get himself tied to
a small tender thing, dreading to hurt it by pulling, and dreading
still more to snap the cord, and which of the two, pray, will be
master?  it was clear that eppie, with her short toddling steps, must
lead father silas a pretty dance on any fine morning when circumstances
favoured mischief.

for example.  he had wisely chosen a broad strip 
 
 ___________________________
 
inen as a means of
fastening her to his loom when he was busy: it made a broad belt round
her waist, and was long enough to allow of her reaching the truckle-bed
and sitting down on it, but not long enough for her to attempt any
dangerous climbing.  one bright summer's morning silas had been more
engrossed than usual in "setting up" a new piece of work, an occasion
on which his scissors were in requisition.  these scissors, owing to an
especial warning of dolly's, had been kept carefully out of eppie's
reach; but the click of them had had a peculiar attraction for her ear,
and watching the results of that click, she had derived the philosophic
lesson that the same cause would produce the same effect.  silas had
seated himself in his loom, and the noise of weaving had begun; but he
had left his scissors on a ledge which eppie's arm was long enough to
reach; and now, like a small mouse, watching her opportunity, she stole
quietly from her corner, secured the scissors, and toddled to the bed
a
 
 ___________________________
 
gain, setting up her back as a mode of concealing the fact.  she had a
distinct intention as to the use of the scissors; and having cut the
linen strip in a jagged but effectual manner, in two moments she had
run out at the open door where the sunshine was inviting her, while
poor silas believed her to be a better child than usual.  it was not
until he happened to need his scissors that the terrible fact burst
upon him: eppie had run out by herself--had perhaps fallen into the
stone-pit.  silas, shaken by the worst fear that could have befallen
him, rushed out, calling "eppie!"  and ran eagerly about the unenclosed
space, exploring the dry cavities into which she might have fallen, and
then gazing with questioning dread at the smooth red surface of the
water.  the cold drops stood on his brow. how long had she been out?
there was one hope--that she had crept through the stile and got into
the fields, where he habitu
 
 ___________________________
 
ally took her to stroll.  but the grass was
high in the meadow, and there was no descrying her, if she were there,
except by a close search that would be a trespass on mr. osgood's crop.
still, that misdemeanour must be committed; and poor silas, after
peering all round the hedgerows, traversed the grass, beginning with
perturbed vision to see eppie behind every group of red sorrel, and to
see her moving always farther off as he approached.  the meadow was
searched in vain; and he got over the stile into the next field,
looking with dying hope towards a small pond which was now reduced to
its summer shallowness, so as to leave a wide margin of good adhesive
mud. here, however, sat eppie, discoursing cheerfully to her own small
boot, which she was using as a bucket to convey the water into a deep
hoof-mark, while her little naked foot was p
 
 ___________________________
 
n a
cushion of olive-green mud.  a red-headed calf was observing her with
alarmed doubt through the opposite hedge.

here was clearly a case of aberration in a christened child which
demanded severe treatment; but silas, overcome with convulsive joy at
finding his treasure again, could do nothing but snatch her up, and
cover her with half-sobbing kisses.  it was not until he had carried
her home, and had begun to think of the necessary washing, that he
recollected the need that he should punish eppie, and "make her
remember".  the idea that she might run away again and come to harm,
gave him unusual resolution, and for the first time he determined to
try the coal-hole--a small closet near the hearth.

"naughty, naughty eppie," he suddenly began, holding her on his knee,
and pointing to her muddy feet and clothes--"naughty to cut with the
scissors and run away.  eppie must go into the coal-hole for being
naughty.  daddy must put her in the coal-hole."

he half-expected that this would be sho
 
 ___________________________
 
ck enough, and that eppie would
begin to cry.  but instead of that, she began to shake herself on his
knee, as if the proposition opened a pleasing novelty. seeing that he
must proceed to extremities, he put her into the coal-hole, and held
the door closed, with a trembling sense that he was using a strong
measure.  for a moment there was silence, but then came a little cry,
"opy, opy!"  and silas let her out again, saying, "now eppie 'ull never
be naughty again, else she must go in the coal-hole--a black naughty
place."

the weaving must stand still a long while this morning, for now eppie
must be washed, and have clean clothes on; but it was to be hoped that
this punishment would have a lasting effect, and save time in
future--though, perhaps, it would have been better if eppie had cried
more.

in half an hour she was clean again, and silas having turned his back
to see what he could do with the linen band, threw it down a
 
 ___________________________
 
gain, with
the reflection that eppie would be good without fastening for the rest
of the morning.  he turned round again, and was going to place her in
her little chair near the loom, when she peeped out at him with black
face and hands again, and said, "eppie in de toal-hole!"

this total failure of the coal-hole discipline shook silas's belief in
the efficacy of punishment.  "she'd take it all for fun," he observed
to dolly, "if i didn't hurt her, and that i can't do, mrs. winthrop.
if she makes me a bit o' trouble, i can bear it. and she's got no
tricks but what she'll grow out of."

"well, that's partly true, master marner," said dolly, sympathetically;
"and if you can't bring your mind to frighten her off touching things,
you must do what you ca
 
 ___________________________
 
n to keep 'em out of her way.  that's what i do
wi' the pups as the lads are allays a-rearing.  they _will_ worry and
gnaw--worry and gnaw they will, if it was one's sunday cap as hung
anywhere so as they could drag it.  they know no difference, god help
'em: it's the pushing o' the teeth as sets 'em on, that's what it is."

so eppie was reared without punishment, the burden of her misdeeds
being borne vicariously by father silas.  the stone hut was made a soft
nest for her, lined with downy patience: and also in the world that lay
beyond the stone hut she knew nothing of frowns and denials.

notwithstanding the difficulty of carrying her and his yarn or linen at
the same time, silas took her with him in most of his journeys to the
farmhouses, unwilling to leave her behind at dolly winthrop's, who was
always ready to take c
 
 ___________________________
 
are of her; and little curly-headed eppie, the
weaver's child, became an object of interest at several outlying
homesteads, as well as in the village.  hitherto he had been treated
very much as if he had been a useful gnome or brownie--a queer and
unaccountable creature, who must necessarily be looked at with
wondering curiosity and repulsion, and with whom one would be glad to
make all greetings and bargains as brief as possible, but who must be
dealt with in a propitiatory way, and occasionally have a present of
pork or garden stuff 
 
 ___________________________
 
e always ready for
him: "ah, master marner, you'll be lucky if she takes the measles soon
and easy!"--or, "why, there isn't many lone men 'ud ha' been wishing to
take up with a little un like that: but i reckon the weaving makes you
handier than men as do out-door work--you're partly as handy as a
woman, for weaving comes next to spinning."  elderly masters and
mistresses, seated observantly in large kitchen arm-chairs, shook their
heads over the difficulties attendant on rearing children, felt eppie's
round arms and legs, and pronounced them remarkably firm, and told
silas that, if she turned out well (which, however, there was no
telling), it would be a fine thing for him to have a steady lass to do
for him when he got helpless.  servant maidens were fond of carrying
her out to look at the hens and chickens, or to see if any cherries
could be shaken down in the orchard; and the small boys and girls
approached her slowly, with cautious movement and steady gaze, like
little dogs face to fac
 
 ___________________________
 
e with one of their own kind, till attraction
had reached the point at which the soft lips were put out for a kiss.
no child was afraid of approaching silas when eppie was near him: there
was no repulsion around him now, either for young or old; for the
little child had come to link him once more with the whole world.
there was love between him and the child that blent them into one, and
there was love between the child and the world--from men and women with
parental looks and tones, to the red lady-birds and the round pebbles.

silas began now to think of raveloe life entirely in relation to eppie:
she must have everything that was a good in raveloe; and he 
 
 ___________________________
 
were angels who came and took men by the hand and led
them away from the city of destruction.  we see no white-winged angels
now.  but yet men are led away from threatening destruction: a hand is
put into theirs, which leads them forth gently towards a calm and
bright land, so that they look no more backward; and the hand may be a
little child's.



chapter xv

there was one person, as you will believe, who watched with keener
though more hidden interest than any other, the prosperous growth of
eppie under the weaver's care.  he dared not do anything that would
imply a stronger interest in a poor man's adopted child than could be
expected from the kindliness of the young squire, when a chance meeting
suggested a little present to a simple old fellow whom others noticed
with goodwill; but he told himself that the time would come when he
might do something towards furthering the welfare of his daughter
without incurring suspicion.  was he very uneasy in the meantime at his
inability to give h
 
 ___________________________
 
e weaver's bent
shoulders and white hair give him almost the look of advanced age,
though he is not more than five-and-fifty; but there is the freshest
blossom of youth close by his side--a blonde dimpled girl of eighteen,
who has vainly tried to chastise her curly auburn hair into smoothness
under her brown bonnet: the hair ripples as obstinately as a brooklet
under the march breeze, and the little ringlets burst away from the
restraining comb behind and show themselves below the bonnet-crown.
eppie cannot help being rather vexed about her hair, for there is no
other girl in raveloe who has hair at all like it, and she thinks hair
ought to be smooth.  she does not like to be blameworthy even in small
things: you see how neatly her prayer-book is folded in her spotted
handkerchief.

that good-looking young fellow, in a new fustian suit, who walks behind
her, is not quite sure upon the question of hair in the abstract, when
eppie puts it to him, and thinks that perhaps straight hair is the b
 
 ___________________________
 
est
in general, but he doesn't want eppie's hair to be different.  she
surely divines that there is some one behind her who is thinking about
her very particularly, and mustering courage to come to her side as
soon as they are out in the lane, else why should she look rather shy,
and take care not to turn away her head from her father silas, to whom
she keeps murmuring little sentences as to who was at church and who
was not at church, and how pretty the red mountain-ash is over the
rectory wall?

"i wish _we_ had a little garden, fath
 
 ___________________________
 
er, with double daisies in, like
mrs. winthrop's," said eppie, when they were out in the lane; "only
they say it 'ud take a deal of digging and bringing fresh soil--and you
couldn't do that, could you, father?  anyhow, i shouldn't like you to
do it, for it 'ud be too hard work for you."

"yes, i could do it, child, if you want a bit o' garden: these long
evenings, i could work at taking in a little bit o' the waste, just
enough for a root or two o' flowers for you; and again, i' the morning,
i could have a turn wi' the spade before i sat down to the loom.
 
 ___________________________
 
  why
didn't you tell me before as you wanted a bit o' garden?"

"_i_ can dig it for you, master marner," said the young man in fustian,
who was now by eppie's side, entering into the conversation without the
trouble of formalities.  "it'll be play to me after i've done my day's
work, or any odd bits o' time when the work's slack.  and i'll bring
you some soil from mr. cass's garden--he'll let me, and willing."

"eh, aaron, my lad, are you there?"  said silas; "i wasn't aware of
you; for when eppie's talking o' things, i see nothing but what she's
a-saying.  well, if you could help me with the digging, we might get
her a bit o' garden all the sooner."

"then, if you think well and good," said aaron, "i'll come to the
stone-pits this afternoon, and we'll settle what land's to be taken in,
and i'll get up an hour earlier i' the morning, and begin on it."

"but not if you don't promise me not to work at the hard digging,
father," said eppie.  "for i shouldn't ha' said anything about it," she
 
 ___________________________
 

added, half-bashfully, half-roguishly, "only mrs. winthrop said as
aaron 'ud be so good, and--"

"and you might ha' known it without mother telling you," said aaron.
"and master marner knows too, i hope, as i'm able and willing to do a
turn o' work for him, and he won't do me the unkindness to anyways take
it out o' my hands."

"there, now, father, you won't work in it till it's all easy," said
eppie, "and you and me can mark out the beds, and make holes and plant
the roots.  it'll be a deal livelier at the stone-pits when we've got
some flowers, for i always think the flowers can see us and know what
we're talking about.  and i'll have a bit o' rosemary, and bergamot,
and thyme, because they're so sweet-smelling; but there's no lavender
only in the gentlefolks' gardens, i think."

"that's no reason why you shouldn't have some," said aaron, "for i can
bring you slips of anything; i'm forced
 
 ___________________________
 
 said aaron; "there's never a garden in
all the parish but what there's endless waste in it for want o'
somebody as could use everything up.  it's what i think to myself
sometimes, as there need nobody run short o' victuals if the land was
made the most on, and there was never a morsel but what could find its
way to a mouth.  it sets one thinking o' that--gardening does.  but i
must go back now, else mother 'ull be in trouble as i aren't there."

"bring her with you this afternoon, aaron," said eppie; "i shouldn't
like to fix about the garden, and her not know everything from the
first--should _you_, father?"

"aye, bring her if you can, aaron," said silas; "she's sure to have a
word to say as'll help us to set things on their right end."

aaron turned back up the village, while silas and eppie went on up the
lonely sheltered lane.

"o daddy!"  she began, when they were in privacy, clasping and
squeezing silas's arm, and skipping round to give him an energetic
kiss.  "my little old daddy!  
 
 ___________________________
 
i'm so glad.  i don't think i shall want
anything else when we've got a little garden; and i knew aaron would
dig it for us," she went on with roguish triumph--"i knew that very
well."

"you're a deep little puss, you are," said silas, with the mild passive
happiness of love-crowned age in his face; "but you'll make yourself
fine and beholden to aaron."

"oh, no, i shan't," said eppie, laughing and frisking; "he likes it."

"come, come, let me carry your prayer-book, else you'll be dropping it,
jumping i' that way."

eppie was now aware that her behaviour was under observation, but it
was only the observation of a friendly donkey, browsing with a log
fastened to his foot--a meek donkey, not scornfully critical of human
trivialities, but thankful to share in them, if possible, by getting
his nose scratched; and eppie did not fail to gratify him with her
usual notice, though i
 
 ___________________________
 
t was attended with the inconvenience of his
following them, painfully, up to the very door of their home.

but the sound of a sharp bark inside, as eppie put the key in the door,
modified the donkey's views, and he limped away again without bidding.
the sharp bark was the sign of an excited welcome that was awaiting
them from a knowing brown terrier, who, after dancing at their legs in
a hysterical manner, rushed with a worrying noise at a tortoise-shell
kitten under the loom, and then rushed back with a sharp bark again, as
much as to say, "i have done my duty by this feeble creature, you
perceive"; while the lady-mother of the kitten sat sunni
 
 ___________________________
 
cerning him had taken an entirely new colour; and mr. macey, now a
very feeble old man of fourscore and six, never seen except in his
chimney-corner or sitting in the sunshine at his door-sill, was of
opinion that when a man had done what silas had done by an orphan
child, it was a sign that his money would come to light again, or
leastwise that the robber would be made to answer for it--for, as mr.
macey observed of himself, his faculties were as strong as ever.

silas sat down now and watched eppie with a satisfied gaze as she
spread the clean cloth, and set on it the potato-pie, warmed up slowly
in a safe sunday fashion, by being put into a dry pot over a
slowly-dying fire, as the best substitute for an oven.  for silas would
not consent to have a grate and oven added to his conveniences: he
loved the old brick hearth as he had loved his brown pot--and was it
not there when he had found eppie?  the gods of the hearth exist for us
still; and let all new faith be tolerant of that fetishism
 
 ___________________________
 
, lest it
bruise its own roots.

silas ate his dinner more silently than usual, soon laying down his
knife and fork, and watching half-abstractedly eppie's play with snap
and the cat, by which her own dining was made rather a lengthy
business.  yet it was a sight that might well arrest wandering
thoughts: eppie, with the rippling radiance of her hair and the
whiteness of her rounded chin and throat set off by the dark-blue
cotton gown, laughing merrily as the kitten held on with her four claws
to one shoulder, like a design for a jug-handle, while snap on the
right hand and puss on the other put up their paws towards a morsel
which she held out of the reach of both--snap occasionally desisting in
order to remonstrate with the cat by a cogent worrying growl on the
greediness and futility of her conduct
 
 ___________________________
 
; till eppie relented, caressed
them both, and divided the morsel between them.

but at last eppie, glancing at the clock, checked the play, and said,
"o daddy, you're wanting to go into the sunshine to smoke your pipe.
but i must clear away first, so as the house may be tidy when godmother
comes.  i'll make haste--i won't be long."

silas had taken to smoking a pipe daily during the last two years,
having been strongly urged to it by the sages of raveloe, as a practice
"good for the fits"; and this advice was sanctioned by dr. kimble, on
the ground that it was as well to try what could do n
 
 ___________________________
 
o harm--a
principle which was made to answer for a great deal of work in that
gentleman's medical practice.  silas did not highly enjoy smoking, and
often wondered how his neighbours could be so fond of it; but a humble
sort of acquiescence in what was held to be good, had become a strong
habit of that new self which had been developed in him since he had
found eppie on his hearth: it had been the only clew his bewildered
mind could hold by in cherishing this young life that had been sent to
him out of the darkness into which his gold had departed.  by seeking
what was needful for eppie, by sharing the effect that everything
produced on her, he had himself come to appropriate the forms of custom
and belief which were the mould of raveloe life; and as, with
reawakening sensibilities, memory also reawakened, he had begun to
ponder over the elements of his old
 
 ___________________________
 
till it acquired some familiarity for her, that silas at last
arrived at the climax of the sad story--the drawing of lots, and its
false testimony concerning him; and this had to be repeated in several
interviews, under new questions on her part as to the nature of this
plan for detecting the guilty and clearing the innocent.

"and yourn's the same bible, you're sure o' that, master marner--the
bible as you brought wi' you from that country--it's the same as what
they've got at church, and what eppie's a-learning to read in?"

"yes," said silas, "every bit the same; and there's drawing o' lots in
the bible, mind you," he added in a lower tone.

"oh, dear, dear," said dolly in a grieved voice, as if she were hearing
an unfavourable report of a sick man's case.  she was silent for some
minutes; at last she said--

"there's wise folks, happen, as know how it all is; the parson knows,
i'll be bound; but it takes big words to tell them things, and such as
poor folks can't make much out on.  i ca
 
 ___________________________
 
as a rights in what happened to you, if one could but
make it out; and you'd no call to lose heart as you did.  but we'll
talk on it again; for sometimes things come into my head when i'm
leeching or poulticing, or such, as i could never think on when i was
sitting still."

dolly was too useful a woman not to have many opportunities of
illumination of the kind she alluded to, and she was not long before
she recurred to the subject.

"master marner," she said, one day that she came to bring home eppie's
washing, "i've been sore puzzled for a good bit wi' that trouble o'
yourn and the drawing o' lots; and it got twisted back'ards and
for'ards, as i didn't know which end to lay hold on. but it come to me
all clear like, that night when i was sitting up wi' poor bessy fawkes,
as is dead and left her children behind, god help 'em--it come to me as
clear as daylight; but whether i've got hold on it now, or can anyways
bring it to my tongue's end, that i don't know.  for i've often a deal
inside m
 
 ___________________________
 
" said dolly, almost with compunction; "them things
are easier said nor done; and i'm partly ashamed o' talking."

"nay, nay," said silas, "you're i' the right, mrs. winthrop--you're i'
the right.  there's good i' this world--i've a feeling o' that now; and
it makes a man feel as there's a good more nor he can see, i' spite o'
the trouble and the wickedness.  that drawing o' the lots is dark; but
the child was sent to me: there's dealings with us--there's dealings."

this dialogue took place in eppie's earlier years, when silas had to
part with her for two hours every day, that she might learn to read at
the dame school, after he had vainly tried himself to guide her in that
first step to learning.  now that she was grown up, silas had often
been led, in those moments of quiet outpouring which come to people who
live together in perfect love, to talk with _her_ too of the past, and
how and why he had lived a lonely man until she had been sent to him.
for it would have been impossible for hi
 
 ___________________________
 
m to hide from eppie that she
was not his own child: even if the most delicate reticence on the point
could have been expected from raveloe gossips in her presence, her own
questions about her mother could not have been parried, as she grew up,
without that complete shrouding of the past which would have made a
painful barrier between their minds. so eppie had long known how her
mother had died on the snowy ground, and how she herself had been found
on the hearth by father silas, who had taken her golden curls for his
lost guineas brought back to him.  the tender and peculiar love with
which silas had reared her in almost inseparable companionship with
himself, aided by the seclusion of their dwelling, had preserved her
from the lowering influences of the village talk and habits, and had
kept her mind in that freshness which is sometimes falsely 
 
 ___________________________
 
supposed to
be an invariable attribute of rusticity.  perfect love has a breath of
poetry which can exalt the relations of the least-instructed human
beings; and this breath of poetry had surrounded eppie from the time
when she had followed the bright gleam that beckoned her to silas's
hearth; so that it is not surprising if, in other things besides her
delicate prettiness, she was not quite a common village maiden, but had
a touch of refinement and fervour which came from no other teaching
than that of tenderly-nurtured unvitiated feeling.  she was too
childish and simple for her imagination to rove into questions about
her unknown father; for a long while it did not even occur to her that
she 
 
 ___________________________
 
must have had a father; and the first time that the idea of her
mother having had a husband presented itself to her, was when silas
showed her the wedding-ring which had been taken from the wasted
finger, and had been carefully preserved by him in a little lackered
box shaped like a shoe.  he delivered this box into eppie's charge when
she had grown up, and she often opened it to look at the ring: but
still she thought hardly at all about the father of whom it was the
symbol.  had she not a father very close to her, who loved her better
than any real fathers in the village seemed to love their daughters?
on the contrary, who her mother was, and how she came to die in that
forlornness, were questions that often pressed on eppie's mind.  her
knowledge of mrs. winthrop, who was her nearest friend next to silas,
mad
 
 ___________________________
 
e her feel that a mother must be very precious; and she had again
and again asked silas to tell her how her mother looked, whom she was
like, and how he had found her against the furze bush, led towards it
by the little footsteps and the outstretched arms.  the furze bush was
there still; and this afternoon, when eppie came out with silas into
the sunshine, it was the first object that arrested her eyes and
thoughts.

"father," she said, in a tone of gentle gravity, which sometimes came
like a sadder, slower cadence across her playfulness, "we shall take
the furze bush into the garden; it'll come into the corner, and just
against it i'll put snowdrops and crocuses, 'cause aaron says they
won't die out, but'll always get more and more."

"ah, child," said silas, always ready to talk when he had his pipe in
his
 
 ___________________________
 
 hand, apparently enjoying the pauses more than the puffs, "it
wouldn't do to leave out the furze bush; and there's nothing prettier,
to my thinking, when it's yallow with flowers.  but it's just come into
my head what we're to do for a fence--mayhap aaron can help us to a
thought; but a fence we must have, else the donkeys and things 'ull
come and trample everything down.  and fencing's hard to be got at, by
what i can make out."

"oh, i'll tell you, daddy," said eppie, clasping her hands suddenly,
after a minute's thought.  "there's lots o' loose stones about, some of
'em not big, and we might lay 'em atop of one another, and make a wall.
you and me could carry the smallest, and aaron 'ud carry the rest--i
know he would."

"eh, my precious un," said silas, "there isn't enough stones to go all
round; and as for you carrying, why, wi' your little arms you couldn't
carry a stone no bigger than a turnip.  you're dillicate made, my
dear," he added, with a tender 
 
 ___________________________
 
intonation--"that's what mrs. winthrop
says."

"oh, i'm stronger than you think, daddy," said eppie; "and if there
wasn't stones enough to go all round, why they'll go part o' the way,
and then it'll be easier to get sticks and things for the rest.  see
here, round the big pit, what a many stones!"

she skipped forward to the pit, meaning to lift one of the stones and
exhibit her strength, but she started back in surprise.

"oh, father, just come and look here," she exclaimed--"come and see how
the water's gone down since yesterday.  why, yesterday the pit was ever
so full!"

"well, to be sur
 
 ___________________________
 
e," said silas, coming to her side.  "why, that's the
draining they've begun on, since harvest, i' mr. osgood's fields, i
reckon.  the foreman said to me the other day, when i passed by 'em,
"master marner," he said, "i shouldn't wonder if we lay your bit o'
waste as dry as a bone."  it was mr. godfrey cass, he said, had gone
into the draining: he'd been taking these fields o' mr. osgood."

"how odd it'll seem to have the old pit dried up!"  said eppie, turning
away, and stooping to lift rather a large stone.  "see, daddy, i can
carry this quite well," she said, going along with much energy for a
few steps, but presently letting it fall.

"ah, you're fine and strong, aren't you?"  said silas, while eppie
shook her aching arms and laughed.  "come, come, let us go and sit down
on the bank against the stile there, and have no more lifting. you
might hurt yourself, child.  you'd need have somebody to work for
you--and my arm isn't over strong."


 
 ___________________________
 
silas uttered the last sentence slowly, as if it implied more than met
the ear; and eppie, when they sat down on the bank, nestled close to
his side, and, taking hold caressingly of the arm that was not over
strong, held it on her lap, while silas puffed again dutifully at the
pipe, which occupied his other arm.  an ash in the hedgerow behind made
a fretted screen from the sun, and threw happy playful shadows all
about them.

"father," said eppie, very gently, after they had been sitting in
silence a little while, "if i was to be married, ought i to be married
with my mother's ring?"

silas gave an almost imperceptible start, though the question fell in
with the under-current of thought in his own mind, and then said, in a
subdued tone, "why, eppie, have you been a-thinking on it?"

"only this last week, father," said eppie, ingenuously, "since aaron
talked to me about it."

"and what did he say?"  said silas, still in the same subdued 
 
 ___________________________
 
way, as
if he were anxious lest he should fall into the slightest tone that was
not for eppie's good.

"he said he should like to be married, because he was a-going in
four-and-twenty, and had got a deal of gardening work, now mr. mott's
given up; and he goes twice a-week regular to mr. cass's, and once to
mr. osgood's, and they're going to take him on at the rectory."

"and who is it as he's wanting to marry?"  said silas, with rather a
sad smile.

"why, me, to be sure, daddy," said eppie, with dimpling laughter,
kissing her father's cheek; "as if he'd want to marry anybody else!"

"and you mean to have him, do you?"  said silas.

"yes, some time," said eppie, "i don't know when.  everybody's married
some time, aaron says.  but i told him that wasn't true: for, i said,
look at father--he's never been married."

"no, child," said silas, "your father was a lone man till you was sent
to him."

"but you'll never be lone again, father," said eppie, tenderly. "that
was what aaron said
 
 ___________________________
 
--"i could never think o' taking you away from
master marner, eppie."  and i said, "it 'ud be no use if you did,
aaron."  and he wants us all to live together, so as you needn't work a
bit, father, only what's for your own pleasure; and he'd be as good as
a son to you--that was what he said."

"and should you like that, eppie?"  said silas, looking at her.

"i shouldn't mind it, father," said eppie, quite simply.  "and i should
like things to be so as you needn't work much.  but if it wasn't for
that, i'd sooner things didn't change.  i'm very happy: i like aaron to
be fond of me, and come and see us often, and behave pretty to you--he
always _does_ behave pretty to you, doesn't he, father?"

"yes, child, nobody could behave better," said silas, emphatically.
"he's his mother's lad."

"but i don't want any change," said eppie.  "i should like to go on a
long, long while, just as we are.  
 
 ___________________________
 
only aaron does want a change; and
he made me cry a bit--only a bit--because he said i didn't care for
him, for if i cared for him i should want us to be married, as he did."

"eh, my blessed child," said silas, laying down his pipe as if it were
useless to pretend to smoke any longer, "you're o'er young to be
married.  we'll ask mrs. winthrop--we'll ask aaron's mother what _she_
thinks: if there's a right thing to do, she'll come at it.  but there's
this to be thought on, eppie: things _will_ change, whether we like it
or no; things won't go on for a long while just as they are and no
difference.  i shall get older and helplesser, and be a burden on you,
belike, if i don't go away from you altogether.  not as i mean you'd
think me a burden--i know you wouldn't--but it 'ud be hard upon you;
and when i look for'ard to that, i like to think as you'd have somebody
else besides me--somebody young and strong, as'll outlast your own
life, and take care on you to the end."  s
 
 ___________________________
 
ilas paused, and, resting his
wrists on his knees, lifted his hands up and down meditatively as he
looked on the ground.

"then, would you like me to be married, father?"  said eppie, with a
little trembling in her voice.

"i'll not be the man to say no, eppie," said silas, emphatically; "but
we'll ask your godmother.  she'll wish the right thing by you and her
son too."

"there they come, then," said eppie.  "let us go and meet 'em. oh, the
pipe!  won't you have it lit again, father?"  said eppie, lifting that
medicinal appliance from the ground.

"nay, child," said silas, "i've done enough for to-day.  i think,
mayhap, a little of it does me more good than so much at once."



chapter xvii

while silas and eppie were seated on the bank discoursing in the
fleckered shade of the ash tree, miss priscilla lammeter was resisting
her sister's arguments, that it would be better to take tea at the red
house, and let her father have a long nap, than drive home to the
warrens so soon after dinne
 
 ___________________________
 
 her religious theory pieced
together out of narrow social traditions, fragments of church doctrine
imperfectly understood, and girlish reasonings on her small
experience--should have arrived by herself at a way of thinking so
nearly akin to that of many devout people, whose beliefs are held in
the shape of a system quite remote from her knowledge--singular, if we
did not know that human beliefs, like all other natural growths, elude
the barriers of system.

godfrey had from the first specified eppie, then about twelve years
old, as a child suitable for them to adopt.  it had never occurred to
him that silas would rather part with his life than with eppie. surely
the weaver would wish the best to the child he had taken so much
trouble with, and would be glad that such good fortune should happen to
her: she would always be very grateful to him, and he would be well
provided for to the end of his life--provided for as the excellent part
he had done by the child deserved.  was it not an approp
 
 ___________________________
 
riate thing for
people in a higher station to take a charge off the hands of a man in a
lower?  it seemed an eminently appropriate thing to godfrey, for
reasons that were known only to himself; and by a common fallacy, he
imagined the measure would be easy because he had private motives for
desiring it.  this was rather a coarse mode of estimating silas's
relation to eppie; but we must remember that many of the impressions
which godfrey was likely to gather concerning the labouring people
around him would favour the idea that deep affections can hardly go
along with callous palms and scant means; and he had not had the
opportunity, even if he had had the power, of entering intimately into
all that was exceptional in the weaver's experience.  it was only the
want of adequate knowledge that could have made it possible for godfrey
deliberately to entertain an unfeel
 
 ___________________________
 
ible to have lived with her fifteen years and not be aware that
an unselfish clinging to the right, and a sincerity clear as the
flower-born dew, were her main characteristics; indeed, godfrey felt
this so strongly, that his own more wavering nature, too averse to
facing difficulty to be unvaryingly simple and truthful, was kept in a
certain awe of this gentle wife who watched his looks with a yearning
to obey them.  it seemed to him impossible that he should ever confess
to her the truth about eppie: she would never recover from the
repulsion the story of his earlier marriage would create, told to her
now, after that long concealment.  and the child, too, he thought, must
become an object of repulsion: the very sight of her would be painful.
the shock to nancy's mingled pride and ignorance of the world's evil
might even be too much for her delicate frame.  since he had married
her with that secret on his heart, he must keep it there to the last.
whatever else he did, he could not make an i
 
 ___________________________
 
th, thinks with envy of the father whose return is greeted by young
voices--seated at the meal where the little heads rise one above
another like nursery plants, it sees a black care hovering behind every
one of them, and thinks the impulses by which men abandon freedom, and
seek for ties, are surely nothing but a brief madness.  in godfrey's
case there were further reasons why his thoughts should be continually
solicited by this one point in his lot: his conscience, never
thoroughly easy about eppie, now gave his childless home the aspect of
a retribution; and as the time passed on, under nancy's refusal to
adopt her, any retrieval of his error became more and more difficult.

on this sunday afternoon it was already four years since there had been
any allusion to the subject between them, and nancy supposed that it
was for ever buried.

"i wonder if he'll mind it less or more as he gets older," she thought;
"i'm afraid more.  aged people feel the miss of children: what would
father do with
 
 ___________________________
 
n't have you know it
by somebody else, and not by me--i wouldn't have you find it out after
i'm dead.  i'll tell you now.  it's been "i will" and "i won't" with me
all my life--i'll make sure of myself now."

nancy's utmost dread had returned.  the eyes of the husband and wife
met with awe in them, as at a crisis which suspended affection.

"nancy," said godfrey, slowly, "when i married you, i hid something
from you--something i ought to have told you.  that woman marner found
dead in the snow--eppie's mother--that wretched woman--was my wife:
eppie is my child."

he paused, dreading the effect of his confession.  but nancy sat quite
still, only that her eyes dropped and ceased to meet his.  she was pale
and quiet as a meditative statue, clasping her hands on her lap.

"you'll never think the same of me again," said godfrey, after a little
while, with some tremor in his voice.

she was silent.

"i oughtn't to have left the child unowned: i oughtn't to have kept it
from you.  but i couldn't 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing is in this world.  nothing is so good as it seems
beforehand--not even our marrying wasn't, you see."  there was a faint
sad smile on nancy's face as she said the last words.

"i'm a worse man than you thought i was, nancy," said godfrey, rather
tremulously.  "can you forgive me ever?"

"the wrong to me is but little, godfrey: you've made it up to
me--you've been good to me for fifteen years.  it's another you did the
wrong to; and i doubt it can never be all made up for."

"but we can take eppie now," said godfrey.  "i won't mind the world
knowing at last.  i'll be plain and open for the rest o' my life."

"it'll be different coming to us, now she's grown up," said nancy,
shaking her head sadly.  "but it's your duty to acknowledge her and
provide for her; and i'll do my part by her, and pray to god almighty
to make her love me."

"then we'll go together to silas marner's this very night, as soon as
everything's quiet at the stone-pits."



chapter xix

between eight and nine o'clock th
 
 ___________________________
 
at evening, eppie and silas were
seated alone in the cottage.  after the great excitement the weaver had
undergone from the events of the afternoon, he had felt a longing for
this quietude, and had even begged mrs. winthrop and aaron, who had
naturally lingered behind every one else, to leave him alone with his
child.  the excitement had not passed away: it had only reached that
stage when the keenness of the susceptibility makes external stimulus
intolerable--when there is no sense of weariness, but rather an
i
 
 ___________________________
 
s an impossibility.  any
one who has watched such moments in other men remembers the brightness
of the eyes and the strange definiteness that comes over coarse
features from that transient influence.  it is as if a new fineness of
ear for all spiritual voices had sent wonder-working vibrations through
the heavy mortal frame--as if "beauty born of murmuring sound" had
passed into the face of the listener.

silas's face showed that sort of transfiguration, as he sat in his
arm-chair and looked at eppie.  she had drawn her own chair towards his
knees, and leaned forward, holding both his hands, while she looked up
at him.  on the table near them, lit by a candle, lay the recovered
gold--the old long-loved gold, ranged in orderly heaps, as silas used
to range it in the days when it was his only joy.  he had been telling
her how he used to count it every night, and how his soul was utterly
desolate till she was sent to him.

"at first, i'd a sort o' feeling come across me now and then," he was
s
 
 ___________________________
 
aying in a subdued tone, "as if you might be changed into the gold
again; for sometimes, turn my head which way i would, i seemed to see
the gold; and i thought i should be glad if i could feel it, and find
it was come back.  but that didn't last long.  after a bit, i should
have thought it was a curse come again, if it had drove you from me,
for i'd got to feel the need o' your looks and your voice and the touch
o' your little fingers.  you didn't know then, eppie, when you were
such a little un--you didn't know what your old father silas felt for
you."

"but i know now, father," said eppie.  "if it hadn't been for you,
they'd have taken me to the workhouse, and there'd have been nobody to
love me."

"eh, my precious child, the blessing was mine.  if you hadn't been sent
to save me, i should ha' gone to the grave in my misery.  the money was
taken away from me in time; and you see it's been kept--kept till it
was wanted for you.  it's wonderful--our life
 
 ___________________________
 
 is wonderful."

silas sat in silence a few minutes, looking at the money.  "it takes no
hold of me now," he said, ponderingly--"the money doesn't.  i wonder if
it ever could again--i doubt it might, if i lost you, eppie.  i might
come to think i was forsaken again, and lose the feeling that god was
good to me."

at that moment there was a knocking at the door; and eppie was obliged
to rise without answering silas.  beautiful she looked, with the
tenderness of gathering tears in her eyes and a slight flush on her
cheeks, as she stepped to open the door.  the flush deepened when she
saw mr. and mrs. godfrey cass.  she made her little rustic curtsy, and
held the door wide for them to enter.

"we're disturbing you very late, my dear," said mrs. cass, taking
eppie's hand, and looking in her face with an expression of anxious
interest and admiration.  nancy herself 
 
 ___________________________
 
was pale and tremulous.

eppie, after placing chairs for mr. and mrs. cass, went to stand
against silas, opposite to them.

"well, marner," said godfrey, trying to speak with perfect firmness,
"it's a great comfort to me to see you with your money again, that
you've been deprived of so many years.  it was one of my family did you
the wrong--the more grief to me--and i feel bound to make up to you for
it in every way.  whatever i can do for you will be nothing but paying
a debt, even if i looked no further than the robbery.  
 
 ___________________________
 
but there are
other things i'm beholden--shall be beholden to you for, marner."

godfrey checked himself.  it had been agreed between him and his wife
that the subject of his fatherhood should be approached very carefully,
and that, if possible, the disclosure should be reserved for the
future, so that it might be made to eppie gradually.  nancy had urged
this, because she felt strongly the painful light in which eppie must
inevitably see the relation between her father and mother.

silas, always ill at ease when he was being spoken to by "betters",
such as mr. cass--tall, powerful, florid men, seen chiefly on
horseback--answered with some constraint--

"sir, i've a deal to thank you for a'ready.  as for the robbery, i
count it no loss to me.  and if i did, you couldn't help it: you aren't
answerable for it."

"you may look at it in that way, marner, but i never can; and i hope
you'll let me act according to 
 
 ___________________________
 
 near as i can say, sir," said silas.

"oh, why, you may live thirty years longer--look at old macey! and that
money on the table, after all, is but little.  it won't go far either
way--whether it's put out to interest, or you were to live on it as
long as it would last: it wouldn't go far if you'd nobody to keep but
yourself, and you've had two to keep for a good many years now."

"eh, sir," said silas, unaffected by anything godfrey was saying, "i'm
in no fear o' want.  we shall do very well--eppie and me 'ull do well
enough.  there's few working-folks have got so much laid by as that.  i
don't know what it is to gentlefolks, but i look upon it as a
deal--almost too much.  and as for us, it's little we want."

"only the garden, father," said eppie, blushing up to the ears the
moment after.

"you love a garden, do you, my dear?"  said nancy, thinking that this
turn in the point of view might help her husband.  "we should agree in
that: i give a deal of time to the garden."

"ah, there's pl
 
 ___________________________
 
enty of gardening at the red house," said godfrey,
surprised at the difficulty he found in approaching a proposition which
had seemed so easy to him in the distance.  "you've done a good part by
eppie, marner, for sixteen years.  it 'ud be a great comfort to you to
see her well provided for, wouldn't it?  she looks blooming and
healthy, but not fit for any hardships: she doesn't look like a
strapping girl come of working parents.  you'd like to see her taken
care of by those who can leave her well off, and make a lady of her;
she's more fit for it than for a rough life, such as she might come to
have in a few years' time."

a slight flush came over marner's face, and disappeared, like a pass
 
 ___________________________
 
ing
gleam.  eppie was simply wondering mr. cass should talk so about things
that seemed to have nothing to do with reality; but silas was hurt and
uneasy.

"i don't take your meaning, sir," he answered, not having words at
command to express the mingled feelings with which he had heard mr.
cass's words.

"well, my meaning is this, marner," said godfrey, determined to come to
the point.  "mrs. cass and i, you know, have no children--nobody to
benefit by our good home and everything else we have--more than enough

 
 ___________________________
 
for ourselves.  and we should like to have somebody in the place of a
daughter to us--we should like to have eppie, and treat her in every
way as our own child.  it 'ud be a great comfort to you in your old
age, i hope, to see her fortune made in that way, after you've been at
the trouble of bringing her up so well.  and it's right you should have
every reward for that.  and eppie, i'm sure, will always love you and
be grateful to you: she'd come and see you very often, and we should
all be on the look-out to do everything we could towards making you
comfortable."

a plain man like godfrey cass, speaking under some embarrassment,
necessarily blunders on words that are coarser than his intentions, and
that are likely to fall gratingly on susceptible feelings. while he had
been speaking, eppie had quietly passed her arm behind silas's head,
and let her hand rest against it
 
 ___________________________
 
 caressingly: she felt him trembling
violently.  he was silent for some moments when mr. cass had
ended--powerless under the conflict of emotions, all alike painful.
eppie's heart was swelling at the sense that her father was in
distress; and she was just going to lean down and speak to him, when
one struggling dread at last gained the mastery over every other in
silas, and he said, faintly--

"eppie, my child, speak.  i won't stand in your way.  thank mr. and
mrs. cass."

eppie took her hand from her father's head, and came forward a step.
her cheeks were flushed, but not with shyness this time: the sense that
her father was in doubt and suffering banished that sort of
self-consciousness.  she dropped a low curtsy, first to mrs. cass and
then to mr. cass, and said--

"thank you, ma'am--thank you, sir.  but i can't leave my father, nor
own anybody nearer than him.  and i don't want to be a lady--thank you
all the same" (here eppie dropped another curtsy).  "i couldn't 
 
 ___________________________
 
give up
the folks i've been used to."

eppie's lips began to tremble a little at the last words.  she
retreated to her father's chair again, and held him round the neck:
while silas, with a subdued sob, put up his hand to grasp hers.

the tears were in nancy's eyes, but her sympathy with eppie was,
naturally, divided with distress on her husband's account.  she dared
not speak, wondering what was going on in her husband's mind.

godfrey felt an irritation inevitable to almost all of us when we
encounter an unexpected obstacle.  he had been full of his own
penitence and resolution to retrieve his error as far as the time was
left to him; he was possessed with all-important feelings, that were to
lead to a predetermined course of action which he had fixed on as the
right, and he was no
 
 ___________________________
 
t prepared to enter with lively appreciation into
other people's feelings counteracting his virtuous resolves.  the
agitation with which he spoke again was not quite unmixed with anger.

"but i've a claim on you, eppie--the strongest of all claims. it's my
duty, marner, to own eppie as my child, and provide for her. she is my
own child--her mother was my wife.  i've a natural claim on her that
must stand before every other."

eppie had given a violent start, and turned quite pale.  silas, on the
contrary, who had been relieved, by eppie's answer, from the dread lest
his mind should be in opposition to hers, felt the spirit of resistance
in him set free, not without a touch of parental fierceness.  "then,
sir," he answered, with an accent of bitterness that had been silent in
him since the memorable day when his youthful hope had perished--"then,
sir, why didn't you say so sixteen year ago, and claim her before i'd
come to
 
 ___________________________
 
el just the same for me as she does now, when we eat o' the same bit,
and drink o' the same cup, and think o' the same things from one day's
end to another?  just the same?  that's idle talk. you'd cut us i' two."

godfrey, unqualified by experience to discern the pregnancy of marner's
simple words, felt rather angry again.  it seemed to him that the
weaver was very selfish (a judgment readily passed by those who have
never tested their own power of sacrifice) to oppose what was
undoubtedly for eppie's welfare; and he felt himself called upon, for
her sake, to assert his authority.

"i should have thought, marner," he said, severely--"i should have
thought your affection for eppie would make you rejoice in what was for
her good, even if it did call upon you to give up something. you ought
to remember your own life's uncertain, and she's at an age now when her
lot may soon be fixed in a way very different from what it would be in
her father's home: she may marry some low working-man, and the
 
 ___________________________
 
n,
whatever i might do for her, i couldn't make her well-off.  you're
putting yourself in the way of her welfare; and though i'm sorry to
hurt you after what you've done, and what i've left undone, i feel now
it's my duty to insist on taking care of my own daughter.  i want to do
my duty."

it would be difficult to say whether it were silas or eppie that was
more deeply stirred by this last speech of godfrey's.  thought had been
very busy in eppie as she listened to the contest between her old
long-loved father and this new unfamiliar father who had suddenly come
to fill the place of that black featureless shadow which had held the
ring and placed it on her mother's finger.  her imagination had darted
backward in conjectures, and forward in previsions, of what this
revealed fatherhood implied; and there were words in godfrey's last
speech which helped to make the previsions especially definite.  not
that these thoughts, either of past or
 
 ___________________________
 
 future, determined her
resolution--_that_ was determined by the feelings which vibrated to
every word silas had uttered; but they raised, even apart from these
feelings, a repulsion towards the offered lot and the newly-revealed
father.

silas, on the other hand, was again stricken in conscience, and alarmed
lest godfrey's accusation should be true--lest he should be raising his
own will as an obstacle to eppie's good.  for many moments he was mute,
struggling for the self-conquest necessary to the uttering of the
difficult words.  they came out tremulously.

"i'll say no more.  let it be as you will.  speak to the child. i'll
hinder nothing."

even nancy, with all the acute sensibility of her own affections,
shared her husband's view, that marner was not justifiable in his wish
to retain eppie, after her real father had avowed himself.  she felt
that it was a very hard trial for the poor weaver, but 
 
 ___________________________
 
her code allowed
no question that a father by blood must have a claim above that of any
foster-father.  besides, nancy, used all her life to plenteous
circumstances and the privileges of "respectability", could not enter
into the pleasures which early nurture and habit connect with all the
little aims and efforts of the poor who are born poor: to her mind,
eppie, in being restored to her birthright, was entering on a too long
withheld but unquestionable good.  hence she heard silas's last words
with relief, and thought, as godfrey did, that their wish was achieved.

"eppie, my dear," said godfrey, looking at his daughter, not without
some embarrassment, under the sense that she was old enough to judge
him, "it'll always be our wish that you should show your love and
gratitude to one who's been a father to you so many years, and we shall
want to help yo
 
 ___________________________
 
 every way. but we hope
you'll come to love us as well; and though i haven't been what a father
should ha' been to you all these years, i wish to do the utmost in my
power for you for the rest of my life, and provide for you as my only
child.  and you'll have the best of mothers in my wife--that'll be a
blessing you haven't known since you were old enough to know it."

"my dear, you'll be a treasure to me," said nancy, in her gentle voice.
"we shall want for nothing when we have our daughter."

eppie did not come forward and curtsy, as she had done before.  she
held silas's hand in hers, and grasped it firmly--it was a weaver's
hand, with a palm and finger-tips that were sensitive to such
pressure--while she spoke with colder decision than before.

"thank you, ma'am--thank you, sir, for your offers--they're very great,
and far above my wish.  for i should have no delight i' life any more
if i was forced to go away from my father, and knew he was sitting at
home, a-thinking of me and feeling
 
 ___________________________
 
 lone.  we've been used to be happy
together every day, and i can't think o' no happiness without him.  and
he says he'd nobody i' the world till i was sent to him, and he'd have
nothing when i was gone.  and he's took care of me and loved me from
the first, and i'll cleave to him as long as he lives, and nobody shall
ever come between him and me."

"but you must make sure, eppie," said silas, in a low voice--"you must
make sure as you won't ever be sorry, because you've made your choice
to stay among poor folks, and with poor clothes and things, when you
might ha' had everything o' the best."

his sensitiveness on this point had increased as he listened to eppie's
words of faithful affection.

"i can never be sorry, father," said eppie.  "i shouldn't know what to
think on or to wish for with fine things about me, as i haven't been
used to.  and it 'ud be poor work for 
 
 ___________________________
 
omething absently.  she thought there was a
word which might perhaps come better from her lips than from his.

"what you say is natural, my dear child--it's natural you should cling
to those who've brought you up," she said, mildly; "but there's a duty
you owe to your lawful father.  there's perhaps something to be given
up on more sides than one.  when your father opens his home to you, i
think it's right you shouldn't turn your back on it."

"i can't feel as i've got any father but one," said eppie, impetuously,
while the tears gathered.  "i've always thought of a little home where
he'd sit i' the corner, and i should fend and do everything for him: i
can't think o' no other home.  i wasn't brought up to be a lady, and i
can't turn my mind to it.  i like the working-folks, and their
victuals, and their ways.  and," she ended passionately, while the
tears fell, "i'm promised to marry a working-man, as'll live with
father, and help me to take care of him."

godfrey looked up at nancy with a
 
 ___________________________
 
 we can't pay
like money debts, by paying extra for the years that have slipped by.
while i've been putting off and putting off, the trees have been
growing--it's too late now.  marner was in the right in what he said
about a man's turning away a blessing from his door: it falls to
somebody else.  i wanted to pass for childless once, nancy--i shall
pass for childless now against my wish."

nancy did not speak immediately, but after a little while she
asked--"you won't make it known, then, about eppie's being your
daughter?"

"no: where would be the good to anybody?--only harm.  i must do what i
can for her in the state of life she chooses.  i must see who it is
she's thinking of marrying."

"if it won't do any good to make the thing known," said nancy, who
thought she might now allow herself the relief of entertaining a
feeling which she had tried to silence before, "i should be very
thankful for father and priscilla never to be troubled with knowing
what was done in the past, more than abo
 
 ___________________________
 
evious self-reproach.

"and i got _you_, nancy, in spite of all; and yet i've been grumbling
and uneasy because i hadn't something else--as if i deserved it."

"you've never been wanting to me, godfrey," said nancy, with quiet
sincerity.  "my only trouble would be gone if you resigned yourself to
the lot that's been given us."

"well, perhaps it isn't too late to mend a bit there.  though it _is_
too late to mend some things, say what they will."



chapter xxi

the next morning, when silas and eppie were seated at their breakfast,
he said to her--

"eppie, there's a thing i've had on my mind to do this two year, and
now the money's been brought back to us, we can do it.  i've been
turning it over and over in the night, and i think we'll set out
to-morrow, while the fine days last.  we'll leave the house and
everything for your godmother to take care on, and we'll make a little
bundle o' things and set out."

"where to go, daddy?"  said eppie, in much surprise.

"to my old country--to the t
 
 ___________________________
 
own where i was born--up lantern yard.  i
want to see mr. paston, the minister: something may ha' come out to
make 'em know i was innicent o' the robbery.  and mr. paston was a man
with a deal o' light--i want to speak to him about the drawing o' the
lots.  and i should like to talk to him about the religion o' this
country-side, for i partly think he doesn't know on it."

eppie was very joyful, for there was the prospect not only of wonder
and delight at seeing a strange country, but also of coming back to
tell aaron all about it.  aaron was so much wiser than she was about
most things--it would be rather pleasant to have this little advantage
over him.  mrs. winthrop, though possessed with a dim fear of dangers
attendant on so long a journey, and requiring many assurances that it
would not take them out of the region of carriers' carts and slow
waggons, was neverthel
 
 ___________________________
 
ess well pleased that silas should revisit his
own country, and find out if he had been cleared from that false
accusation.

"you'd be easier in your mind for the rest o' your life, master
marner," said dolly--"that you would.  and if there's any light to be
got up the yard as you talk on, we've need of it i' this world, and i'd
be glad on it myself, if you could bring it back."

so on the fourth day from that time, silas and eppie, in their sunday
clothes, with a small bundle tied in a blue linen handkerchief, were
making their way through the streets of a great manufacturing town.
silas, bewildered by the changes thirty years had brought over his
native place, had stopped several persons in succession to ask them the
name of this town, that he might be sure he was not under a mistake
about it.

"ask for lantern yard, father--ask this gentleman with the tassels on
his shoulders a-standing at the shop door; he isn't in a 
 
 ___________________________
 
hurry like the
rest," said eppie, in some distress at her father's bewilderment, and
ill at ease, besides, amidst the noise, the movement, and the multitude
of strange indifferent faces.

"eh, my child, he won't know anything about it," said silas;
"gentlefolks didn't ever go up the yard.  but happen somebody can tell
me which is the way to prison street, where the jail is. i know the way
out o' that as if i'd seen it yesterday."

with some difficulty, after many turnings and new inquiries, they
reached prison street; and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
grim walls of the jail, the first object
that answered to any image in silas's memory, cheered him with the
certitude, which no assurance of the town's name had hitherto given
him, that he was in his native place.

"ah," he said, drawing a long breath, "there's the jail, eppie; that's
just the same: i aren't afraid now.  it's the third turning on the left
hand from the jail doors--that's the way we must go."

"oh, what a dark ugly place!"  said eppie.  "how it hides the sky!
it's worse than the workhouse.  i'm glad you don't live in this town
now, father.  is lantern yard like this street?"

"my precious child," said silas, smiling, "it isn't a big street like
this.  i never was easy i' this street myself, but i was fond o'
lantern yard.  the shops here are all altered, i think--i can't make
'em out; but i shall know the turning, because it's the third."

"here it is," he said, in a tone of satisfaction, as they came to a
narrow alley.  "an
 
 ___________________________
 
d then we must go to the left again, and then
straight for'ard for a bit, up shoe lane: and then we shall be at the
entry next to the o'erhanging window, where there's the nick in the
road for the water to run.  eh, i can see it all."

"o father, i'm like as if i was stifled," said eppie.  "i couldn't ha'
thought as any folks lived i' this way, so close together.  how pretty
the stone-pits 'ull look when we get back!"

"it looks comical to _me_, child, now--and smells bad.  i can't think
as it usened to smell so."

here and there a sallow, begrimed face looked out from a gloomy doorway
at the strangers, and increased eppie's uneasiness, so that it was a
longed-for relief when they issued from the alleys into shoe lane,
where there was a broader strip of sky.

"dear heart!"  sai
 
 ___________________________
 
d silas, "why, there's people coming out o' the yard
as if they'd been to chapel at this time o' day--a weekday noon!"

suddenly he started and stood still with a look of distressed
amazement, that alarmed eppie.  they were before an opening in front of
a large factory, from which men and women were streaming for their
midday meal.

"father," said eppie, clasping his arm, "what's the matter?"

but she had to speak again and again before silas could answer her.

"it's gone, child," he said, at last, in strong agitation--"lantern
yard's gone.  it must ha' been here, because here's the house with the
o'erhanging window--i know that--it's just the same; but they've made
this new opening; and see that big factory! it's all gone--chapel and
all."

"come into that little brush-shop and sit down, father--they'll let you
sit down," said eppie, always o
 
 ___________________________
 
reat lilacs and
laburnums in the old-fashioned gardens showed their golden and purple
wealth above the lichen-tinted walls, and when there were calves still
young enough to want bucketfuls of fragrant milk. people were not so
busy then as they must become when the full cheese-making and the
mowing had set in; and besides, it was a time when a light bridal dress
could be worn with comfort and seen to advantage.

happily the sunshine fell more warmly than usual on the lilac tufts the
morning that eppie was married, for her dress was a very light one.
she had often thought, though with a feeling of renunciation, that the
perfection of a wedding-dress would be a white cotton, with the tiniest
pink sprig at wide intervals; so that when mrs. godfrey cass begged to
provide one, and asked eppie to choose what it should be, previous
meditation had enabled her to give a decided answer at once.

seen at a little distance as she walked across the churchyard and down
the village, she seemed to be attire
 
 ___________________________
 
d all differences among the company were merged in a
general agreement with mr. snell's sentiment, that when a man had
deserved his good luck, it was the part of his neighbours to wish him
joy.

as the bridal group approached, a hearty cheer was raised in the
rainbow yard; and ben winthrop, whose jokes had retained their
acceptable flavour, found it agreeable to turn in there and receive
congratulations; not requiring the proposed interval of quiet at the
stone-pits before joining the company.

eppie had a larger garden than she had ever expected there now; and in
other ways there had been alterations at the expense of mr. cass, the
landlord, to suit silas's larger family.  for he and eppie had declared
that they would rather stay at the stone-pits than go to any new home.
the garden was fenced with stones on two sides, but in front there was
an open fence, through which the flowers shone with answering gladness,
as the four united people came within sight of them.

"o father," said eppie, 