 when the company first assembled.  the pipes began to be
puffed in a silence which had an air of severity; the more important
customers, who drank spirits and sat nearest the fire, staring at each
other as if a bet were depending on the first man who winked; while the
beer-drinkers, chiefly men in fustian jackets and smock-frocks, kept
their eyelids down and rubbed their hands across their mouths, as if
their draughts of beer were a funereal duty attended with embarrassing
sadness.  at last mr. snell, the landlord, a man of a neutral
disposition, accustomed to stand aloof from human differences as those
of beings who were all alike in need of liquor, broke silence, by
saying in a doubtful tone to his cousin the butcher--

"some folks 'ud say that was a fine beast you druv in yesterday, bob?"

the butcher, a jolly, smiling, red-haired man, was not disposed to
answer rashly.  he gave a few puffs before he spat and replied, "and
they wouldn't be fur wrong, john."

after this feeble delusive th
 
 ___________________________
 
urned out all right,
on'y poor mrs. lammeter--that's miss osgood as was--died afore the
lasses was growed up; but for prosperity and everything respectable,
there's no family more looked on."

every one of mr. macey's audience had heard this story many times, but
it was listened to as if it had been a favourite tune, and at certain
points the puffing of the pipes was momentarily suspended, that the
listeners might give their whole minds to the expected words.  but
there was more to come; and mr. snell, the landlord, duly put the
leading question.

"why, old mr. lammeter had a pretty fortin, didn't they say, when he
come into these parts?"

"well, yes," said mr. macey; "but i daresay it's as much as this mr.
lammeter's done to keep it whole.  for there was allays a talk as
nobody could get rich on the warrens: though he holds it cheap, for
it's what they call charity land."

"aye, and there's few folks know so well as you how it come to be
charity land, eh, mr. macey?"  said the butcher.

"ho
 
 ___________________________
 
nciliatory tone, "what's lacking to
you?  what's your business here?"

"robbed!"  said silas, gaspingly.  "i've been robbed!  i want the
constable--and the justice--and squire cass--and mr. crackenthorp."

"lay hold on him, jem rodney," said the landlord, the idea of a ghost
subsiding; "he's off his head, i doubt.  he's wet through."

jem rodney was the outermost man, and sat conveniently near marner's
standing-place; but he declined to give his services.

"come and lay hold on him yourself, mr. snell, if you've a mind," said
jem, rather sullenly.  "he's been robbed, and murdered too, for what i
know," he added, in a muttering tone.

"jem rodney!"  said silas, turning and fixing his strange eyes on the
suspected man.

"aye, master marner, what do you want wi' me?"  said jem, trembling a
little, and seizing his drinking-can as a defensive weapon.

"if it was you stole my money," said silas, clasping his hands
entreatingly, and raising his voice to a cry, "give it me back--and i
won't meddle w
 
 ___________________________
 
row a stone beyond. what i said was against
the tinder-box: i said nothing against justices and constables, for
they're o' king george's making, and it 'ud be ill-becoming a man in a
parish office to fly out again' king george."

while these discussions were going on amongst the group outside the
rainbow, a higher consultation was being carried on within, under the
presidency of mr. crackenthorp, the rector, assisted by squire cass and
other substantial parishioners.  it had just occurred to mr. snell, the
landlord--he being, as he observed, a man accustomed to put two and two
together--to connect with the tinder-box, which, as deputy-constable,
he himself had had the honourable distinction of finding, certain
recollections of a pedlar who had called to drink at the house about a
month before, and had actually stated that he carried a tinder-box
about with him to light his pipe.  here, surely, was a clue to be
followed out.  and as memory, when duly impregnated with ascertained
facts, is som
 
 ___________________________
 
etimes surprisingly fertile, mr. snell gradually recovered
a vivid impression of the effect produced on him by the pedlar's
countenance and conversation.  he had a "look with his eye" which fell
unpleasantly on mr. snell's sensitive organism.  to be sure, he didn't
say anything particular--no, except that about the tinder-box--but it
isn't what a man says, it's the way he says it. moreover, he had a
swarthy foreignness of complexion which boded little honesty.

"did he wear ear-rings?"  mr. crackenthorp wished to know, having some
acquaintance with foreign customs.

"well--stay--let me see," said mr. snell, like a docile clairvoyante,
who would really not make a mistake if she could help it.  after
stretching t
 
 ___________________________
 
he corners of his mouth and contracting his eyes, as if he
were trying to see the ear-rings, he appeared to give up the effort,
and said, "well, he'd got ear-rings in his box to sell, so it's nat'ral
to suppose he might wear 'em.  but he called at every house, a'most, in
the village; there's somebody else, mayhap, saw 'em in his ears, though
i can't take upon me rightly to say."

mr. snell was correct in his surmise, that somebody else would remember
the pedlar's ear-rings.  for on the spread of inquiry among the
villagers it was stated with gathering emphasis, that the parson had
wanted to know whether the pedlar wore ear-rings in his ears, and an
impression was created that a great deal depended on the eliciting of
this fact.  of course, every one who heard the question, not having any
distinct image of the pedlar as _without_ ear-rings, immediately had an
image of him _with_ e
 
 ___________________________
 
if he hadn't been lingering there?  doubtless, he had
made his observations when he saw marner at the door.  anybody might
know--and only look at him--that the weaver was a half-crazy miser.  it
was a wonder the pedlar hadn't murdered him; men of that sort, with
rings in their ears, had been known for murderers often and often;
there had been one tried at the 'sizes, not so long ago but what there
were people living who remembered it.

godfrey cass, indeed, entering the rainbow during one of mr. snell's
frequently repeated recitals of his testimony, had treated it lightly,
stating that he himself had bought a pen-knife of the pedlar, and
thought him a merry grinning fellow enough; it was all nonsense, he
said, about the man's evil looks.  but this was spoken of in the
village as the random talk of youth, "as if it was only mr. snell who
had seen something odd about the pedlar!"  on the contrary, there were
at least half-a-dozen who were ready to go before justice malam, and
give in much more
 
 ___________________________
 
 striking testimony than any the landlord could
furnish.  it was to be hoped mr. godfrey would not go to tarley and
throw cold water on what mr. snell said there, and so prevent the
justice from drawing up a warrant.  he was suspected of intending this,
when, after mid-day, he was seen setting off on horseback in the
direction of tarley.

but by this time godfrey's interest in the robbery had faded before his
growing anxiety about dunstan and wildfire, and he was going, not to
tarley, but to batherley, unable to rest in uncertainty about them any
longer.  the possibility that dunstan had played him the ugly trick of
riding away with wildfire,
 
 ___________________________
 
ide
of dolly, who, though feeling that she was entirely in her place in
encountering cold and snow on an errand of mercy, was much concerned at
a young gentleman's getting his feet wet under a like impulse.

"you'd a deal better go back, sir," said dolly, with respectful
compassion.  "you've no call to catch cold; and i'd ask you if you'd be
so good as tell my husband to come, on your way back--he's at the
rainbow, i doubt--if you found him anyway sober enough to be o' use.
or else, there's mrs. snell 'ud happen send the boy up to fetch and
carry, for there may be things wanted from the doctor's."

"no, i'll stay, now i'm once out--i'll stay outside here," said
godfrey, when they came opposite marner's cottage.  "you can come and
tell me if i can do anything."

"well, sir, you're very good: you've a tender heart," said dolly, going
to the door.

godfrey was too painfully preoccupied to feel a twinge of self-reproach
at this undeserved praise.  he walked up and down, unconscious that he
was p
 
 ___________________________
 
ht emphasis, of which,
however, her mistress took no notice.

"i don't know whether you've seen 'em, 'm," continued jane, after a
pause, "but there's folks making haste all one way, afore the front
window.  i doubt something's happened.  there's niver a man to be seen
i' the yard, else i'd send and see.  i've been up into the top attic,
but there's no seeing anything for trees.  i hope nobody's hurt, that's
all."

"oh, no, i daresay there's nothing much the matter," said nancy. "it's
perhaps mr. snell's bull got out again, as he did before."

"i wish he mayn't gore anybody then, that's all," said jane, not
altogether despising a hypothesis which covered a few imaginary
calamities.

"that girl is always terrifying me," thought nancy; "i wish godfrey
would come in."

she went to the front window and looked as far as she could see along
the road, with an uneasiness which she felt to be childish, for there
were now no such signs of excitement as jane had spoken of, and godfrey
would not be likel
 
 ___________________________
 
eir pleasure; they had also ample leisure to talk of silas
marner's strange history, and arrive by due degrees at the conclusion
that he had brought a blessing on himself by acting like a father to a
lone motherless child.  even the farrier did not negative this
sentiment: on the contrary, he took it up as peculiarly his own, and
invited any hardy person present to contradict him.  but he met with no
contradiction; and all differences among the company were merged in a
general agreement with mr. snell's sentiment, that when a man had
deserved his good luck, it was the part of his neighbours to wish him
joy.

as the bridal group approached, a hearty cheer was raised in the
rainbow yard; and ben winthrop, whose jokes had retained their
acceptable flavour, found it agreeable to turn in there and receive
congratulations; not requiring the proposed interval of quiet at the
stone-pits before joining the company.

eppie had a larger garden than she had ever expected there now; and in
other ways the