lutched the bag as if they'd been made of iron;
but just as he had made up his mind that the weaver was dead, he came
all right again, like, as you might say, in the winking of an eye, and
said "good-night", and walked off.  all this jem swore he had seen,
more by token that it was the very day he had been mole-catching on
squire cass's land, down by the old saw-pit.  some said marner must
have been in a "fit", a word which seemed to explain things otherwise
incredible; but the argumentative mr. macey, clerk of the parish, shook
his head, and asked if anybody was ever known to go off in a fit and
not fall down.  a fit was a stroke, wasn't it?  and it was in the
nature of a stroke to partly take away the use of a man's limbs and
throw him on the parish, if he'd got no children to look to.  no, no;
it was no stroke that would let a man stand on his legs, like a horse
between the shafts, and then walk off as soon as you can say "gee!"
but there might be such a thing as a man's soul being loose 
 
 ___________________________
 
and p'rhaps you didn't
say the cow was a red durham; and p'rhaps you didn't say she'd got a
star on her brow--stick to that, now you're at it."

"come, come," said the landlord; "let the cow alone.  the truth lies
atween you: you're both right and both wrong, as i allays say. and as
for the cow's being mr. lammeter's, i say nothing to that; but this i
say, as the rainbow's the rainbow.  and for the matter o' that, if the
talk is to be o' the lammeters, _you_ know the most upo' that head, eh,
mr. macey?  you remember when first mr. lammeter's father come into
these parts, and took the warrens?"

mr. macey, tailor and parish-clerk, the latter of which functions
rheumatism had of late obliged him to share with a small-featured young
man who sat opposite him, held his white head on one side, and twirled
his thumbs with an air of complacency, slightly seasoned with
criticism.  he smiled pityingly, in answer to the landlord's appeal,
and said--

"aye, aye; i know, i know; but i let other folks tal
 
 ___________________________
 
k.  i've laid by
now, and gev up to the young uns.  ask them as have been to school at
tarley: they've learnt pernouncing; that's come up since my day."

"if you're pointing at me, mr. macey," said the deputy clerk, with an
air of anxious propriety, "i'm nowise a man to speak out of my place.
as the psalm says--

  "i know what's right, nor only so,
  but also practise what i know."


"well, then, i wish you'd keep hold o' the tune, when it's set for you;
if you're for prac_tis_ing, i wish you'd prac_tise_ that," said a large
jocose-looking man, an excellent wheelwright in his week-day capacity,
but on sundays leader of the choir.  he winked, as he spoke, at two of
the company, who
 
 ___________________________
 
he
"key-bugle", in the confidence that he was expressing the sense of the
musical profession in raveloe.

mr. tookey, the deputy-clerk, who shared the unpopularity common to
deputies, turned very red, but replied, with careful moderation--"mr.
winthrop, if you'll bring me any proof as i'm in the wrong, i'm not the
man to say i won't alter.  but there's people set up their own ears for
a standard, and expect the whole choir to follow 'em.  there may be two
opinions, i hope."

"aye, aye," said mr. macey, who felt very well satisfied with this
attack on youthful presumption; "you're right there, tookey: there's
allays two 'pinions; there's the 'pinion a man has of himsen, and
there's the 'pinion other folks have on him.  there'd be two 'pinions
about a cracked bell, if the bell could hear itself."

"well, mr. macey," said poor tookey, serious amidst the general
laughter, "i undertook to partially fill up the office of parish-clerk
by mr. crackenthorp's desire, whenever your infirmities should m
 
 ___________________________
 
  it's a nat'ral gift.  there's my little lad aaron, he's got a
gift--he can sing a tune off straight, like a throstle.  but as for
you, master tookey, you'd better stick to your "amens": your voice is
well enough when you keep it up in your nose.  it's your inside as
isn't right made for music: it's no better nor a hollow stalk."

this kind of unflinching frankness was the most piquant form of joke to
the company at the rainbow, and ben winthrop's insult was felt by
everybody to have capped mr. macey's epigram.

"i see what it is plain enough," said mr. tookey, unable to keep cool
any longer.  "there's a consperacy to turn me out o' the choir, as i
shouldn't share the christmas money--that's where it is.  but i shall
speak to mr. crackenthorp; i'll not be put upon by no man."

"nay, nay, tookey," said ben winthrop.  "we'll pay you your share to
keep out of it--that's what we'll do.  there's things folks 'ud pay to
be rid on, besides varmin."

"come, come," said the landlord, who felt that p
 
 ___________________________
 
aying people for their
absence was a principle dangerous to society; "a joke's a joke.  we're
all good friends here, i hope.  we must give and take. you're both
right and you're both wrong, as i say.  i agree wi' mr. macey here, as
there's two opinions; and if mine was asked, i should say they're both
right.  tookey's right and winthrop's right, and they've only got to
split the difference and make themselves even."

the farrier was puffing his pipe rather fiercely, in some contempt at
this trivial discussion.  he had no ear for music himself, and never
went to church, as being of the medical profession, and likely to be in
requisition for delicate cows.  but the butcher, having music in his
soul, had listened wi
 
 ___________________________
 
th a divided desire for tookey's defeat and for
the preservation of the peace.

"to be sure," he said, following up the landlord's conciliatory view,
"we're fond of our old clerk; it's nat'ral, and him used to be such a
singer, and got a brother as is known for the first fiddler in this
country-side.  eh, it's a pity but what solomon lived in our village,
and could give us a tune when we liked; eh, mr. macey?  i'd keep him in
liver and lights for nothing--that i would."

"aye, aye," said mr. macey, in the height of complacency; "our family's
been known for musicianers as far back as anybody can tell. but them
things are dying out, as i tell solomon every time he comes round;
there's no voices like what there used to be, and there's nobody
remembers what we remember, if it isn't the old crows."

"aye, you remember when first mr. lammeter's father come into these
parts, don't you, mr. macey?"  said the landlord.

"i should think i did," said the old man, who had now gone through that
compl
 
 ___________________________
 
stoms o' things, and kep a
good house, and was well looked on by everybody.  and the young
man--that's the mr. lammeter as now is, for he'd niver a sister--soon
begun to court miss osgood, that's the sister o' the mr. osgood as now
is, and a fine handsome lass she was--eh, you can't think--they pretend
this young lass is like her, but that's the way wi' people as don't
know what come before 'em.  _i_ should know, for i helped the old
rector, mr. drumlow as was, i helped him marry 'em."

here mr. macey paused; he always gave his narrative in instalments,
expecting to be questioned according to precedent.

"aye, and a partic'lar thing happened, didn't it, mr. macey, so as you
were likely to remember that marriage?"  said the landlord, in a
congratulatory tone.

"i should think there did--a _very_ partic'lar thing," said mr. macey,
nodding sideways.  "for mr. drumlow--poor old gentleman, i was fond on
him, though he'd got a bit confused in his head, what wi' age and wi'
taking a drop o' summat 
 
 ___________________________
 
he come to
put the questions, he put 'em by the rule o' contrairy, like, and he
says, "wilt thou have this man to thy wedded wife?"  says he, and then
he says, "wilt thou have this woman to thy wedded husband?" says he.
but the partic'larest thing of all is, as nobody took any notice on it
but me, and they answered straight off "yes", like as if it had been me
saying "amen" i' the right place, without listening to what went
before."

"but _you_ knew what was going on well enough, didn't you, mr. macey?
you were live enough, eh?"  said the butcher.

"lor bless you!"  said mr. macey, pausing, and smiling in pity at the
impotence of his hearer's imagination--"why, i was all of a tremble: it
was as if i'd been a coat pulled by the two tails, like; for i couldn't
stop the parson, i couldn't take upon me to do that; and yet i said to
myself, i says, "suppose they shouldn't be fast married, 'cause the
words are contrairy?"  and my head went working like a mill, for i was
allays uncommon for turning
 
 ___________________________
 
hen, when i come to think on it, meanin' goes but a
little way i' most things, for you may mean to stick things together
and your glue may be bad, and then where are you?  and so i says to
mysen, "it isn't the meanin', it's the glue."  and i was worreted as if
i'd got three bells to pull at once, when we went into the vestry, and
they begun to sign their names.  but where's the use o' talking?--you
can't think what goes on in a 'cute man's inside."

"but you held in for all that, didn't you, mr. macey?"  said the
landlord.

"aye, i held in tight till i was by mysen wi' mr. drumlow, and then i
out wi' everything, but respectful, as i allays did.  and he made light
on it, and he says, "pooh, pooh, macey, make yourself easy," he says;
"it's neither the meaning nor the words--it's the re_ges_ter does
it--that's the glue."  so you see he settled it easy; for parsons and
doctors know everything by heart, like, so as they aren't worreted wi'
thinking what's the rights and wrongs o' things, as i'n b
 
 ___________________________
 
een many and
many's the time.  and sure enough the wedding turned out all right,
on'y poor mrs. lammeter--that's miss osgood as was--died afore the
lasses was growed up; but for prosperity and everything respectable,
there's no family more looked on."

every one of mr. macey's audience had heard this story many times, but
it was listened to as if it had been a favourite tune, and at certain
points the puffing of the pipes was momentarily suspended, that the
listeners might give their whole minds to the expected words.  but
there was more to come; and mr. snell, the landlord, duly put the
leading question.

"why, old mr. lammeter had a pretty fortin, didn't they say, when he
come into these parts?"

"well, yes," said mr. macey; "but i daresay it's as much as this mr
 
 ___________________________
 
.
lammeter's done to keep it whole.  for there was allays a talk as
nobody could get rich on the warrens: though he holds it cheap, for
it's what they call charity land."

"aye, and there's few folks know so well as you how it come to be
charity land, eh, mr. macey?"  said the butcher.

"how should they?"  said the old clerk, with some contempt. "why, my
grandfather made the grooms' livery for that mr. cliff as came and
built the big stables at the warrens.  why, they're stables four times
as big as squire cass's, for he thought o' nothing but hosses and
hunting, cliff didn't--a lunnon tailor, some folks said, as had gone
mad wi' cheating.  for he couldn't ride; lor bless you!  they said he'd
got no more grip o' the hoss than if his legs had been cross-st
 
 ___________________________
 
get burnt down wi' the poor dumb creaturs
in 'em.  but at last he died raving, and they found as he'd left all
his property, warrens and all, to a lunnon charity, and that's how the
warrens come to be charity land; though, as for the stables, mr.
lammeter never uses 'em--they're out o' all charicter--lor bless you!
if you was to set the doors a-banging in 'em, it 'ud sound like thunder
half o'er the parish."

"aye, but there's more going on in the stables than what folks see by
daylight, eh, mr. macey?"  said the landlord.

"aye, aye; go that way of a dark night, that's all," said mr. macey,
winking mysteriously, "and then make believe, if you like, as you
didn't see lights i' the stables, nor hear the stamping o' the hosses,
nor the cracking o' the whips, and howling, too, if it's tow'rt
daybreak.  "cliff's holiday" has been the name of it ever sin' i were a
boy; that's to say, some said as it was the holiday old harry gev him
from roasting, like.  that's what my father told me, and he was 
 
 ___________________________
 
re's nobody 'ull ventur a ten-pun' note on their ghos'es
as they make so sure of."

"why, dowlas, that's easy betting, that is," said ben winthrop. "you
might as well bet a man as he wouldn't catch the rheumatise if he stood
up to 's neck in the pool of a frosty night.  it 'ud be fine fun for a
man to win his bet as he'd catch the rheumatise. folks as believe in
cliff's holiday aren't agoing to ventur near it for a matter o' ten
pound."

"if master dowlas wants to know the truth on it," said mr. macey, with
a sarcastic smile, tapping his thumbs together, "he's no call to lay
any bet--let him go and stan' by himself--there's nobody 'ull hinder
him; and then he can let the parish'ners know if they're wrong."

"thank you!  i'm obliged to you," said the farrier, with a snort of
scorn.  "if folks are fools, it's no business o' mine.  _i_ don't want
to make out the truth about ghos'es: i know it a'ready. but i'm not
against a bet--everything fair and open.  let any man bet me ten pound
as i shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
cal argument was not well received by the
farrier--a man intensely opposed to compromise.

"tut, tut," he said, setting down his glass with refreshed irritation;
"what's the smell got to do with it?  did ever a ghost give a man a
black eye?  that's what i should like to know.  if ghos'es want me to
believe in 'em, let 'em leave off skulking i' the dark and i' lone
places--let 'em come where there's company and candles."

"as if ghos'es 'ud want to be believed in by anybody so ignirant!" said
mr. macey, in deep disgust at the farrier's crass incompetence to
apprehend the conditions of ghostly phenomena.



chapter vii

yet the next moment there seemed to be some evidence that ghosts had a
more condescending disposition than mr. macey attributed to them; for
the pale thin figure of silas marner was suddenly seen standing in the
warm light, uttering no word, but looking round at the company with his
strange unearthly eyes.  the long pipes gave a simultaneous movement,
like the antennae of start
 
 ___________________________
 
led insects, and every man present, not
excepting even the sceptical farrier, had an impression that he saw,
not silas marner in the flesh, but an apparition; for the door by which
silas had entered was hidden by the high-screened seats, and no one had
noticed his approach. mr. macey, sitting a long way off the ghost,
might be supposed to have felt an argumentative triumph, which would
tend to neutralize his share of the general alarm.  had he not always
said that when silas marner was in that strange trance of his, his soul
went loose from his body?  here was the demonstration: nevertheless, on
the whole, he would have been as well contented without it.  for a few
moments there was a dead silence, marner's want of breath and agitation
not allowing him to speak.  the landlo
 
 ___________________________
 
s any more than without us:
there have been many circulations of the sap before we detect the
smallest sign of the bud.

the slight suspicion with which his hearers at first listened to him,
gradually melted away before the convincing simplicity of his distress:
it was impossible for the neighbours to doubt that marner was telling
the truth, not because they were capable of arguing at once from the
nature of his statements to the absence of any motive for making them
falsely, but because, as mr. macey observed, "folks as had the devil to
back 'em were not likely to be so mushed" as poor silas was.  rather,
from the strange fact that the robber had left no traces, and had
happened to know the nick of time, utterly incalculable by mortal
agents, when silas would go away from home without locking his door,
the more probable conclusion seemed to be, that his disreputable
intimacy in that quarter, if it ever existed, had been broken up, and
that, in consequence, this ill turn had been done to mar
 
 ___________________________
 
 a question which did not present itself.

"it isn't jem rodney as has done this work, master marner," said the
landlord.  "you mustn't be a-casting your eye at poor jem. there may be
a bit of a reckoning against jem for the matter of a hare or so, if
anybody was bound to keep their eyes staring open, and niver to wink;
but jem's been a-sitting here drinking his can, like the decentest man
i' the parish, since before you left your house, master marner, by your
own account."

"aye, aye," said mr. macey; "let's have no accusing o' the innicent.
that isn't the law.  there must be folks to swear again' a man before
he can be ta'en up.  let's have no accusing o' the innicent, master
marner."

memory was not so utterly torpid in silas that it could not be awakened
by these words.  with a movement of compunction as new and strange to
him as everything else within the last hour, he started from his chair
and went close up to jem, looking at him as if he wanted to assure
himself of the expression in 
 
 ___________________________
 
his face.

"i was wrong," he said--"yes, yes--i ought to have thought. there's
nothing to witness against you, jem.  only you'd been into my house
oftener than anybody else, and so you came into my head. i don't accuse
you--i won't accuse anybody--only," he added, lifting up his hands to
his head, and turning away with bewildered misery, "i try--i try to
think where my guineas can be."

"aye, aye, they're gone where it's hot enough to melt 'em, i doubt,"
said mr. macey.

"tchuh!"  said the farrier.  and then he asked, with a cross-examining
air, "how much money might there be in the bags, master marner?"

"two hundred and seventy-two pounds, twelve and sixpence, last night
when i counted it," said silas, seating himself again, with a groan.

"pooh!  why, they'd be none so heavy to carry.  some tramp's been in,
that's all; and as for the no footmarks, and the bricks and the sand
being all right--why, your eyes are pretty much like a insect's, master
marner; th
 
 ___________________________
 
 from the door.

"well, i'm not the man to be afraid o' the rain," said the farrier.
"for it'll look bad when justice malam hears as respectable men like us
had a information laid before 'em and took no steps."

the landlord agreed with this view, and after taking the sense of the
company, and duly rehearsing a small ceremony known in high
ecclesiastical life as the _nolo episcopari_, he consented to take on
himself the chill dignity of going to kench's.  but to the farrier's
strong disgust, mr. macey now started an objection to his proposing
himself as a deputy-constable; for that oracular old gentleman,
claiming to know the law, stated, as a fact delivered to him by his
father, that no doctor could be a constable.

"and you're a doctor, i reckon, though you're only a cow-doctor--for a
fly's a fly, though it may be a hoss-fly," concluded mr. macey,
wondering a little at his own "'cuteness".

there was a hot debate upon this, the farrier being of course
indisposed to renounce the quality of 
 
 ___________________________
 
doctor, but contending that a
doctor could be a constable if he liked--the law meant, he needn't be
one if he didn't like.  mr. macey thought this was nonsense, since the
law was not likely to be fonder of doctors than of other folks.
moreover, if it was in the nature of doctors more than of other men not
to like being constables, how came mr. dowlas to be so eager to act in
that capacity?

"_i_ don't want to act the constable," said the farrier, driven into a
corner by this merciless reasoning; "and there's no man can say it of
me, if he'd tell the truth.  but if there's to be any jealousy and
en_vy_ing about going to kench'
 
 ___________________________
 
 that such things had been known as a man's doing
himself a mischief, and then setting the justice to look for the doer.
but when questioned closely as to their grounds for this opinion, and
what master marner had to gain by such false pretences, they only shook
their heads as before, and observed that there was no knowing what some
folks counted gain; moreover, that everybody had a right to their own
opinions, grounds or no grounds, and that the weaver, as everybody
knew, was partly crazy.  mr. macey, though he joined in the defence of
marner against all suspicions of deceit, also pooh-poohed the
tinder-box; indeed, repudiated it as a rather impious suggestion,
tending to imply that everything must be done by human hands, and that
there was no power which could make away with the guineas without
moving the bricks. nevertheless, he turned round rather sharply on mr.
tookey, when the zealous deputy, feeling that this was a view of the
case peculiarly suited to a parish-clerk, carried it still
 
 ___________________________
 
 farther, and
doubted whether it was right to inquire into a robbery at all when the
circumstances were so mysterious.

"as if," concluded mr. tookey--"as if there was nothing but what could
be made out by justices and constables."

"now, don't you be for overshooting the mark, tookey," said mr. macey,
nodding his head aside admonishingly.  "that's what you're allays at;
if i throw a stone and hit, you think there's summat better than
hitting, and you try to throw a stone beyond. what i said was against
the tinder-box: i said nothing against justices and constables, for
they're o' king george's making, and it 'ud be ill-becoming a man in a
parish office to fly out again' king george."

while these discussions were going on amongst the group outside the
rainbow, a higher consultation was bein
 
 ___________________________
 
eason why we are seldom able to comfort our neighbours
with our words is that our goodwill gets adulterated, in spite of
ourselves, before it can pass our lips.  we can send black puddings and
pettitoes without giving them a flavour of our own egoism; but language
is a stream that is almost sure to smack of a mingled soil.  there was
a fair proportion of kindness in raveloe; but it was often of a beery
and bungling sort, and took the shape least allied to the complimentary
and hypocritical.

mr. macey, for example, coming one evening expressly to let silas know
that recent events had given him the advantage of standing more
favourably in the opinion of a man whose judgment was not formed
lightly, opened the conversation by saying, as soon as he had seated
himself and adjusted his thumbs--

"come, master marner, why, you've no call to sit a-moaning.  you're a
deal better off to ha' lost your money, nor to ha' kep it by foul
means.  i used to think, when you first come into these parts, as you
 
 ___________________________
 
as
for thinking you're a deep un, and ha' got more inside you nor 'ull
bear daylight, i'm not o' that opinion at all, and so i tell the
neighbours.  for, says i, you talk o' master marner making out a
tale--why, it's nonsense, that is: it 'ud take a 'cute man to make a
tale like that; and, says i, he looked as scared as a rabbit."

during this discursive address silas had continued motionless in his
previous attitude, leaning his elbows on his knees, and pressing his
hands against his head.  mr. macey, not doubting that he had been
listened to, paused, in the expectation of some appreciatory reply, but
marner remained silent.  he had a sense that the old man meant to be
good-natured and neighbourly; but the kindness fell on him as sunshine
falls on the wretched--he had no heart to taste it, and felt that it
was very far off him.

"come, master marner, have you got nothing to say to that?"  said mr.
macey at last, with a slight accent of impatience.

"oh," said marner, slowly, shaking his hea
 
 ___________________________
 
d between his hands, "i thank
you--thank you--kindly."

"aye, aye, to be sure: i thought you would," said mr. macey; "and my
advice is--have you got a sunday suit?"

"no," said marner.

"i doubted it was so," said mr. macey.  "now, let me advise you to get
a sunday suit: there's tookey, he's a poor creatur, but he's got my
tailoring business, and some o' my money in it, and he shall make a
suit at a low price, and give you trust, and then you can come to
church, and be a bit neighbourly.  why, you've never heared me say
"amen" since you come into these parts, and i recommend you to lose no
time, for it'll be poor work when tookey has it all to himself, for i
mayn't be equil to stand i' the desk at all, come anothe
 
 ___________________________
 
r winter."
here mr. macey paused, perhaps expecting some sign of emotion in his
hearer; but not observing any, he went on. "and as for the money for
the suit o' clothes, why, you get a matter of a pound a-week at your
weaving, master marner, and you're a young man, eh, for all you look so
mushed.  why, you couldn't ha' been five-and-twenty when you come into
these parts, eh?"

silas started a little at the change to a questioning tone, and
answered mildly, "i don't know; i can't rightly say--it's a long while
since."

a
 
 ___________________________
 
fter receiving such an answer as this, it is not surprising that mr.
macey observed, later on in the evening at the rainbow, that marner's
head was "all of a muddle", and that it was to be doubted if he ever
knew when sunday came round, which showed him a worse heathen than many
a dog.

another of silas's comforters, besides mr. macey, came to him with a
mind highly charged on the same topic.  this was mrs. winthrop, the
wheelwright's wife.  the inhabitants of raveloe were not severely
regular in their church-going, and perhaps there was hardly a person in
the parish who would not have held that to go to church every sunday in
the calendar would have shown a greedy desire to stand well with
heaven, and get an undue advantage over their neighbours--a wish to be
better than the "common run", that would have implied a reflectio
 
 ___________________________
 
omical, they want a change--they do, i know, god help 'em."

dolly sighed gently as she held out the cakes to silas, who thanked her
kindly and looked very close at them, absently, being accustomed to
look so at everything he took into his hand--eyed all the while by the
wondering bright orbs of the small aaron, who had made an outwork of
his mother's chair, and was peeping round from behind it.

"there's letters pricked on 'em," said dolly.  "i can't read 'em
myself, and there's nobody, not mr. macey himself, rightly knows what
they mean; but they've a good meaning, for they're the same as is on
the pulpit-cloth at church.  what are they, aaron, my dear?"

aaron retreated completely behind his outwork.

"oh, go, that's naughty," said his mother, mildly.  "well, whativer the
letters are, they've a good meaning; and it's a stamp as has been in
our house, ben says, ever since he was a little un, and his mother used
to put it on the cakes, and i've allays put it on too; for if there's
any good,
 
 ___________________________
 
nothing of 'em--i went to chapel."

dolly was much puzzled at this new word, but she was rather afraid of
inquiring further, lest "chapel" might mean some haunt of wickedness.
after a little thought, she said--

"well, master marner, it's niver too late to turn over a new leaf, and
if you've niver had no church, there's no telling the good it'll do
you.  for i feel so set up and comfortable as niver was, when i've been
and heard the prayers, and the singing to the praise and glory o' god,
as mr. macey gives out--and mr. crackenthorp saying good words, and
more partic'lar on sacramen' day; and if a bit o' trouble comes, i feel
as i can put up wi' it, for i've looked for help i' the right quarter,
and gev myself up to them as we must all give ourselves up to at the
last; and if we'n done our part, it isn't to be believed as them as are
above us 'ull be worse nor we are, and come short o' their'n."

poor dolly's exposition of her simple raveloe theology fell rather
unmeaningly on silas's ears, 
 
 ___________________________
 
n and moan at his ease.  her
simple view of life and its comforts, by which she had tried to cheer
him, was only like a report of unknown objects, which his imagination
could not fashion.  the fountains of human love and of faith in a
divine love had not yet been unlocked, and his soul was still the
shrunken rivulet, with only this difference, that its little groove of
sand was blocked up, and it wandered confusedly against dark
obstruction.

and so, notwithstanding the honest persuasions of mr. macey and dolly
winthrop, silas spent his christmas-day in loneliness, eating his meat
in sadness of heart, though the meat had come to him as a neighbourly
present.  in the morning he looked out on the black frost that seemed
to press cruelly on every blade of grass, while the half-icy red pool
shivered under the bitter wind; but towards evening the snow began to
fall, and curtained from him even that dreary outlook, shutting him
close up with his narrow grief.  and he sat in his robbed home through
 
 ___________________________
 
hint as we aren't enough in a hurry to hear him play.
bob," he called out to his third long-legged son, who was at the other
end of the room, "open the door, and tell solomon to come in.  he shall
give us a tune here."

bob obeyed, and solomon walked in, fiddling as he walked, for he would
on no account break off in the middle of a tune.

"here, solomon," said the squire, with loud patronage.  "round here, my
man.  ah, i knew it was "the flaxen-headed ploughboy": there's no finer
tune."

solomon macey, a small hale old man with an abundant crop of long white
hair reaching nearly to his shoulders, advanced to the indicated spot,
bowing reverently while he fiddled, as much as to say that he respected
the company, though he respected the key-note more.  as soon as he had
repeated the tune and lowered his fiddle, he bowed again to the squire
and the rector, and said, "i hope i see your honour and your reverence
well, and wishing you health and long life and a happy new year.  and
wishing the sam
 
 ___________________________
 
to be luring
that decent company by the magic scream of his fiddle--luring discreet
matrons in turban-shaped caps, nay, mrs. crackenthorp herself, the
summit of whose perpendicular feather was on a level with the squire's
shoulder--luring fair lasses complacently conscious of very short
waists and skirts blameless of front-folds--luring burly fathers in
large variegated waistcoats, and ruddy sons, for the most part shy and
sheepish, in short nether garments and very long coat-tails.

already mr. macey and a few other privileged villagers, who were
allowed to be spectators on these great occasions, were seated on
benches placed for them near the door; and great was the admiration and
satisfaction in that quarter when the couples had formed themselves for
the dance, and the squire led off with mrs. crackenthorp, joining hands
with the rector and mrs. osgood. that was as it should be--that was
what everybody had been used to--and the charter of raveloe seemed to
be renewed by the ceremony. it w
 
 ___________________________
 
and to
take tithe in kind; on which last point, of course, there was a little
grumbling, but not to the extent of irreligion--not of deeper
significance than the grumbling at the rain, which was by no means
accompanied with a spirit of impious defiance, but with a desire that
the prayer for fine weather might be read forthwith.

there was no reason, then, why the rector's dancing should not be
received as part of the fitness of things quite as much as the
squire's, or why, on the other hand, mr. macey's official respect
should restrain him from subjecting the parson's performance to that
criticism with which minds of extraordinary acuteness must necessarily
contemplate the doings of their fallible fellow-men.

"the squire's pretty springe, considering his weight," said mr. macey,
"and he stamps uncommon well.  but mr. lammeter beats 'em all for
shapes: you see he holds his head like a sodger, and he isn't so
cushiony as most o' the oldish gentlefolks--they run fat in general;
and he's got a 
 
 ___________________________
 
do worse, he might do worse.
though he hasn't that grand way o' waving his hand as the squire has."

"talk o' nimbleness, look at mrs. osgood," said ben winthrop, who was
holding his son aaron between his knees.  "she trips along with her
little steps, so as nobody can see how she goes--it's like as if she
had little wheels to her feet.  she doesn't look a day older nor last
year: she's the finest-made woman as is, let the next be where she
will."

"i don't heed how the women are made," said mr. macey, with some
contempt.  "they wear nayther coat nor breeches: you can't make much
out o' their shapes."

"fayder," said aaron, whose feet were busy beating out the tune, "how
does that big cock's-feather stick in mrs. crackenthorp's yead?  is
there a little hole for it, like in my shuttle-cock?"

"hush, lad, hush; that's the way the ladies dress theirselves, that
is," said the father, adding, however, in an undertone to mr. macey,
"it does make her look funny, though--partly like a short-necked b
 
 ___________________________
 
ottle
wi' a long quill in it.  hey, by jingo, there's the young squire
leading off now, wi' miss nancy for partners! there's a lass for
you!--like a pink-and-white posy--there's nobody 'ud think as anybody
could be so pritty.  i shouldn't wonder if she's madam cass some day,
arter all--and nobody more rightfuller, for they'd make a fine match.
you can find nothing against master godfrey's shapes, macey, _i_'ll bet
a penny."

mr. macey screwed up his mouth, leaned his head further on one side,
and twirled his thumbs with a presto movement as his eyes followed
godfrey up the dance.  at last he summed up his opinion.

"pretty well down'ard, but a bit too round i' the shoulder-blades. and
as for them coats as he gets from the flitton tailor, they're a poor
cut to pay double money for."

"ah, mr. macey, you and me are two folks," said ben, slightly indignant
at this carping.  "when i've got a pot o' good ale, i like to swaller
it
 
 ___________________________
 
, and do my inside good, i'stead o' smelling and staring at it to see
if i can't find faut wi' the brewing.  i should like you to pick me out
a finer-limbed young fellow nor master godfrey--one as 'ud knock you
down easier, or 's more pleasanter-looksed when he's piert and merry."

"tchuh!"  said mr. macey, provoked to increased severity, "he isn't
come to his right colour yet: he's partly like a slack-baked pie.  and
i doubt he's got a soft place in his head, else why should he be turned
round the finger by that offal dunsey as nobody's seen o' late, and let
him kill that fine hunting hoss as was the talk o' the country?  and
one while he was allays after miss nancy, and then it all went off
again, like a smell o' hot porridge, as i may say. that wasn't my way
when _i_ went a-coorting."

"ah, bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t mayhap miss nancy hung off, like, and your lass didn't," said
ben.

"i should say she didn't," said mr. macey, significantly. "before i
said "sniff", i took care to know as she'd say "snaff", and pretty
quick too.  i wasn't a-going to open _my_ mouth, like a dog at a fly,
and snap it to again, wi' nothing to swaller."

"well, i think miss nancy's a-coming round again," said ben, "for
master godfrey doesn't look so down-hearted to-night.  and i see he's
for taking her away to sit down, now they're at the end o' the dance:
that looks like sweethearting, that does."

the reason why godfrey and nancy had l
 
 ___________________________
 
eed",--as well as if he
was the clerk.  that's what you must do, master marner, if you'd do the
right thing by the orphin child."

marner's pale face flushed suddenly under a new anxiety.  his mind was
too busy trying to give some definite bearing to dolly's words for him
to think of answering her.

"and it's my belief," she went on, "as the poor little creatur has
never been christened, and it's nothing but right as the parson should
be spoke to; and if you was noways unwilling, i'd talk to mr. macey
about it this very day.  for if the child ever went anyways wrong, and
you hadn't done your part by it, master marner--'noculation, and
everything to save it from harm--it 'ud be a thorn i' your bed for ever
o' this side the grave; and i can't think as it 'ud be easy lying down
for anybody when they'd got to another world, if they hadn't done their
part by the helpless children as come wi'out their own asking."

dolly herself was disposed to be silent for some time now, for she had
spoken from 
 
 ___________________________
 
good words and good things to keep us from
harm?"

"yes," said silas, in a low voice; "i know a deal about that--used to,
used to.  but your ways are different: my country was a good way off."
he paused a few moments, and then added, more decidedly, "but i want to
do everything as can be done for the child.  and whatever's right for
it i' this country, and you think 'ull do it good, i'll act according,
if you'll tell me."

"well, then, master marner," said dolly, inwardly rejoiced, "i'll ask
mr. macey to speak to the parson about it; and you must fix on a name
for it, because it must have a name giv' it when it's christened."

"my mother's name was hephzibah," said silas, "and my little sister was
named after her."

"eh, that's a hard name," said dolly.  "i partly think it isn't a
christened name."

"it's a bible name," said silas, old ideas recurring.

"then i've no call to speak again' it," said dolly, rather startled by
silas's knowledge on this head; "but you see i'm no scholard, and i'm
 
 ___________________________
 
ught up an orphan child, and been
father and mother to her--and had lost his money too, so as he had
nothing but what he worked for week by week, and when the weaving was
going down too--for there was less and less flax spun--and master
marner was none so young.  nobody was jealous of the weaver, for he was
regarded as an exceptional person, whose claims on neighbourly help
were not to be matched in raveloe.  any superstition that remained
concerning him had taken an entirely new colour; and mr. macey, now a
very feeble old man of fourscore and six, never seen except in his
chimney-corner or sitting in the sunshine at his door-sill, was of
opinion that when a man had done what silas had done by an orphan
child, it was a sign that his money would come to light again, or
leastwise that the robber would be made to answer for it--for, as mr.
macey observed of himself, his faculties were as strong as ever.

silas sat down now and watched eppie with a satisfied gaze as she
spread the clean cloth, 
 
 ___________________________
 
erything else was gone
from me."

"ah," said godfrey, applying marner's words simply to his bodily wants,
"it was a good trade for you in this country, because there's been a
great deal of linen-weaving to be done.  but you're getting rather past
such close work, marner: it's time you laid by and had some rest.  you
look a good deal pulled down, though you're not an old man, _are_ you?"

"fifty-five, as near as i can say, sir," said silas.

"oh, why, you may live thirty years longer--look at old macey! and that
money on the table, after all, is but little.  it won't go far either
way--whether it's put out to interest, or you were to live on it as
long as it would last: it wouldn't go far if you'd nobody to keep but
yourself, and you've had two to keep for a good many years now."

"eh, sir," said silas, unaffected by anything godfrey was saying, "i'm
in no fear o' want.  we shall do very well--eppie and me 'ull do well
enough.  there's few working-folks have got so much laid by as that.  i
do
 
 ___________________________
 
e
gig; "i should ha' had something young to think of then, besides the
lambs and the calves."

"yes, my dear, yes," said mr. lammeter; "one feels that as one gets
older.  things look dim to old folks: they'd need have some young eyes
about 'em, to let 'em know the world's the same as it used to be."

nancy came out now to welcome her father and sister; and the wedding
group had passed on beyond the red house to the humbler part of the
village.

dolly winthrop was the first to divine that old mr. macey, who had been
set in his arm-chair outside his own door, would expect some special
notice as they passed, since he was too old to be at the wedding-feast.

"mr. macey's looking for a word from us," said dolly; "he'll be hurt if
we pass him and say nothing--and him so racked with rheumatiz."

so they turned aside to shake hands with the old man.  he had looked
forward to the occasion, and had his premeditated speech.

"well, master marner," he said, in a voice that quavered a good deal,
"i've li