ood.  in this office of charity, silas felt, for
the first time since he had come to raveloe, a sense of unity between
his past and present life, which might have been the beginning of his
rescue from the insect-like existence into which his nature had shrunk.
but sally oates's disease had raised her into a personage of much
interest and importance among the neighbours, and the fact of her
having found relief from drinking silas marner's "stuff" became a
matter of general discourse.  when doctor kimble gave physic, it was
natural that it should have an effect; but when a weaver, who came from
nobody knew where, worked wonders with a bottle of brown waters, the
occult character of the process was evident.  such a sort of thing had
not been known since the wise woman at tarley died; and she had charms
as well as "stuff": everybody went to her when their children had fits.
silas marner must be a person of the same sort, for how did he know
what would bring back sally oates's breath, if he didn't
 
 ___________________________
 
company--you're such a handsome brother, and we've always been so fond
of quarrelling with one another, i shouldn't know what to do without
you.  but you'd like better for us both to stay at home together; i
know you would.  so you'll manage to get that little sum o' money, and
i'll bid you good-bye, though i'm sorry to part."

dunstan was moving off, but godfrey rushed after him and seized him by
the arm, saying, with an oath--

"i tell you, i have no money: i can get no money."

"borrow of old kimble."

"i tell you, he won't lend me any more, and i shan't ask him."

"well, then, sell wildfire."

"yes, that's easy talking.  i must have the money directly."

"well, you've only got to ride him to the hunt to-morrow.  there'll be
bryce and keating there, for sure.  you'll get more bids than one."

"i daresay, and get back home at eight o'clock, splashed up to the
chin.  i'm going to mrs. osgood's birthday dance."

"oho!"  said dunsey, turning his head on one side, and trying to speak
in a small
 
 ___________________________
 
h wildfire," he began;
"happened the day before yesterday."

"what!  broke his knees?"  said the squire, after taking a draught of
ale.  "i thought you knew how to ride better than that, sir. i never
threw a horse down in my life.  if i had, i might ha' whistled for
another, for _my_ father wasn't quite so ready to unstring as some
other fathers i know of.  but they must turn over a new leaf--_they_
must.  what with mortgages and arrears, i'm as short o' cash as a
roadside pauper.  and that fool kimble says the newspaper's talking
about peace.  why, the country wouldn't have a leg to stand on.  prices
'ud run down like a jack, and i should never get my arrears, not if i
sold all the fellows up.  and there's that damned fowler, i won't put
up with him any longer; i've told winthrop to go to cox this very day.
the lying scoundrel told me he'd be sure to pay me a hundred last
month.  he takes advantage because he's on that outlying farm, and
thinks i shall forget him."

the squire had delivered 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a gradual cessation of the
excitement it had caused in raveloe.  dunstan cass's absence was hardly
a subject of remark: he had once before had a quarrel with his father,
and had gone off, nobody knew whither, to return at the end of six
weeks, take up his old quarters unforbidden, and swagger as usual.  his
own family, who equally expected this issue, with the sole difference
that the squire was determined this time to forbid him the old
quarters, never mentioned his absence; and when his uncle kimble or mr.
osgood noticed it, the story of his having killed wildfire, and
committed some offence against his father, was enough to prevent
surprise.  to connect the fact of dunsey's disappearance with that of
the robbery occurring on the same day, lay quite away from the track of
every one's thought--even godfrey's, who had better reason than any one
else to know what his brother was capable of.  he remembered no mention
of the weaver between them since the time, twelve years ago, when it
was thei
 
 ___________________________
 
hurch reg'lar; for, as for
the children as the wise woman charmed, i've been at the christening of
'em again and again, and they took the water just as well.  and that's
reasonable; for if old harry's a mind to do a bit o' kindness for a
holiday, like, who's got anything against it?  that's my thinking; and
i've been clerk o' this parish forty year, and i know, when the parson
and me does the cussing of a ash wednesday, there's no cussing o' folks
as have a mind to be cured without a doctor, let kimble say what he
will.  and so, master marner, as i was saying--for there's windings i'
things as they may carry you to the fur end o' the prayer-book afore
you get back to 'em--my advice is, as you keep up your sperrits; for as
for thinking you're a deep un, and ha' got more inside you nor 'ull
bear daylight, i'm not o' that opinion at all, and so i tell the
neighbours.  for, says i, you talk o' master marner making out a
tale--why, it's nonsense, that is: it 'ud take a 'cute man to make a
tale lik
 
 ___________________________
 
 had been done for them in heaven above and in earth
below, which they were appropriating by their presence.  and then the
red faces made their way through the black biting frost to their own
homes, feeling themselves free for the rest of the day to eat, drink,
and be merry, and using that christian freedom without diffidence.

at squire cass's family party that day nobody mentioned dunstan--nobody
was sorry for his absence, or feared it would be too long. the doctor
and his wife, uncle and aunt kimble, were there, and the annual
christmas talk was carried through without any omissions, rising to the
climax of mr. kimble's experience when he walked the london hospitals
thirty years back, together with striking professional anecdotes then
gathered.  whereupon cards followed, with aunt kimble's annual failure
to follow suit, and uncle kimble's irascibility concerning the odd
trick which was rarely explicable to him, when it was not on his side,
without a general visitation of tricks to see that
 
 ___________________________
 
nority; for already the afternoon
was beginning to decline, and there would not be too much time for the
ladies who came from a distance to attire themselves in readiness for
the early tea which was to inspirit them for the dance.

there was a buzz of voices through the house, as miss nancy entered,
mingled with the scrape of a fiddle preluding in the kitchen; but the
lammeters were guests whose arrival had evidently been thought of so
much that it had been watched for from the windows, for mrs. kimble,
who did the honours at the red house on these great occasions, came
forward to meet miss nancy in the hall, and conduct her up-stairs.
mrs. kimble was the squire's sister, as well as the doctor's wife--a
double dignity, with which her diameter was in direct proportion; so
that, a journey up-stairs being rather fatiguing to her, she did not
oppose miss nancy's request to be allowed to find her way alone to the
blue room, where the miss lammeters' bandboxes had been deposited on
their arrival in
 
 ___________________________
 
 consent would be vouchsafed. his spare but
healthy person, and high-featured firm face, that looked as if it had
never been flushed by excess, was in strong contrast, not only with the
squire's, but with the appearance of the raveloe farmers generally--in
accordance with a favourite saying of his own, that "breed was stronger
than pasture".

"miss nancy's wonderful like what her mother was, though; isn't she,
kimble?"  said the stout lady of that name, looking round for her
husband.

but doctor kimble (country apothecaries in old days enjoyed that title
without authority of diploma), being a thin and agile man, was flitting
about the room with his hands in his pockets, making himself agreeable
to his feminine patients, with medical impartiality, and being welcomed
everywhere as a doctor by hereditary right--not one of those miserable
apothecaries who canvass for practice in strange neighbourhoods, and
spend all their income in starving their one horse, but a man of
substance, able to keep an
 
 ___________________________
 
 extravagant table like the best of his
patients.  time out of mind the raveloe doctor had been a kimble;
kimble was inherently a doctor's name; and it was difficult to
contemplate firmly the melancholy fact that the actual kimble had no
son, so that his practice might one day be handed over to a successor
with the incongruous name of taylor or johnson.  but in that case the
wiser people in raveloe would employ dr. blick of flitton--as less
unnatural.

"did you speak to me, my dear?"  said the authentic doctor, coming
quickly to his wife's side; but, as if foreseeing that she would be too
much out of breath to repeat her remark, he went on immediately--"ha,
miss priscilla, the sight of you revives the taste of that
super
 
 ___________________________
 
-excellent pork-pie.  i hope the batch isn't near an end."

"yes, indeed, it is, doctor," said priscilla; "but i'll answer for it
the next shall be as good.  my pork-pies don't turn out well by chance."

"not as your doctoring does, eh, kimble?--because folks forget to take
your physic, eh?"  said the squire, who regarded physic and doctors as
many loyal churchmen regard the church and the clergy--tasting a joke
against them when he was in health, but impatiently eager for their aid
when anything was the matter with him.  he tapped his box, and looked
round with a triumphant laugh.

"ah, she has a quick wit, my friend priscilla has," said the doctor,
choosing to attribute the epigram to a lady rather than allow a
brother-in-law that 
 
 ___________________________
 
advantage over him.  "she saves a little pepper to
sprinkle over her talk--that's the reason why she never puts too much
into her pies.  there's my wife now, she never has an answer at her
tongue's end; but if i offend her, she's sure to scarify my throat with
black pepper the next day, or else give me the colic with watery
greens.  that's an awful tit-for-tat."  here the vivacious doctor made
a pathetic grimace.

"did you ever hear the like?"  said mrs. kimble, laughing above her
double chin with much good-humour, aside to mrs. crackenthorp, who
blinked and nodded, and seemed to intend a smile, which, by the
correlation of forces, went off in small twitchings and noises.

"i suppose that's the sort of tit-for-tat adopted in your profession,
kimble, if you've a grudge against a patient," said the rector.

"never do have a grudge against our patients," said mr. kimble, "except
when they leave us: and then, you see, we haven't the chance of
prescribing 
 
 ___________________________
 
for 'em.  ha, miss nancy," he continued, suddenly skipping
to nancy's side, "you won't forget your promise? you're to save a dance
for me, you know."

"come, come, kimble, don't you be too for'ard," said the squire. "give
the young uns fair-play.  there's my son godfrey'll be wanting to have
a round with you if you run off with miss nancy. he's bespoke her for
the first dance, i'll be bound.  eh, sir!  what do you say?"  he
continued, throwing himself backward, and looking at godfrey.  "haven't
you asked miss nancy to open the dance with you?"

godfrey, sorely uncomfortable under this significant insistence about
nancy, and afraid to think where it would end by 
 
 ___________________________
 
't been before me."

"no, i've not engaged myself," said nancy, quietly, though blushingly.
(if mr. godfrey founded any hopes on her consenting to dance with him,
he would soon be undeceived; but there was no need for her to be
uncivil.)

"then i hope you've no objections to dancing with me," said godfrey,
beginning to lose the sense that there was anything uncomfortable in
this arrangement.

"no, no objections," said nancy, in a cold tone.

"ah, well, you're a lucky fellow, godfrey," said uncle kimble; "but
you're my godson, so i won't stand in your way.  else i'm not so very
old, eh, my dear?"  he went on, skipping to his wife's side again.
"you wouldn't mind my having a second after you were gone--not if i
cried a good deal first?"

"come, come, take a cup o' tea and stop your tongue, do," said
good-humoured mrs. kimble, feeling some pride in a husband who must be
regarded as so clever and amusing by the company generally.  if he had
only not been irritable at cards!

while safe, well-test
 
 ___________________________
 
d
sunk low in the furze, and half-covered with the shaken snow.



chapter xiii

it was after the early supper-time at the red house, and the
entertainment was in that stage when bashfulness itself had passed into
easy jollity, when gentlemen, conscious of unusual accomplishments,
could at length be prevailed on to dance a hornpipe, and when the
squire preferred talking loudly, scattering snuff, and patting his
visitors' backs, to sitting longer at the whist-table--a choice
exasperating to uncle kimble, who, being always volatile in sober
business hours, became intense and bitter over cards and brandy,
shuffled before his adversary's deal with a glare of suspicion, and
turned up a mean trump-card with an air of inexpressible disgust, as if
in a world where such things could happen one might as well enter on a
course of reckless profligacy. when the evening had advanced to this
pitch of freedom and enjoyment, it was usual for the servants, the
heavy duties of supper being well over, to get the
 
 ___________________________
 
inmate to have found a nestling-place in godfrey's
kindly disposition; but no disposition is a security from evil wishes
to a man whose happiness hangs on duplicity.

"hush, hush!"  said mr. crackenthorp.  "go out into the hall there.
i'll fetch the doctor to you.  found a woman in the snow--and thinks
she's dead," he added, speaking low to the squire. "better say as
little about it as possible: it will shock the ladies.  just tell them
a poor woman is ill from cold and hunger. i'll go and fetch kimble."

by this time, however, the ladies had pressed forward, curious to know
what could have brought the solitary linen-weaver there under such
strange circumstances, and interested in the pretty child, who, half
alarmed and half attracted by the brightness and the numerous company,
now frowned and hid her face, now lifted up her head again and looked
round placably, until a touch or a coaxing word brought back the frown,
and made her bury her face with new determination.

"what child is it?"  sai
 
 ___________________________
 
d several ladies at once, and, among the rest,
nancy lammeter, addressing godfrey.

"i don't know--some poor woman's who has been found in the snow, i
believe," was the answer godfrey wrung from himself with a terrible
effort.  ("after all, _am_ i certain?"  he hastened to add, silently,
in anticipation of his own conscience.)

"why, you'd better leave the child here, then, master marner," said
good-natured mrs. kimble, hesitating, however, to take those dingy
clothes into contact with her own ornamented satin bodice. "i'll tell
one o' the girls to fetch it."

"no--no--i can't part with it, i can't let it go," said silas,
abruptly.  "it's come to me--i've a right to keep it."

the proposition to take the child from him had come to silas quite
unexpectedly, and his speech, uttered under a strong sudden impulse,
was almost like a revelation to himself: a minute before, he had no
distinct intention about the chi
 
 ___________________________
 
ld.

"did you ever hear the like?"  said mrs. kimble, in mild surprise, to
her neighbour.

"now, ladies, i must trouble you to stand aside," said mr. kimble,
coming from the card-room, in some bitterness at the interruption, but
drilled by the long habit of his profession into obedience to
unpleasant calls, even when he was hardly sober.

"it's a nasty business turning out now, eh, kimble?"  said the squire.
"he might ha' gone for your young fellow--the 'prentice, there--what's
his name?"

"might?  aye--what's the use of talking about might?"  growled uncle
kimble, hastening out with marner, and followed by mr. crackenthorp and
godfrey.  "get me a pair of thick boots, godfrey, will you?  and stay,
let somebody run to winthrop's and fetch dolly--she's the best woman to
get.  ben was here himself before supper; is he gone?"

"yes, sir, i met him," said marner; "but i couldn't stop
 
 ___________________________
 
he house, and so i went in to where
the company was."

the child, no longer distracted by the bright light and the smiling
women's faces, began to cry and call for "mammy", though always
clinging to marner, who had apparently won her thorough confidence.
godfrey had come back with the boots, and felt the cry as if some fibre
were drawn tight within him.

"i'll go," he said, hastily, eager for some movement; "i'll go and
fetch the woman--mrs. winthrop."

"oh, pooh--send somebody else," said uncle kimble, hurrying away with
marner.

"you'll let me know if i can be of any use, kimble," said mr.
crackenthorp.  but the doctor was out of hearing.

godfrey, too, had disappeared: he was gone to snatch his hat and coat,
having just reflection enough to remember that he must not look like a
madman; but he rushed out of the house into the snow without heeding
his thin shoes.

in a few minutes he was on his rapid way to the stone-pits by the side
of dolly, who, though feeling that she was entirely in her
 
 ___________________________
 
leaped away from all restraint toward the sudden prospect of
deliverance from his long bondage.

"is she dead?"  said the voice that predominated over every other
within him.  "if she is, i may marry nancy; and then i shall be a good
fellow in future, and have no secrets, and the child--shall be taken
care of somehow."  but across that vision came the other
possibility--"she may live, and then it's all up with me."

godfrey never knew how long it was before the door of the cottage
opened and mr. kimble came out.  he went forward to meet his uncle,
prepared to suppress the agitation he must feel, whatever news he was
to hear.

"i waited for you, as i'd come so far," he said, speaking first.

"pooh, it was nonsense for you to come out: why didn't you send one of
the men?  there's nothing to be done.  she's dead--has been dead for
hours, i should say."

"what sort of woman is she?"  said godfrey, feeling the blood rush to
his face.

"a young woman, but emaciated, with long black hair.  some
vagr
 
 ___________________________
 
ant--quite in rags.  she's got a wedding-ring on, however.  they
must fetch her away to the workhouse to-morrow.  come, come along."

"i want to look at her," said godfrey.  "i think i saw such a woman
yesterday.  i'll overtake you in a minute or two."

mr. kimble went on, and godfrey turned back to the cottage.  he cast
only one glance at the dead face on the pillow, which dolly had
smoothed with decent care; but he remembered that last look at his
unhappy hated wife so well, that at the end of sixteen years every line
in the worn face was present to him when he told the full story of this
night.

he turned immediately towards the hearth, where silas marner sat
lulling the child.  she was perfectly quiet now, but not asleep--only
soothed by sweet porrid
 
 ___________________________
 
 they've a right to take her away from me," said
marner.  "the mother's dead, and i reckon it's got no father: it's a
lone thing--and i'm a lone thing.  my money's gone, i don't know
where--and this is come from i don't know where.  i know nothing--i'm
partly mazed."

"poor little thing!"  said godfrey.  "let me give something towards
finding it clothes."

he had put his hand in his pocket and found half-a-guinea, and,
thrusting it into silas's hand, he hurried out of the cottage to
overtake mr. kimble.

"ah, i see it's not the same woman i saw," he said, as he came up.
"it's a pretty little child: the old fellow seems to want to keep it;
that's strange for a miser like him.  but i gave him a trifle to help
him out: the parish isn't likely to quarrel with him for the right to
keep the child."

"no; but i've seen the time when i might have quarrelled with him for
it myself.  it's too late now, though.  if the child ran into the fire,
your aunt's too fat to overtake it: she could only sit and g
 
 ___________________________
 
hem both, and divided the morsel between them.

but at last eppie, glancing at the clock, checked the play, and said,
"o daddy, you're wanting to go into the sunshine to smoke your pipe.
but i must clear away first, so as the house may be tidy when godmother
comes.  i'll make haste--i won't be long."

silas had taken to smoking a pipe daily during the last two years,
having been strongly urged to it by the sages of raveloe, as a practice
"good for the fits"; and this advice was sanctioned by dr. kimble, on
the ground that it was as well to try what could do no harm--a
principle which was made to answer for a great deal of work in that
gentleman's medical practice.  silas did not highly enjoy smoking, and
often wondered how his neighbours could be so fond of it; but a humble
sort of acquiescence in what was held to be good, had become a strong
habit of that new self which had been developed in him since he had
found eppie on his hearth: it had been the only clew his bewildered
mind could hold 