silas marner

the weaver of raveloe


by

george eliot

(mary anne evans)



1861



  "a child, more than all other gifts
  that earth can offer to declining man,
  brings hope with it, and forward-looking thoughts."
    --wordsworth.




part one



chapter i

in the days when the spinning-wheels hummed busily in the
farmhouses--and even great ladies, clothed in silk and thread-lace, had
their toy spinning-wheels of polished oak--there might be seen in
districts far away among the lanes, or deep in the bo
 
 ___________________________
 
ould descend from
his loom, and, opening the door, would fix on them a gaze that was
always enough to make them take to their legs in terror.  for how was
it possible to believe that those large brown protuberant eyes in silas
marner's pale face really saw nothing very distinctly that was not
close to them, and not rather that their dreadful stare could dart
cramp, or rickets, or a wry mouth at any boy who happened to be in the
rear?  they had, perhaps, heard their fathers and mothers hint that
silas marner could cure folks' rheumatism if he had a mind, and add,
still more darkly, that if you could only speak the devil fair enough,
he might save you the cost of the doctor.  such strange lingering
echoes of the old demon-worship might perhaps even now be caught by the
diligent listener among the grey-haired peasantry; for the rude mind
with difficulty associates the ideas of power and benignity.  a shadowy
conception of power that by much persuasion can be induced to refrain
from inflicting harm, i
 
 ___________________________
 
ectory, which peeped from among the trees on the other side of the
churchyard:--a village which showed at once the summits of its social
life, and told the practised eye that there was no great park and
manor-house in the vicinity, but that there were several chiefs in
raveloe who could farm badly quite at their ease, drawing enough money
from their bad farming, in those war times, to live in a rollicking
fashion, and keep a jolly christmas, whitsun, and easter tide.

it was fifteen years since silas marner had first come to raveloe; he
was then simply a pallid young man, with prominent short-sighted brown
eyes, whose appearance would have had nothing strange for people of
average culture and experience, but for the villagers near whom he had
come to settle it had mysterious peculiarities which corresponded with
the exceptional nature of his occupation, and his advent from an
unknown region called "north'ard".  so had his way of life:--he invited
no comer to step across his door-sill, and he never
 
 ___________________________
 
, save for the purposes of his
calling, or in order to supply himself with necessaries; and it was
soon clear to the raveloe lasses that he would never urge one of them
to accept him against her will--quite as if he had heard them declare
that they would never marry a dead man come to life again.  this view
of marner's personality was not without another ground than his pale
face and unexampled eyes; for jem rodney, the mole-catcher, averred
that one evening as he was returning homeward, he saw silas marner
leaning against a stile with a heavy bag on his back, instead of
resting the bag on the stile as a man in his senses would have done;
and that, on coming up to him, he saw that marner's eyes were set like
a dead man's, and he spoke to him, and shook him, and his limbs were
stiff, and his hands clutched the bag as if they'd been made of iron;
but just as he had made up his mind that the weaver was dead, he came
all right again, like, as you might say, in the winking of an eye, and
said "good-nig
 
 ___________________________
 
n to the more provident cottagers, who had their little stock of
yarn at the year's end. their sense of his usefulness would have
counteracted any repugnance or suspicion which was not confirmed by a
deficiency in the quality or the tale of the cloth he wove for them.
and the years had rolled on without producing any change in the
impressions of the neighbours concerning marner, except the change from
novelty to habit.  at the end of fifteen years the raveloe men said
just the same things about silas marner as at the beginning: they did
not say them quite so often, but they believed them much more strongly
when they did say them.  there was only one important addition which
the years had brought: it was, that master marner had laid by a fine
sight of money somewhere, and that he could buy up "bigger men" than
himself.

but while opinion concerning him had remained nearly stationary, and
his daily habits had presented scarcely any visible change, marner's
inward life had been a history and a metamo
 
 ___________________________
 

measures for finding out the truth, and they resolved on praying and
drawing lots.  this resolution can be a ground of surprise only to
those who are unacquainted with that obscure religious life which has
gone on in the alleys of our towns.  silas knelt with his brethren,
relying on his own innocence being certified by immediate divine
interference, but feeling that there was sorrow and mourning behind for
him even then--that his trust in man had been cruelly bruised.  _the
lots declared that silas marner was guilty._  he was solemnly suspended
from church-membership, and called upon to render up the stolen money:
only on confession, as the sign of repentance, could he be received
once more within the folds of the church. marner listened in silence.
at last, when everyone rose to depart, he went towards william dane and
said, in a voice shaken by agitation--

"the last time i remember using my knife, was when i took it out to cut
a strap for you.  i don't remember putting it in my pocket again.

 
 ___________________________
 
k refuge from benumbing unbelief, by
getting into his loom and working away as usual; and before many hours
were past, the minister and one of the deacons came to him with the
message from sarah, that she held her engagement to him at an end.
silas received the message mutely, and then turned away from the
messengers to work at his loom again.  in little more than a month from
that time, sarah was married to william dane; and not long afterwards
it was known to the brethren in lantern yard that silas marner had
departed from the town.



chapter ii

even people whose lives have been made various by learning, sometimes
find it hard to keep a fast hold on their habitual views of life, on
their faith in the invisible, nay, on the sense that their past joys
and sorrows are a real experience, when they are suddenly transported
to a new land, where the beings around them know nothing of their
history, and share none of their ideas--where their mother earth shows
another lap, and human life has other for
 
 ___________________________
 
world than the world in
raveloe?--orchards looking lazy with neglected plenty; the large church
in the wide churchyard, which men gazed at lounging at their own doors
in service-time; the purple-faced farmers jogging along the lanes or
turning in at the rainbow; homesteads, where men supped heavily and
slept in the light of the evening hearth, and where women seemed to be
laying up a stock of linen for the life to come.  there were no lips in
raveloe from which a word could fall that would stir silas marner's
benumbed faith to a sense of pain. in the early ages of the world, we
know, it was believed that each territory was inhabited and ruled by
its own divinities, so that a man could cross the bordering heights and
be out of the reach of his native gods, whose presence was confined to
the streams and the groves and the hills among which he had lived from
his birth.  and poor silas was vaguely conscious of something not
unlike the feeling of primitive men, when they fled thus, in fear or in
sullen
 
 ___________________________
 
to bring her something that would ease her, since
the doctor did her no good.  in this office of charity, silas felt, for
the first time since he had come to raveloe, a sense of unity between
his past and present life, which might have been the beginning of his
rescue from the insect-like existence into which his nature had shrunk.
but sally oates's disease had raised her into a personage of much
interest and importance among the neighbours, and the fact of her
having found relief from drinking silas marner's "stuff" became a
matter of general discourse.  when doctor kimble gave physic, it was
natural that it should have an effect; but when a weaver, who came from
nobody knew where, worked wonders with a bottle of brown waters, the
occult character of the process was evident.  such a sort of thing had
not been known since the wise woman at tarley died; and she had charms
as well as "stuff": everybody went to her when their children had fits.
silas marner must be a person of the same sort, for how 
 
 ___________________________
 
 he know
what would bring back sally oates's breath, if he didn't know a fine
sight more than that?  the wise woman had words that she muttered to
herself, so that you couldn't hear what they were, and if she tied a
bit of red thread round the child's toe the while, it would keep off
the water in the head.  there were women in raveloe, at that present
time, who had worn one of the wise woman's little bags round their
necks, and, in consequence, had never had an idiot child, as ann
coulter had.  silas marner could very likely do as much, and more; and
now it was all clear how he should have come from unknown parts, and be
so "comical-looking". but sally oates must mind and not tell the
doctor, for he would be sure to set his face against marner: he was
always angry about the wise woman, and used to threaten those who went
to her that they should have none of his help any more.

silas now found himself and his cottage suddenly beset by mothers who
wanted him to charm away the whooping-cough, or brin
 
 ___________________________
 
; there were old labourers in the parish of raveloe who were known
to have their savings by them, probably inside their flock-beds; but
their rustic neighbours, though not all of them as honest as their
ancestors in the days of king alfred, had not imaginations bold enough
to lay a plan of burglary.  how could they have spent the money in
their own village without betraying themselves?  they would be obliged
to "run away"--a course as dark and dubious as a balloon journey.

so, year after year, silas marner had lived in this solitude, his
guineas rising in the iron pot, and his life narrowing and hardening
itself more and more into a mere pulsation of desire and satisfaction
that had no relation to any other being.  his life had reduced itself
to the functions of weaving and hoarding, without any contemplation of
an end towards which the functions tended.  the same sort of process
has perhaps been undergone by wiser men, when they have been cut off
from faith and love--only, instead of a loom and 
 
 ___________________________
 
n mingled with that of having the
fresh clear water.  one day as he was returning from the well, he
stumbled against the step of the stile, and his brown pot, falling with
force against the stones that overarched the ditch below him, was
broken in three pieces.  silas picked up the pieces and carried them
home with grief in his heart.  the brown pot could never be of use to
him any more, but he stuck the bits together and propped the ruin in
its old place for a memorial.

this is the history of silas marner, until the fifteenth year after he
came to raveloe.  the livelong day he sat in his loom, his ear filled
with its monotony, his eyes bent close down on the slow growth of
sameness in the brownish web, his muscles moving with such even
repetition that their pause seemed almost as much a constraint as the
holding of his breath.  but at night came his revelry: at night he
closed his shutters, and made fast his doors, and drew forth his gold.
long ago the heap of coins had become too large for the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the old squire, if she never
brought a penny to her fortune; for it was to be feared that,
notwithstanding his incomings, there were more holes in his pocket than
the one where he put his own hand in.  but if mr. godfrey didn't turn
over a new leaf, he might say "good-bye" to miss nancy lammeter.

it was the once hopeful godfrey who was standing, with his hands in his
side-pockets and his back to the fire, in the dark wainscoted parlour,
one late november afternoon in that fifteenth year of silas marner's
life at raveloe.  the fading grey light fell dimly on the walls
decorated with guns, whips, and foxes' brushes, on coats and hats flung
on the chairs, on tankards sending forth a scent of flat ale, and on a
half-choked fire, with pipes propped up in the chimney-corners: signs
of a domestic life destitute of any hallowing charm, with which the
look of gloomy vexation on godfrey's blond face was in sad accordance.
he seemed to be waiting and listening for some one's approach, and
presently the 
 
 ___________________________
 
out looking at her, and left the room,
followed humbly by the unresenting snuff--perhaps because she saw no
other career open to her.



chapter iv

dunstan cass, setting off in the raw morning, at the judiciously quiet
pace of a man who is obliged to ride to cover on his hunter, had to
take his way along the lane which, at its farther extremity, passed by
the piece of unenclosed ground called the stone-pit, where stood the
cottage, once a stone-cutter's shed, now for fifteen years inhabited by
silas marner.  the spot looked very dreary at this season, with the
moist trodden clay about it, and the red, muddy water high up in the
deserted quarry.  that was dunstan's first thought as he approached it;
the second was, that the old fool of a weaver, whose loom he heard
rattling already, had a great deal of money hidden somewhere.  how was
it that he, dunstan cass, who had often heard talk of marner's
miserliness, had never thought of suggesting to godfrey that he should
frighten or persuade the old fe
 
 ___________________________
 
stream of light: a few steps would be enough to carry
him beyond betrayal by the gleams from the shutter-chinks and the
latch-hole.  the rain and darkness had got thicker, and he was glad of
it; though it was awkward walking with both hands filled, so that it
was as much as he could do to grasp his whip along with one of the
bags.  but when he had gone a yard or two, he might take his time.  so
he stepped forward into the darkness.



chapter v

when dunstan cass turned his back on the cottage, silas marner was not
more than a hundred yards away from it, plodding along from the village
with a sack thrown round his shoulders as an overcoat, and with a horn
lantern in his hand.  his legs were weary, but his mind was at ease,
free from the presentiment of change.  the sense of security more
frequently springs from habit than from conviction, and for this reason
it often subsists after such a change in the conditions as might have
been expected to suggest alarm.  the lapse of time during which a given
 
 ___________________________
 
nt me to
believe in 'em, let 'em leave off skulking i' the dark and i' lone
places--let 'em come where there's company and candles."

"as if ghos'es 'ud want to be believed in by anybody so ignirant!" said
mr. macey, in deep disgust at the farrier's crass incompetence to
apprehend the conditions of ghostly phenomena.



chapter vii

yet the next moment there seemed to be some evidence that ghosts had a
more condescending disposition than mr. macey attributed to them; for
the pale thin figure of silas marner was suddenly seen standing in the
warm light, uttering no word, but looking round at the company with his
strange unearthly eyes.  the long pipes gave a simultaneous movement,
like the antennae of startled insects, and every man present, not
excepting even the sceptical farrier, had an impression that he saw,
not silas marner in the flesh, but an apparition; for the door by which
silas had entered was hidden by the high-screened seats, and no one had
noticed his approach. mr. macey, sitting a l
 
 ___________________________
 
ong way off the ghost,
might be supposed to have felt an argumentative triumph, which would
tend to neutralize his share of the general alarm.  had he not always
said that when silas marner was in that strange trance of his, his soul
went loose from his body?  here was the demonstration: nevertheless, on
the whole, he would have been as well contented without it.  for a few
moments there was a dead silence, marner's want of breath and agitation
not allowing him to speak.  the landlord, under the habitual sense that
he was bound to keep his house open to all company, and confident in
the protection of his unbroken neutrality, at last took on himself the
task of adjuring the ghost.

 
 ___________________________
 
e tinder-box,
a collection was made of all the articles purchased from the pedlar at
various houses, and carried to the rainbow to be exhibited there.  in
fact, there was a general feeling in the village, that for the
clearing-up of this robbery there must be a great deal done at the
rainbow, and that no man need offer his wife an excuse for going there
while it was the scene of severe public duties.

some disappointment was felt, and perhaps a little indignation also,
when it became known that silas marner, on being questioned by the
squire and the parson, had retained no other recollection of the pedlar
than that he had called at his door, but had not entered his house,
having turned away at once when silas, holding the door ajar, had said
that he wanted nothing.  this had been silas's testimony, though he
clutched strongly at the idea of the pedlar's being the culprit, if
only because it gave him a definite image of a whereabout for his gold
after it had been taken away from its hiding-place: h
 
 ___________________________
 
 like a funereal mourner who is not a relation.  it
seemed surprising that ben winthrop, who loved his quart-pot and his
joke, got along so well with dolly; but she took her husband's jokes
and joviality as patiently as everything else, considering that "men
_would_ be so", and viewing the stronger sex in the light of animals
whom it had pleased heaven to make naturally troublesome, like bulls
and turkey-cocks.

this good wholesome woman could hardly fail to have her mind drawn
strongly towards silas marner, now that he appeared in the light of a
sufferer; and one sunday afternoon she took her little boy aaron with
her, and went to call on silas, carrying in her hand some small
lard-cakes, flat paste-like articles much esteemed in raveloe. aaron,
an apple-cheeked youngster of seven, with a clean starched frill which
looked like a plate for the apples, needed all his adventurous
curiosity to embolden him against the possibility that the big-eyed
weaver might do him some bodily injury; and his dubie
 
 ___________________________
 
y blade of grass, while the half-icy red pool
shivered under the bitter wind; but towards evening the snow began to
fall, and curtained from him even that dreary outlook, shutting him
close up with his narrow grief.  and he sat in his robbed home through
the livelong evening, not caring to close his shutters or lock his
door, pressing his head between his hands and moaning, till the cold
grasped him and told him that his fire was grey.

nobody in this world but himself knew that he was the same silas marner
who had once loved his fellow with tender love, and trusted in an
unseen goodness.  even to himself that past experience had become dim.

but in raveloe village the bells rang merrily, and the church was
fuller than all through the rest of the year, with red faces among the
abundant dark-green boughs--faces prepared for a longer service than
usual by an odorous breakfast of toast and ale.  those green boughs,
the hymn and anthem never heard but at christmas--even the athanasian
creed, which was
 
 ___________________________
 
ustomed to be left to itself for long hours without notice from
its mother, squatted down on the sack, and spread its tiny hands
towards the blaze, in perfect contentment, gurgling and making many
inarticulate communications to the cheerful fire, like a new-hatched
gosling beginning to find itself comfortable.  but presently the warmth
had a lulling effect, and the little golden head sank down on the old
sack, and the blue eyes were veiled by their delicate half-transparent
lids.

but where was silas marner while this strange visitor had come to his
hearth?  he was in the cottage, but he did not see the child. during
the last few weeks, since he had lost his money, he had contracted the
habit of opening his door and looking out from time to time, as if he
thought that his money might be somehow coming back to him, or that
some trace, some news of it, might be mysteriously on the road, and be
caught by the listening ear or the straining eye.  it was chiefly at
night, when he was not occupied in his
 
 ___________________________
 
pipe was concluded, and in the
meanwhile it was very pleasant to get long glances at her quite
unobserved.

but when godfrey was lifting his eyes from one of those long glances,
they encountered an object as startling to him at that moment as if it
had been an apparition from the dead.  it _was_ an apparition from that
hidden life which lies, like a dark by-street, behind the goodly
ornamented facade that meets the sunlight and the gaze of respectable
admirers.  it was his own child, carried in silas marner's arms.  that
was his instantaneous impression, unaccompanied by doubt, though he had
not seen the child for months past; and when the hope was rising that
he might possibly be mistaken, mr. crackenthorp and mr. lammeter had
already advanced to silas, in astonishment at this strange advent.
godfrey joined them immediately, unable to rest without hearing every
word--trying to control himself, but conscious that if any one noticed
him, they must see that he was white-lipped and trembling.

but no
 
 ___________________________
 
w all eyes at that end of the room were bent on silas marner; the
squire himself had risen, and asked angrily, "how's this?--what's
this?--what do you do coming in here in this way?"

"i'm come for the doctor--i want the doctor," silas had said, in the
first moment, to mr. crackenthorp.

"why, what's the matter, marner?"  said the rector.  "the doctor's
here; but say quietly what you want him for."

"it's a woman," said silas, speaking low, and half-breathlessly, just
as godfrey came up.  "she's dead, i think--dead in the snow at the
stone-pits--not far 
 
 ___________________________
 
er," said godfrey.  "i think i saw such a woman
yesterday.  i'll overtake you in a minute or two."

mr. kimble went on, and godfrey turned back to the cottage.  he cast
only one glance at the dead face on the pillow, which dolly had
smoothed with decent care; but he remembered that last look at his
unhappy hated wife so well, that at the end of sixteen years every line
in the worn face was present to him when he told the full story of this
night.

he turned immediately towards the hearth, where silas marner sat
lulling the child.  she was perfectly quiet now, but not asleep--only
soothed by sweet porridge and warmth into that wide-gazing calm which
makes us older human beings, with our inward turmoil, feel a certain
awe in the presence of a little child, such as we feel before some
quiet majesty or beauty in the earth or sky--before a steady glowing
planet, or a full-flowered eglantine, or the bending trees over a
silent pathway.  the wide-open blue eyes looked up at godfrey's without
any uneasine
 
 ___________________________
 
ere was a pauper's burial that week in raveloe, and up kench yard at
batherley it was known that the dark-haired woman with the fair child,
who had lately come to lodge there, was gone away again. that was all
the express note taken that molly had disappeared from the eyes of men.
but the unwept death which, to the general lot, seemed as trivial as
the summer-shed leaf, was charged with the force of destiny to certain
human lives that we know of, shaping their joys and sorrows even to the
end.

silas marner's determination to keep the "tramp's child" was matter of
hardly less surprise and iterated talk in the village than the robbery
of his money.  that softening of feeling towards him which dated from
his misfortune, that merging of suspicion and dislike in a rather
contemptuous pity for him as lone and crazy, was now accompanied with a
more active sympathy, especially amongst the women.  notable mothers,
who knew what it was to keep children "whole and sweet"; lazy mothers,
who knew what it was 
 
 ___________________________
 
he felt a reformed man,
delivered from temptation; and the vision of his future life seemed to
him as a promised land for which he had no cause to fight.  he saw
himself with all his happiness centred on his own hearth, while nancy
would smile on him as he played with the children.

and that other child--not on the hearth--he would not forget it; he
would see that it was well provided for.  that was a father's duty.




part two



chapter xvi

it was a bright autumn sunday, sixteen years after silas marner had
found his new treasure on the hearth.  the bells of the old raveloe
church were ringing the cheerful peal which told that the morning
service was ended; and out of the arched doorway in the tower came
slowly, retarded by friendly greetings and questions, the richer
parishioners who had chosen this bright sunday morning as eligible for
church-going.  it was the rural fashion of that time for the more
important members of the congregation to depart first, while their
humbler neighbours waited
 
 ___________________________
 
little behind--nancy having
observed that they must wait for "father and priscilla"--and now they
all turn into a narrower path leading across the churchyard to a small
gate opposite the red house.  we will not follow them now; for may
there not be some others in this departing congregation whom we should
like to see again--some of those who are not likely to be handsomely
clad, and whom we may not recognize so easily as the master and
mistress of the red house?

but it is impossible to mistake silas marner.  his large brown eyes
seem to have gathered a longer vision, as is the way with eyes that
have been short-sighted in early life, and they have a less vague, a
more answering gaze; but in everything else one sees signs of a frame
much enfeebled by the lapse of the sixteen years.  the weaver's bent
shoulders and white hair give him almost the look of advanced age,
though he is not more than five-and-fifty; but there is the freshest
blossom of youth close by his side--a blonde dimpled girl of eig
 
 ___________________________
 
, the
day he went hunting on wildfire, the last time he was seen."

godfrey paused: it was not so easy to say what came next.  "do you
think he drowned himself?"  said nancy, almost wondering that her
husband should be so deeply shaken by what had happened all those years
ago to an unloved brother, of whom worse things had been augured.

"no, he fell in," said godfrey, in a low but distinct voice, as if he
felt some deep meaning in the fact.  presently he added: "dunstan was
the man that robbed silas marner."

the blood rushed to nancy's face and neck at this surprise and shame,
for she had been bred up to regard even a distant kinship with crime as
a dishonour.

"o godfrey!"  she said, with compassion in her tone, for she had
immediately reflected that the dishonour must be felt still more keenly
by her husband.

"there was the money in the pit," he continued--"all the weaver's
money.  everything's been gathered up, and they're taking the skeleton
to the rainbow.  but i came back to tell you: the
 
 ___________________________
 
 to me for fifteen years.  it's another you did the
wrong to; and i doubt it can never be all made up for."

"but we can take eppie now," said godfrey.  "i won't mind the world
knowing at last.  i'll be plain and open for the rest o' my life."

"it'll be different coming to us, now she's grown up," said nancy,
shaking her head sadly.  "but it's your duty to acknowledge her and
provide for her; and i'll do my part by her, and pray to god almighty
to make her love me."

"then we'll go together to silas marner's this very night, as soon as
everything's quiet at the stone-pits."



chapter xix

between eight and nine o'clock that evening, eppie and silas were
seated alone in the cottage.  after the great excitement the weaver had
undergone from the events of the afternoon, he had felt a longing for
this quietude, and had even begged mrs. winthrop and aaron, who had
naturally lingered behind every one else, to leave him alone with his
child.  the excitement had not passed away: it had only reached that