our godmother.  she'll wish the right thing by you and her
son too."

"there they come, then," said eppie.  "let us go and meet 'em. oh, the
pipe!  won't you have it lit again, father?"  said eppie, lifting that
medicinal appliance from the ground.

"nay, child," said silas, "i've done enough for to-day.  i think,
mayhap, a little of it does me more good than so much at once."



chapter xvii

while silas and eppie were seated on the bank discoursing in the
fleckered shade of the ash tree, miss priscilla lammeter was resisting
her sister's arguments, that it would be better to take tea at the red
house, and let her father have a long nap, than drive home to the
warrens so soon after dinner.  the family party (of four only) were
seated round the table in the dark wainscoted parlour, with the sunday
dessert before them, of fresh filberts, apples, and pears, duly
ornamented with leaves by nancy's own hand before the bells had rung
for church.

a great change has come over the dark wainscoted parlour since 
 
 ___________________________
 
s the churchyard and down
the village, she seemed to be attired in pure white, and her hair
looked like the dash of gold on a lily.  one hand was on her husband's
arm, and with the other she clasped the hand of her father silas.

"you won't be giving me away, father," she had said before they went to
church; "you'll only be taking aaron to be a son to you."

dolly winthrop walked behind with her husband; and there ended the
little bridal procession.

there were many eyes to look at it, and miss priscilla lammeter was
glad that she and her father had happened to drive up to the door of
the red house just in time to see this pretty sight.  they had come to
keep nancy company to-day, because mr. cass had had to go away to
lytherley, for special reasons.  that seemed to be a pity, for
otherwise he might have gone, as mr. crackenthorp and mr. osgood
certainly would, to look on at the wedding-feast which he had ordered
at the rainbow, naturally feeling a great interest in the weaver who
had been wronged by on