idn't see lights i' the stables, nor hear the stamping o' the hosses,
nor the cracking o' the whips, and howling, too, if it's tow'rt
daybreak.  "cliff's holiday" has been the name of it ever sin' i were a
boy; that's to say, some said as it was the holiday old harry gev him
from roasting, like.  that's what my father told me, and he was a
reasonable man, though there's folks nowadays know what happened afore
they were born better nor they know their own business."

"what do you say to that, eh, dowlas?"  said the landlord, turning to
the farrier, who was swelling with impatience for his cue. "there's a
nut for _you_ to crack."

mr. dowlas was the negative spirit in the company, and was proud of his
position.

"say?  i say what a man _should_ say as doesn't shut his eyes to look
at a finger-post.  i say, as i'm ready to wager any man ten pound, if
he'll stand out wi' me any dry night in the pasture before the warren
stables, as we shall neither see lights nor hear noises, if it isn't
the blow
 
 ___________________________
 
ing of our own noses.  that's what i say, and i've said it many
a time; but there's nobody 'ull ventur a ten-pun' note on their ghos'es
as they make so sure of."

"why, dowlas, that's easy betting, that is," said ben winthrop. "you
might as well bet a man as he wouldn't catch the rheumatise if he stood
up to 's neck in the pool of a frosty night.  it 'ud be fine fun for a
man to win his bet as he'd catch the rheumatise. folks as believe in
cliff's holiday aren't agoing to ventur near it for a matter o' ten
pound."

"if master dowlas wants to know the truth on it," said mr. macey, with
a sarcastic smile, tapping his thumbs together, "he's no call to lay
any bet--let h
 
 ___________________________
 
im; and then he can let the parish'ners know if they're wrong."

"thank you!  i'm obliged to you," said the farrier, with a snort of
scorn.  "if folks are fools, it's no business o' mine.  _i_ don't want
to make out the truth about ghos'es: i know it a'ready. but i'm not
against a bet--everything fair and open.  let any man bet me ten pound
as i shall see cliff's holiday, and i'll go and stand by myself.  i
want no company.  i'd as lief do it as i'd fill this pipe."

"ah, but who's to watch you, dowlas, and see you do it?  that's no fair
bet," said the butcher.

"no fair bet?"  replied mr. dowlas, angrily.  "i should like to hear
any man stand up and say i want to bet unfair.  come now, master lundy,
i should like to hear you say it."

"very like you would," said the butcher.  "but it's no business o'
mine.  you're none o' my bargains, and i aren't a-going to try and
'bate your price.  if anybody 'll bid for you at your own vallying, let
him.  i'm for peace and quietness, i am."

"yes, that's
 
 ___________________________
 
 what every yapping cur is, when you hold a stick up at
him," said the farrier.  "but i'm afraid o' neither man nor ghost, and
i'm ready to lay a fair bet.  _i_ aren't a turn-tail cur."

"aye, but there's this in it, dowlas," said the landlord, speaking in a
tone of much candour and tolerance.  "there's folks, i' my opinion,
they can't see ghos'es, not if they stood as plain as a pike-staff
before 'em.  and there's reason i' that.  for there's my wife, now,
can't smell, not if she'd the strongest o' cheese under her nose.  i
never see'd a ghost myself; but then i says to myself, "very like i
haven't got the smell for 'em."  i mean, putting a ghost for a smell,
or else contrairiways.  and so, i'm for holding with b
 
 ___________________________
 
oth sides; for,
as i say, the truth lies between 'em.  and if dowlas was to go and
stand, and say he'd never seen a wink o' cliff's holiday all the night
through, i'd back him; and if anybody said as cliff's holiday was
certain sure, for all that, i'd back _him_ too.  for the smell's what i
go by."

the landlord's analogical argument was not well received by the
farrier--a man intensely opposed to compromise.

"tut, tut," he said, setting down his glass with refreshed irritation;
"what's the smell got to do with it?  did ever a ghost give a man a
black eye?  tha
 
 ___________________________
 
mr. macey,
wondering a little at his own "'cuteness".

there was a hot debate upon this, the farrier being of course
indisposed to renounce the quality of doctor, but contending that a
doctor could be a constable if he liked--the law meant, he needn't be
one if he didn't like.  mr. macey thought this was nonsense, since the
law was not likely to be fonder of doctors than of other folks.
moreover, if it was in the nature of doctors more than of other men not
to like being constables, how came mr. dowlas to be so eager to act in
that capacity?

"_i_ don't want to act the constable," said the farrier, driven into a
corner by this merciless reasoning; "and there's no man can say it of
me, if he'd tell the truth.  but if there's to be any jealousy and
en_vy_ing about going to kench's in the rain, let them go as like
it--you won't get me to go, i can tell you."

by the landlord's intervention, however, the dispute was accommodated.
mr. dowlas consented to go as a second person disinclined to act
of