ed to enjoy his drink the more when other
people went dry--always provided that his doings did not bring trouble
on a family like squire cass's, with a monument in the church, and
tankards older than king george.  but it would be a thousand pities if
mr. godfrey, the eldest, a fine open-faced good-natured young man who
was to come into the land some day, should take to going along the same
road with his brother, as he had seemed to do of late.  if he went on
in that way, he would lose miss nancy lammeter; for it was well known
that she had looked very shyly on him ever since last whitsuntide
twelvemonth, when there was so much talk about his being away from home
days and days together. there was something wrong, more than
common--that was quite clear; for mr. godfrey didn't look half so
fresh-coloured and open as he used to do.  at one time everybody was
saying, what a handsome couple he and miss nancy lammeter would make!
and if she could come to be mistress at the red house, there would be a

 
 ___________________________
 
fine change, for the lammeters had been brought up in that way, that
they never suffered a pinch of salt to be wasted, and yet everybody in
their household had of the best, according to his place.  such a
daughter-in-law would be a saving to the old squire, if she never
brought a penny to her fortune; for it was to be feared that,
notwithstanding his incomings, there were more holes in his pocket than
the one where he put his own hand in.  but if mr. godfrey didn't turn
over a new leaf, he might say "good-bye" to miss nancy
 
 ___________________________
 
 lammeter.

it was the once hopeful godfrey who was standing, with his hands in his
side-pockets and his back to the fire, in the dark wainscoted parlour,
one late november afternoon in that fifteenth year of silas marner's
life at raveloe.  the fading grey light fell dimly on the walls
decorated with guns, whips, and foxes' brushes, on coats and hats flung
on the chairs, on tankards sending forth a scent of flat ale, and on a
half-choked fire, with pipes propped up in the chimney-corners: signs
of a dom
 
 ___________________________
 
on were not contingent, they were
certain; whereas betrayal was not certain. from the near vision of that
certainty he fell back on suspense and vacillation with a sense of
repose.  the disinherited son of a small squire, equally disinclined to
dig and to beg, was almost as helpless as an uprooted tree, which, by
the favour of earth and sky, has grown to a handsome bulk on the spot
where it first shot upward. perhaps it would have been possible to
think of digging with some cheerfulness if nancy lammeter were to be
won on those terms; but, since he must irrevocably lose _her_ as well
as the inheritance, and must break every tie but the one that degraded
him and left him without motive for trying to recover his better self,
he could imagine no future for himself on the other side of confession
but that of "'listing for a soldier"--the most desperate step, short of
suicide, in the eyes of respectable families.  no!  he would rather
trust to casualties than to his own resolve--rather go on sitting
 
 ___________________________
 
or it."

"make your tender heart easy," said dunstan, opening the door. "you
never knew me see double when i'd got a bargain to make; it 'ud spoil
the fun.  besides, whenever i fall, i'm warranted to fall on my legs."

with that, dunstan slammed the door behind him, and left godfrey to
that bitter rumination on his personal circumstances which was now
unbroken from day to day save by the excitement of sporting, drinking,
card-playing, or the rarer and less oblivious pleasure of seeing miss
nancy lammeter.  the subtle and varied pains springing from the higher
sensibility that accompanies higher culture, are perhaps less pitiable
than that dreary absence of impersonal enjoyment and consolation which
leaves ruder minds to the perpetual urgent companionship of their own
griefs and discontents.  the lives of those rural forefathers, whom we
are apt to think very prosaic figures--men whose only work was to ride
round their land, getting heavier and heavier in their saddles, and who
passed the rest o
 
 ___________________________
 
ctim, the iron bit that destiny had put into his mouth would
have chafed him less intolerably.  if the curses he muttered half aloud
when he was alone had had no other object than dunstan's diabolical
cunning, he might have shrunk less from the consequences of avowal.
but he had something else to curse--his own vicious folly, which now
seemed as mad and unaccountable to him as almost all our follies and
vices do when their promptings have long passed away.  for four years
he had thought of nancy lammeter, and wooed her with tacit patient
worship, as the woman who made him think of the future with joy: she
would be his wife, and would make home lovely to him, as his father's
home had never been; and it would be easy, when she was always near, to
shake off those foolish habits that were no pleasures, but only a
feverish way of annulling vacancy.  godfrey's was an essentially
domestic nature, bred up in a home where the hearth had no smiles, and
where the daily habits were not chastised by the pre
 
 ___________________________
 
he would be in when the ugly secret was disclosed; and the
desire that continually triumphed over every other was that of warding
off the evil day, when he would have to bear the consequences of his
father's violent resentment for the wound inflicted on his family
pride--would have, perhaps, to turn his back on that hereditary ease
and dignity which, after all, was a sort of reason for living, and
would carry with him the certainty that he was banished for ever from
the sight and esteem of nancy lammeter.  the longer the interval, the
more chance there was of deliverance from some, at least, of the
hateful consequences to which he had sold himself; the more
opportunities remained for him to snatch the strange gratification of
seeing nancy, and gathering some faint indications of her lingering
regard.  towards this gratification he was impelled, fitfully, every
now and then, after having passed weeks in which he had avoided her as
the far-off bright-winged prize that only made him spring forward
 
 ___________________________
 
me triumph; "i know who it is has got the red
durhams o' this country-side.  and she'd a white star on her brow, i'll
bet a penny?"  the farrier leaned forward with his hands on his knees
as he put this question, and his eyes twinkled knowingly.

"well; yes--she might," said the butcher, slowly, considering that he
was giving a decided affirmative.  "i don't say contrairy."

"i knew that very well," said the farrier, throwing himself backward
again, and speaking defiantly; "if _i_ don't know mr. lammeter's cows,
i should like to know who does--that's all. and as for the cow you've
bought, bargain or no bargain, i've been at the drenching of
her--contradick me who will."

the farrier looked fierce, and the mild butcher's conversational spirit
was roused a little.

"i'm not for contradicking no man," he said; "i'm for peace and
quietness.  some are for cutting long ribs--i'm for cutting 'em short
myself; but _i_ don't quarrel with 'em.  all i say is, it's a lovely
carkiss--and anybody as was reas
 
 ___________________________
 
onable, it 'ud bring tears into their
eyes to look at it."

"well, it's the cow as i drenched, whatever it is," pursued the
farrier, angrily; "and it was mr. lammeter's cow, else you told a lie
when you said it was a red durham."

"i tell no lies," said the butcher, with the same mild huskiness as
before, "and i contradick none--not if a man was to swear himself
black: he's no meat o' mine, nor none o' my bargains.  all i say is,
it's a lovely carkiss.  and what i say, i'll stick to; but i'll quarrel
wi' no man."

"no," said the farrier, with bitter sarcasm, looking at the company
generally; "and p'rhaps you aren't pig-headed; and p'rhaps you didn't
say the 
 
 ___________________________
 
cow was a red durham; and p'rhaps you didn't say she'd got a
star on her brow--stick to that, now you're at it."

"come, come," said the landlord; "let the cow alone.  the truth lies
atween you: you're both right and both wrong, as i allays say. and as
for the cow's being mr. lammeter's, i say nothing to that; but this i
say, as the rainbow's the rainbow.  and for the matter o' that, if the
talk is to be o' the lammeters, _you_ know the most upo' that head, eh,
mr. macey?  you remember when first mr. lammeter's father come into
these parts, and took the warrens?"

mr. macey, tailor and parish-clerk, the latter of which functions
rheumatism had of late obliged him to share with a small-featured young
man who sat opposite him, held his white head on one side, and twirled
his thumbs with an air of complacency, slightly seasoned with
criticism.  he smiled pityingly, in answer to the landlord's appeal,
and said--


 
 ___________________________
 
ed in our village,
and could give us a tune when we liked; eh, mr. macey?  i'd keep him in
liver and lights for nothing--that i would."

"aye, aye," said mr. macey, in the height of complacency; "our family's
been known for musicianers as far back as anybody can tell. but them
things are dying out, as i tell solomon every time he comes round;
there's no voices like what there used to be, and there's nobody
remembers what we remember, if it isn't the old crows."

"aye, you remember when first mr. lammeter's father come into these
parts, don't you, mr. macey?"  said the landlord.

"i should think i did," said the old man, who had now gone through that
complimentary process necessary to bring him up to the point of
narration; "and a fine old gentleman he was--as fine, and finer nor the
mr. lammeter as now is.  he came from a bit north'ard, so far as i
could ever make out.  but there's nobody rightly knows about those
parts: only it couldn't be far north'ard, nor much different from this
country, f
 
 ___________________________
 
.  but they said it was along of his wife's dying; though there's
reasons in things as nobody knows on--that's pretty much what i've made
out; yet some folks are so wise, they'll find you fifty reasons
straight off, and all the while the real reason's winking at 'em in the
corner, and they niver see't.  howsomever, it was soon seen as we'd got
a new parish'ner as know'd the rights and customs o' things, and kep a
good house, and was well looked on by everybody.  and the young
man--that's the mr. lammeter as now is, for he'd niver a sister--soon
begun to court miss osgood, that's the sister o' the mr. osgood as now
is, and a fine handsome lass she was--eh, you can't think--they pretend
this young lass is like her, but that's the way wi' people as don't
know what come before 'em.  _i_ should know, for i helped the old
rector, mr. drumlow as was, i helped him marry 'em."

here mr. macey paused; he always gave his narrative in instalments,
expecting to be questioned according to precedent.

"aye, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd a partic'lar thing happened, didn't it, mr. macey, so as you
were likely to remember that marriage?"  said the landlord, in a
congratulatory tone.

"i should think there did--a _very_ partic'lar thing," said mr. macey,
nodding sideways.  "for mr. drumlow--poor old gentleman, i was fond on
him, though he'd got a bit confused in his head, what wi' age and wi'
taking a drop o' summat warm when the service come of a cold morning.
and young mr. lammeter, he'd have no way but he must be married in
janiwary, which, to be sure, 's a unreasonable time to be married in,
for it isn't like a christening or a burying, as you can't help; and so
mr. drumlow--poor old gentleman, i was fond on him--but when he come to
put the questions, he put 'em by the rule o' contrairy, like, and he
says, "wilt thou have this man to thy wedded wife?"  says he, and then
he says, "wilt thou have this woman to thy wedded husband?" says he.
but the partic'larest thing of a
 
 ___________________________
 
ut wi' everything, but respectful, as i allays did.  and he made light
on it, and he says, "pooh, pooh, macey, make yourself easy," he says;
"it's neither the meaning nor the words--it's the re_ges_ter does
it--that's the glue."  so you see he settled it easy; for parsons and
doctors know everything by heart, like, so as they aren't worreted wi'
thinking what's the rights and wrongs o' things, as i'n been many and
many's the time.  and sure enough the wedding turned out all right,
on'y poor mrs. lammeter--that's miss osgood as was--died afore the
lasses was growed up; but for prosperity and everything respectable,
there's no family more looked on."

every one of mr. macey's audience had heard this story many times, but
it was listened to as if it had been a favourite tune, and at certain
points the puffing of the pipes was momentarily suspended, that the
listeners might give their whole minds to the expected words.  but
there was more to come; and mr. snell, the landlord, duly put the
leading q
 
 ___________________________
 
uestion.

"why, old mr. lammeter had a pretty fortin, didn't they say, when he
come into these parts?"

"well, yes," said mr. macey; "but i daresay it's as much as this mr.
lammeter's done to keep it whole.  for there was allays a talk as
nobody could get rich on the warrens: though he holds it cheap, for
it's what they call charity land."

"aye, and there's few folks know so well as you how it come to be
charity land, eh, mr. macey?"  said the butcher.

"how should they?"  said the old clerk, with some contempt. "why, my
gran
 
 ___________________________
 
things together."

"well, sir, i've often offered to take the management of things, but
you know you've taken it ill always, and seemed to think i wanted to
push you out of your place."

"i know nothing o' your offering or o' my taking it ill," said the
squire, whose memory consisted in certain strong impressions unmodified
by detail; "but i know, one while you seemed to be thinking o'
marrying, and i didn't offer to put any obstacles in your way, as some
fathers would.  i'd as lieve you married lammeter's daughter as
anybody.  i suppose, if i'd said you nay, you'd ha' kept on with it;
but, for want o' contradiction, you've changed your mind.  you're a
shilly-shally fellow: you take after your poor mother.  she never had a
will of her own; a woman has no call for one, if she's got a proper man
for her husband.  but _your_ wife had need have one, for you hardly
know your own mind enough to make both your legs walk one way.  the
lass hasn't said downright she won't have you, has she?"

"no," said
 
 ___________________________
 
 godfrey, feeling very hot and uncomfortable; "but i don't
think she will."

"think!  why haven't you the courage to ask her?  do you stick to it,
you want to have _her_--that's the thing?"

"there's no other woman i want to marry," said godfrey, evasively.

"well, then, let me make the offer for you, that's all, if you haven't
the pluck to do it yourself.  lammeter isn't likely to be loath for his
daughter to marry into _my_ family, i should think. and as for the
pretty lass, she wouldn't have her cousin--and there's nobody else, as
i see, could ha' stood in your way."

"i'd rather let it be, please sir, at present," said godfrey, in alarm.
"i think she's a little offended with me just now, and i should like to
speak for myself.  a man must manage these things for himself."

"well, speak, then, and manage it, and see if you can't turn over a new
leaf.  th
 
 ___________________________
 
 moving towards the door.

"confound it, sir, don't stay arguing, but go and order my horse," said
the squire, taking up a pipe.

godfrey left the room, hardly knowing whether he were more relieved by
the sense that the interview was ended without having made any change
in his position, or more uneasy that he had entangled himself still
further in prevarication and deceit.  what had passed about his
proposing to nancy had raised a new alarm, lest by some after-dinner
words of his father's to mr. lammeter he should be thrown into the
embarrassment of being obliged absolutely to decline her when she
seemed to be within his reach.  he fled to his usual refuge, that of
hoping for some unforeseen turn of fortune, some favourable chance
which would save him from unpleasant consequences--perhaps even justify
his insincerity by manifesting its prudence. and in this point of
trusting to some throw of fortune's dice, godfrey can hardly be called
specially old-fashioned.  favourable chance, i fancy, is th
 
 ___________________________
 
 much drinking.



chapter xi

some women, i grant, would not appear to advantage seated on a pillion,
and attired in a drab joseph and a drab beaver-bonnet, with a crown
resembling a small stew-pan; for a garment suggesting a coachman's
greatcoat, cut out under an exiguity of cloth that would only allow of
miniature capes, is not well adapted to conceal deficiencies of
contour, nor is drab a colour that will throw sallow cheeks into lively
contrast.  it was all the greater triumph to miss nancy lammeter's
beauty that she looked thoroughly bewitching in that costume, as,
seated on the pillion behind her tall, erect father, she held one arm
round him, and looked down, with open-eyed anxiety, at the treacherous
snow-covered pools and puddles, which sent up formidable splashings of
mud under the stamp of dobbin's foot.  a painter would, perhaps, have
preferred her in those moments when she was free from
self-consciousness; but certainly the bloom on her cheeks was at its
highest point of contrast 
 
 ___________________________
 
l continue to pay you marked attentions; besides, why didn't
he always show the same attentions, if he meant them sincerely, instead
of being so strange as mr. godfrey cass was, sometimes behaving as if
he didn't want to speak to her, and taking no notice of her for weeks
and weeks, and then, all on a sudden, almost making love again?
moreover, it was quite plain he had no real love for her, else he would
not let people have _that_ to say of him which they did say. did he
suppose that miss nancy lammeter was to be won by any man, squire or no
squire, who led a bad life?  that was not what she had been used to see
in her own father, who was the soberest and best man in that
country-side, only a little hot and hasty now and then, if things were
not done to the minute.

all these thoughts rushed through miss nancy's mind, in their habitual
succession, in the moments between her first sight of mr. godfrey cass
standing at the door and her own arrival there. happily, the squire
came out too and gave
 
 ___________________________
 
at it had been watched for from the windows, for mrs. kimble,
who did the honours at the red house on these great occasions, came
forward to meet miss nancy in the hall, and conduct her up-stairs.
mrs. kimble was the squire's sister, as well as the doctor's wife--a
double dignity, with which her diameter was in direct proportion; so
that, a journey up-stairs being rather fatiguing to her, she did not
oppose miss nancy's request to be allowed to find her way alone to the
blue room, where the miss lammeters' bandboxes had been deposited on
their arrival in the morning.

there was hardly a bedroom in the house where feminine compliments were
not passing and feminine toilettes going forward, in various stages, in
space made scanty by extra beds spread upon the floor; and miss nancy,
as she entered the blue room, had to make her little formal curtsy to a
group of six.  on the one hand, there were ladies no less important
than the two miss gunns, the wine merchant's daughters from lytherly,
dressed i
 
 ___________________________
 
caps of her neighbours.  she approached miss
nancy with much primness, and said, with a slow, treble suavity--

"niece, i hope i see you well in health."  miss nancy kissed her aunt's
cheek dutifully, and answered, with the same sort of amiable primness,
"quite well, i thank you, aunt; and i hope i see you the same."

"thank you, niece; i keep my health for the present.  and how is my
brother-in-law?"

these dutiful questions and answers were continued until it was
ascertained in detail that the lammeters were all as well as usual, and
the osgoods likewise, also that niece priscilla must certainly arrive
shortly, and that travelling on pillions in snowy weather was
unpleasant, though a joseph was a great protection.  then nancy was
formally introduced to her aunt's visitors, the miss gunns, as being
the daughters of a mother known to _their_ mother, though now for the
first time induced to make a journey into these parts; and these ladies
were so taken by surprise at finding such a lovely face 
 
 ___________________________
 
d take notions
in your head and be an old maid, because some folks are no better than
they should be?  i haven't a bit o' patience with you--sitting on an
addled egg for ever, as if there was never a fresh un in the world.
one old maid's enough out o' two sisters; and i shall do credit to a
single life, for god a'mighty meant me for it.  come, we can go down
now.  i'm as ready as a mawkin _can_ be--there's nothing awanting to
frighten the crows, now i've got my ear-droppers in."

as the two miss lammeters walked into the large parlour together, any
one who did not know the character of both might certainly have
supposed that the reason why the square-shouldered, clumsy,
high-featured priscilla wore a dress the facsimile of her pretty
sister's, was either the mistaken vanity of the one, or the malicious
contrivance of the other in order to set off her own rare beauty.  but
the good-natured self-forgetful cheeriness and common-sense of
priscilla would soon have dissipated the one suspicion; and t
 
 ___________________________
 
he modest
calm of nancy's speech and manners told clearly of a mind free from all
disavowed devices.

places of honour had been kept for the miss lammeters near the head of
the principal tea-table in the wainscoted parlour, now looking fresh
and pleasant with handsome branches of holly, yew, and laurel, from the
abundant growths of the old garden; and nancy felt an inward flutter,
that no firmness of purpose could prevent, when she saw mr. godfrey
cass advancing to lead her to a seat between himself and mr.
crackenthorp, while priscilla was called to the opposite side between
her father and the squire.  it certainly did make some difference to
na
 
 ___________________________
 
rayed out more widely, till he had tapped the
youngest guests on the back and shown a peculiar fondness for their
presence, in the full belief that they must feel their lives made happy
by their belonging to a parish where there was such a hearty man as
squire cass to invite them and wish them well.  even in this early
stage of the jovial mood, it was natural that he should wish to supply
his son's deficiencies by looking and speaking for him.

"aye, aye," he began, offering his snuff-box to mr. lammeter, who for
the second time bowed his head and waved his hand in stiff rejection of
the offer, "us old fellows may wish ourselves young to-night, when we
see the mistletoe-bough in the white parlour. it's true, most things
are gone back'ard in these last thirty years--the country's going down
since the old king fell ill.  but when i look at miss nancy here, i
begin to think the lasses keep up their quality;--ding me if i remember
a sample to match her, not when i was a fine young fellow, and thoug
 
 ___________________________
 
e old man with an abundant crop of long white
hair reaching nearly to his shoulders, advanced to the indicated spot,
bowing reverently while he fiddled, as much as to say that he respected
the company, though he respected the key-note more.  as soon as he had
repeated the tune and lowered his fiddle, he bowed again to the squire
and the rector, and said, "i hope i see your honour and your reverence
well, and wishing you health and long life and a happy new year.  and
wishing the same to you, mr. lammeter, sir; and to the other gentlemen,
and the madams, and the young lasses."

as solomon uttered the last words, he bowed in all directions
solicitously, lest he should be wanting in due respect.  but thereupon
he immediately began to prelude, and fell into the tune which he knew
would be taken as a special compliment by mr. lammeter.

"thank ye, solomon, thank ye," said mr. lammeter when the fiddle paused
again.  "that's "over the hills and far away", that is.  my father used
to say to me, wheneve
 
 ___________________________
 


there was no reason, then, why the rector's dancing should not be
received as part of the fitness of things quite as much as the
squire's, or why, on the other hand, mr. macey's official respect
should restrain him from subjecting the parson's performance to that
criticism with which minds of extraordinary acuteness must necessarily
contemplate the doings of their fallible fellow-men.

"the squire's pretty springe, considering his weight," said mr. macey,
"and he stamps uncommon well.  but mr. lammeter beats 'em all for
shapes: you see he holds his head like a sodger, and he isn't so
cushiony as most o' the oldish gentlefolks--they run fat in general;
and he's got a fine leg.  the parson's nimble enough, but he hasn't got
much of a leg: it's a bit too thick down'ard, and his knees might be a
bit nearer wi'out damage; but he might do worse, he might do worse.
though he hasn't that grand way o' waving his hand as the squire has."

"talk o' nimbleness, look at mrs. osgood," said ben winthrop, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
n his young days in a tone that implied this
to be the very highest stamp of juvenile merit, was the centre of a
group who had placed themselves opposite the performer, not far from
the upper door.  godfrey was standing a little way off, not to admire
his brother's dancing, but to keep sight of nancy, who was seated in
the group, near her father.  he stood aloof, because he wished to avoid
suggesting himself as a subject for the squire's fatherly jokes in
connection with matrimony and miss nancy lammeter's beauty, which were
likely to become more and more explicit.  but he had the prospect of
dancing with her again when the hornpipe was concluded, and in the
meanwhile it was very pleasant to get long glances at her quite
unobserved.

but when godfrey was lifting his eyes from one of those long glances,
they encountered an object as startling to him at that moment as if it
had been an apparition from the dead.  it _was_ an apparition from that
hidden life which lies, like a dark by-street, behin
 
 ___________________________
 
d the goodly
ornamented facade that meets the sunlight and the gaze of respectable
admirers.  it was his own child, carried in silas marner's arms.  that
was his instantaneous impression, unaccompanied by doubt, though he had
not seen the child for months past; and when the hope was rising that
he might possibly be mistaken, mr. crackenthorp and mr. lammeter had
already advanced to silas, in astonishment at this strange advent.
godfrey joined them immediately, unable to rest without hearing every
word--trying to control himself, but conscious that if any one noticed
him, they must see that he was white-lipped and trembling.

but now all eyes at that end of the room were bent on silas marner; the
squire himself had risen, and asked angrily, "how's this?--what's
this?--what do you do coming in here in this way?"

"i'm come for the doctor--i want the 
 
 ___________________________
 
rward, curious to know
what could have brought the solitary linen-weaver there under such
strange circumstances, and interested in the pretty child, who, half
alarmed and half attracted by the brightness and the numerous company,
now frowned and hid her face, now lifted up her head again and looked
round placably, until a touch or a coaxing word brought back the frown,
and made her bury her face with new determination.

"what child is it?"  said several ladies at once, and, among the rest,
nancy lammeter, addressing godfrey.

"i don't know--some poor woman's who has been found in the snow, i
believe," was the answer godfrey wrung from himself with a terrible
effort.  ("after all, _am_ i certain?"  he hastened to add, silently,
in anticipation of his own conscience.)

"why, you'd better leave the child here, then, master marner," said
good-natured mrs. kimble, hesitating, however, to take those dingy
clothes into contact with her own ornamented satin bodice. "i'll tell
one o' the girls to fetch 
 
 ___________________________
 
me back; but dunsey might be won
to silence.

and when events turn out so much better for a man than he has had
reason to dread, is it not a proof that his conduct has been less
foolish and blameworthy than it might otherwise have appeared?  when we
are treated well, we naturally begin to think that we are not
altogether unmeritorious, and that it is only just we should treat
ourselves well, and not mar our own good fortune.  where, after all,
would be the use of his confessing the past to nancy lammeter, and
throwing away his happiness?--nay, hers?  for he felt some confidence
that she loved him.  as for the child, he would see that it was cared
for: he would never forsake it; he would do everything but own it.
perhaps it would be just as happy in life without being owned by its
father, seeing that nobody could tell how things would turn out, and
that--is there any other reason wanted?--well, then, that the father
would be much happier without owning the child.



chapter xiv

there was a paup
 
 ___________________________
 
ther.  she'll wish the right thing by you and her
son too."

"there they come, then," said eppie.  "let us go and meet 'em. oh, the
pipe!  won't you have it lit again, father?"  said eppie, lifting that
medicinal appliance from the ground.

"nay, child," said silas, "i've done enough for to-day.  i think,
mayhap, a little of it does me more good than so much at once."



chapter xvii

while silas and eppie were seated on the bank discoursing in the
fleckered shade of the ash tree, miss priscilla lammeter was resisting
her sister's arguments, that it would be better to take tea at the red
house, and let her father have a long nap, than drive home to the
warrens so soon after dinner.  the family party (of four only) were
seated round the table in the dark wainscoted parlour, with the sunday
dessert before them, of fresh filberts, apples, and pears, duly
ornamented with leaves by nancy's own hand before the bells had rung
for church.

a great change has come over the dark wainscoted parlour since 
 
 ___________________________
 
ind to have an opinion on all topics, not exclusively masculine, that
had come under her notice, as for her to have a precisely marked place
for every article of her personal property: and her opinions were
always principles to be unwaveringly acted on.  they were firm, not
because of their basis, but because she held them with a tenacity
inseparable from her mental action.  on all the duties and proprieties
of life, from filial behaviour to the arrangements of the evening
toilette, pretty nancy lammeter, by the time she was three-and-twenty,
had her unalterable little code, and had formed every one of her habits
in strict accordance with that code.  she carried these decided
judgments within her in the most unobtrusive way: they rooted
themselves in her mind, and grew there as quietly as grass.  years ago,
we know, she insisted on dressing like priscilla, because "it was right
for sisters to dress alike", and because "she would do what was right
if she wore a gown dyed with cheese-colouring". 
 
 ___________________________
 
rchyard and down
the village, she seemed to be attired in pure white, and her hair
looked like the dash of gold on a lily.  one hand was on her husband's
arm, and with the other she clasped the hand of her father silas.

"you won't be giving me away, father," she had said before they went to
church; "you'll only be taking aaron to be a son to you."

dolly winthrop walked behind with her husband; and there ended the
little bridal procession.

there were many eyes to look at it, and miss priscilla lammeter was
glad that she and her father had happened to drive up to the door of
the red house just in time to see this pretty sight.  they had come to
keep nancy company to-day, because mr. cass had had to go away to
lytherley, for special reasons.  that seemed to be a pity, for
otherwise he might have gone, as mr. crackenthorp and mr. osgood
certainly would, to look on at the wedding-feast which he had ordered
at the rainbow, naturally feeling a great interest in the weaver who
had been wronged by on
 
 ___________________________
 
e of his own family.

"i could ha' wished nancy had had the luck to find a child like that
and bring her up," said priscilla to her father, as they sat in the
gig; "i should ha' had something young to think of then, besides the
lambs and the calves."

"yes, my dear, yes," said mr. lammeter; "one feels that as one gets
older.  things look dim to old folks: they'd need have some young eyes
about 'em, to let 'em know the world's the same as it used to be."

nancy came out now to welcome her father and sister; and the wedding
group had passed on beyond the red house to the humbler part of the
village.

dolly winthrop was the first to divine that old mr. macey, who had been
set in his arm-chair outside his own door, would expect some special
notice as they passed, since he was too old