 seemed to enjoy his drink the more when other
people went dry--always provided that his doings did not bring trouble
on a family like squire cass's, with a monument in the church, and
tankards older than king george.  but it would be a thousand pities if
mr. godfrey, the eldest, a fine open-faced good-natured young man who
was to come into the land some day, should take to going along the same
road with his brother, as he had seemed to do of late.  if he went on
in that way, he would lose miss nancy lammeter; for it was well known
that she had looked very shyly on him ever since last whitsuntide
twelvemonth, when there was so much talk about his being away from home
days and days together. there was something wrong, more than
common--that was quite clear; for mr. godfrey didn't look half so
fresh-coloured and open as he used to do.  at one time everybody was
saying, what a handsome couple he and miss nancy lammeter would make!
and if she could come to be mistress at the red house, there would be a

 
 ___________________________
 
meters had been brought up in that way, that
they never suffered a pinch of salt to be wasted, and yet everybody in
their household had of the best, according to his place.  such a
daughter-in-law would be a saving to the old squire, if she never
brought a penny to her fortune; for it was to be feared that,
notwithstanding his incomings, there were more holes in his pocket than
the one where he put his own hand in.  but if mr. godfrey didn't turn
over a new leaf, he might say "good-bye" to miss nancy lammeter.

it was the once hopeful godfrey who was standing, with his hands in his
side-pockets and his back to the fire, in the dark wainscoted parlour,
one late november afternoon in that fifteenth year of silas marner's
life at raveloe.  the fading grey light fell dimly on the walls
decorated with guns, whips, and foxes' brushes, on coats and hats flung
on the chairs, on tankards sending forth a scent of flat ale, and on a
half-choked fire, with pipes propped up in the chimney-corners: signs
of a dom
 
 ___________________________
 
fession were not contingent, they were
certain; whereas betrayal was not certain. from the near vision of that
certainty he fell back on suspense and vacillation with a sense of
repose.  the disinherited son of a small squire, equally disinclined to
dig and to beg, was almost as helpless as an uprooted tree, which, by
the favour of earth and sky, has grown to a handsome bulk on the spot
where it first shot upward. perhaps it would have been possible to
think of digging with some cheerfulness if nancy lammeter were to be
won on those terms; but, since he must irrevocably lose _her_ as well
as the inheritance, and must break every tie but the one that degraded
him and left him without motive for trying to recover his better self,
he could imagine no future for himself on the other side of confession
but that of "'listing for a soldier"--the most desperate step, short of
suicide, in the eyes of respectable families.  no!  he would rather
trust to casualties than to his own resolve--rather go on sitting
 
 ___________________________
 
rse for it."

"make your tender heart easy," said dunstan, opening the door. "you
never knew me see double when i'd got a bargain to make; it 'ud spoil
the fun.  besides, whenever i fall, i'm warranted to fall on my legs."

with that, dunstan slammed the door behind him, and left godfrey to
that bitter rumination on his personal circumstances which was now
unbroken from day to day save by the excitement of sporting, drinking,
card-playing, or the rarer and less oblivious pleasure of seeing miss
nancy lammeter.  the subtle and varied pains springing from the higher
sensibility that accompanies higher culture, are perhaps less pitiable
than that dreary absence of impersonal enjoyment and consolation which
leaves ruder minds to the perpetual urgent companionship of their own
griefs and discontents.  the lives of those rural forefathers, whom we
are apt to think very prosaic figures--men whose only work was to ride
round their land, getting heavier and heavier in their saddles, and who
passed the rest o
 
 ___________________________
 
 a victim, the iron bit that destiny had put into his mouth would
have chafed him less intolerably.  if the curses he muttered half aloud
when he was alone had had no other object than dunstan's diabolical
cunning, he might have shrunk less from the consequences of avowal.
but he had something else to curse--his own vicious folly, which now
seemed as mad and unaccountable to him as almost all our follies and
vices do when their promptings have long passed away.  for four years
he had thought of nancy lammeter, and wooed her with tacit patient
worship, as the woman who made him think of the future with joy: she
would be his wife, and would make home lovely to him, as his father's
home had never been; and it would be easy, when she was always near, to
shake off those foolish habits that were no pleasures, but only a
feverish way of annulling vacancy.  godfrey's was an essentially
domestic nature, bred up in a home where the hearth had no smiles, and
where the daily habits were not chastised by the pre
 
 ___________________________
 
tion he would be in when the ugly secret was disclosed; and the
desire that continually triumphed over every other was that of warding
off the evil day, when he would have to bear the consequences of his
father's violent resentment for the wound inflicted on his family
pride--would have, perhaps, to turn his back on that hereditary ease
and dignity which, after all, was a sort of reason for living, and
would carry with him the certainty that he was banished for ever from
the sight and esteem of nancy lammeter.  the longer the interval, the
more chance there was of deliverance from some, at least, of the
hateful consequences to which he had sold himself; the more
opportunities remained for him to snatch the strange gratification of
seeing nancy, and gathering some faint indications of her lingering
regard.  towards this gratification he was impelled, fitfully, every
now and then, after having passed weeks in which he had avoided her as
the far-off bright-winged prize that only made him spring forward
 
 ___________________________
 
en by much drinking.



chapter xi

some women, i grant, would not appear to advantage seated on a pillion,
and attired in a drab joseph and a drab beaver-bonnet, with a crown
resembling a small stew-pan; for a garment suggesting a coachman's
greatcoat, cut out under an exiguity of cloth that would only allow of
miniature capes, is not well adapted to conceal deficiencies of
contour, nor is drab a colour that will throw sallow cheeks into lively
contrast.  it was all the greater triumph to miss nancy lammeter's
beauty that she looked thoroughly bewitching in that costume, as,
seated on the pillion behind her tall, erect father, she held one arm
round him, and looked down, with open-eyed anxiety, at the treacherous
snow-covered pools and puddles, which sent up formidable splashings of
mud under the stamp of dobbin's foot.  a painter would, perhaps, have
preferred her in those moments when she was free from
self-consciousness; but certainly the bloom on her cheeks was at its
highest point of contrast 
 
 ___________________________
 
 still continue to pay you marked attentions; besides, why didn't
he always show the same attentions, if he meant them sincerely, instead
of being so strange as mr. godfrey cass was, sometimes behaving as if
he didn't want to speak to her, and taking no notice of her for weeks
and weeks, and then, all on a sudden, almost making love again?
moreover, it was quite plain he had no real love for her, else he would
not let people have _that_ to say of him which they did say. did he
suppose that miss nancy lammeter was to be won by any man, squire or no
squire, who led a bad life?  that was not what she had been used to see
in her own father, who was the soberest and best man in that
country-side, only a little hot and hasty now and then, if things were
not done to the minute.

all these thoughts rushed through miss nancy's mind, in their habitual
succession, in the moments between her first sight of mr. godfrey cass
standing at the door and her own arrival there. happily, the squire
came out too and gave
 
 ___________________________
 
elf in his young days in a tone that implied this
to be the very highest stamp of juvenile merit, was the centre of a
group who had placed themselves opposite the performer, not far from
the upper door.  godfrey was standing a little way off, not to admire
his brother's dancing, but to keep sight of nancy, who was seated in
the group, near her father.  he stood aloof, because he wished to avoid
suggesting himself as a subject for the squire's fatherly jokes in
connection with matrimony and miss nancy lammeter's beauty, which were
likely to become more and more explicit.  but he had the prospect of
dancing with her again when the hornpipe was concluded, and in the
meanwhile it was very pleasant to get long glances at her quite
unobserved.

but when godfrey was lifting his eyes from one of those long glances,
they encountered an object as startling to him at that moment as if it
had been an apparition from the dead.  it _was_ an apparition from that
hidden life which lies, like a dark by-street, behin
 
 ___________________________
 
ed forward, curious to know
what could have brought the solitary linen-weaver there under such
strange circumstances, and interested in the pretty child, who, half
alarmed and half attracted by the brightness and the numerous company,
now frowned and hid her face, now lifted up her head again and looked
round placably, until a touch or a coaxing word brought back the frown,
and made her bury her face with new determination.

"what child is it?"  said several ladies at once, and, among the rest,
nancy lammeter, addressing godfrey.

"i don't know--some poor woman's who has been found in the snow, i
believe," was the answer godfrey wrung from himself with a terrible
effort.  ("after all, _am_ i certain?"  he hastened to add, silently,
in anticipation of his own conscience.)

"why, you'd better leave the child here, then, master marner," said
good-natured mrs. kimble, hesitating, however, to take those dingy
clothes into contact with her own ornamented satin bodice. "i'll tell
one o' the girls to fetch 
 
 ___________________________
 
he came back; but dunsey might be won
to silence.

and when events turn out so much better for a man than he has had
reason to dread, is it not a proof that his conduct has been less
foolish and blameworthy than it might otherwise have appeared?  when we
are treated well, we naturally begin to think that we are not
altogether unmeritorious, and that it is only just we should treat
ourselves well, and not mar our own good fortune.  where, after all,
would be the use of his confessing the past to nancy lammeter, and
throwing away his happiness?--nay, hers?  for he felt some confidence
that she loved him.  as for the child, he would see that it was cared
for: he would never forsake it; he would do everything but own it.
perhaps it would be just as happy in life without being owned by its
father, seeing that nobody could tell how things would turn out, and
that--is there any other reason wanted?--well, then, that the father
would be much happier without owning the child.



chapter xiv

there was a paup
 
 ___________________________
 
her
mind to have an opinion on all topics, not exclusively masculine, that
had come under her notice, as for her to have a precisely marked place
for every article of her personal property: and her opinions were
always principles to be unwaveringly acted on.  they were firm, not
because of their basis, but because she held them with a tenacity
inseparable from her mental action.  on all the duties and proprieties
of life, from filial behaviour to the arrangements of the evening
toilette, pretty nancy lammeter, by the time she was three-and-twenty,
had her unalterable little code, and had formed every one of her habits
in strict accordance with that code.  she carried these decided
judgments within her in the most unobtrusive way: they rooted
themselves in her mind, and grew there as quietly as grass.  years ago,
we know, she insisted on dressing like priscilla, because "it was right
for sisters to dress alike", and because "she would do what was right
if she wore a gown dyed with cheese-colouring". 