no efficacy
without prayer, and that prayer might suffice without herbs; so that
the inherited delight he had in wandering in the fields in search of
foxglove and dandelion and coltsfoot, began to wear to him the
character of a temptation.

among the members of his church there was one young man, a little older
than himself, with whom he had long lived in such close friendship that
it was the custom of their lantern yard brethren to call them david and
jonathan.  the real name of the friend was william dane, and he, too,
was regarded as a shining instance of youthful piety, though somewhat
given to over-severity towards weaker brethren, and to be so dazzled by
his own light as to hold himself wiser than his teachers.  but whatever
blemishes others might discern in william, to his friend's mind he was
faultless; for marner had one of those impressible self-doubting
natures which, at an inexperienced age, admire imperativeness and lean
on contradiction.  the expression of trusting simplicity in marn
 
 ___________________________
 
er's
face, heightened by that absence of special observation, that
defenceless, deer-like gaze which belongs to large prominent eyes, was
strongly contrasted by the self-complacent suppression of inward
triumph that lurked in the narrow slanting eyes and compressed lips of
william dane.  one of the most frequent topics of conversation between
the two friends was assurance of salvation: silas confessed that he
could never arrive at anything higher than hope mingled with fear, and
listened with longing wonder when william declared that he had
possessed unshaken assurance ever since, in the period of his
conversion, he had dreamed that he saw the words "calling and election
sure" standing by themselves on a white page in the open bible.  such
colloquies have occupied many a pair
 
 ___________________________
 
ted deacon's bedside--found in the place where
the little bag of church money had lain, which the minister himself had
seen the day before.  some hand had removed that bag; and whose hand
could it be, if not that of the man to whom the knife belonged?  for
some time silas was mute with astonishment: then he said, "god will
clear me: i know nothing about the knife being there, or the money
being gone.  search me and my dwelling; you will find nothing but three
pound five of my own savings, which william dane knows i have had these
six months."  at this william groaned, but the minister said, "the
proof is heavy against you, brother marner.  the money was taken in the
night last past, and no man was with our departed brother but you, for
william dane declares to us that he was hindered by sudden sickness
from going to take his place as usual, and you yourself said that he
had not come; and, moreover, you neglected the dead body."

"i must have slept," said silas.  then, after a pause, he added, "or 
 
 ___________________________
 
i
must have had another visitation like that which you have all seen me
under, so that the thief must have come and gone while i was not in the
body, but out of the body.  but, i say again, search me and my
dwelling, for i have been nowhere else."

the search was made, and it ended--in william dane's finding the
well-known bag, empty, tucked behind the chest of drawers in silas's
chamber!  on this william exhorted his friend to confess, and not to
hide his sin any longer.  silas turned a look of keen reproach on him,
and said, "william, for nine years that we have gone in and out
together, have you ever known me tell a lie?  but god will clear me."

"brother," said william, "how do i know what you may have done in the
secret chambers of your heart, to give satan an advantage over you?"

s
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by immediate divine
interference, but feeling that there was sorrow and mourning behind for
him even then--that his trust in man had been cruelly bruised.  _the
lots declared that silas marner was guilty._  he was solemnly suspended
from church-membership, and called upon to render up the stolen money:
only on confession, as the sign of repentance, could he be received
once more within the folds of the church. marner listened in silence.
at last, when everyone rose to depart, he went towards william dane and
said, in a voice shaken by agitation--

"the last time i remember using my knife, was when i took it out to cut
a strap for you.  i don't remember putting it in my pocket again.
_you_ stole the money, and you have woven a plot to lay the sin at my
door.  but you may prosper, for all that: there is no just god that
governs the earth righteously, but a god of lies, that bears witness
against the innocent."

there was a general shudder at this blasphemy.

william said meekly, "i leave our bret
 
 ___________________________
 
se to go to sarah and attempt to win her belief in his
innocence.  the second day he took refuge from benumbing unbelief, by
getting into his loom and working away as usual; and before many hours
were past, the minister and one of the deacons came to him with the
message from sarah, that she held her engagement to him at an end.
silas received the message mutely, and then turned away from the
messengers to work at his loom again.  in little more than a month from
that time, sarah was married to william dane; and not long afterwards
it was known to the brethren in lantern yard that silas marner had
departed from the town.



chapter ii

even people whose lives have been made various by learning, sometimes
find it hard to keep a fast hold on their habitual views of life, on
their faith in the invisible, nay, on the sense that their past joys
and sorrows are a real experience, when they are suddenly transported
to a new land, where the beings around them know nothing of their
history, and share none 