ome whom--thanks to their native human-kindness--even riot
could never drive into brutality; men who, when their cheeks were
fresh, had felt the keen point of sorrow or remorse, had been pierced
by the reeds they leaned on, or had lightly put their limbs in fetters
from which no struggle could loose them; and under these sad
circumstances, common to us all, their thoughts could find no
resting-place outside the ever-trodden round of their own petty history.

that, at least, was the condition of godfrey cass in this
six-and-twentieth year of his life.  a movement of compunction, helped
by those small indefinable influences which every personal relation
exerts on a pliant nature, had urged him into a secret marriage, which
was a blight on his life.  it was an ugly story of low passion,
delusion, and waking from delusion, which needs not to be dragged from
the privacy of godfrey's bitter memory.  he had long known that the
delusion was partly due to a trap laid for him by dunstan, who saw in
his brot
 
 ___________________________
 
 dunstan rather than disappoint the yearning, even
if he had not had another reason for his disinclination towards the
morrow's hunt.  that other reason was the fact that the morning's meet
was near batherley, the market-town where the unhappy woman lived,
whose image became more odious to him every day; and to his thought the
whole vicinage was haunted by her.  the yoke a man creates for himself
by wrong-doing will breed hate in the kindliest nature; and the
good-humoured, affectionate-hearted godfrey cass was fast becoming a
bitter man, visited by cruel wishes, that seemed to enter, and depart,
and enter again, like demons who had found in him a ready-garnished
home.

what was he to do this evening to pass the time?  he might as well go
to the rainbow, and hear the talk about the cock-fighting: everybody
was there, and what else was there to be done?  though, for his own
part, he did not care a button for cock-fighting. snuff, the brown
spaniel, who had placed herself in front of him, and had be
 
 ___________________________
 
a select circle at the rainbow.  when
a young gentleman like dunsey is reduced to so exceptional a mode of
locomotion as walking, a whip in his hand is a desirable corrective to
a too bewildering dreamy sense of unwontedness in his position; and
dunstan, as he went along through the gathering mist, was always
rapping his whip somewhere.  it was godfrey's whip, which he had chosen
to take without leave because it had a gold handle; of course no one
could see, when dunstan held it, that the name _godfrey cass_ was cut
in deep letters on that gold handle--they could only see that it was a
very handsome whip. dunsey was not without fear that he might meet some
acquaintance in whose eyes he would cut a pitiable figure, for mist is
no screen when people get close to each other; but when he at last
found himself in the well-known raveloe lanes without having met a
soul, he silently remarked that that was part of his usual good luck.
but now the mist, helped by the evening darkness, was more of a screen
t
 
 ___________________________
 
ere he could most speedily make his loss public.  he
lifted the latch, and turned into the bright bar or kitchen on the
right hand, where the less lofty customers of the house were in the
habit of assembling, the parlour on the left being reserved for the
more select society in which squire cass frequently enjoyed the double
pleasure of conviviality and condescension.  but the parlour was dark
to-night, the chief personages who ornamented its circle being all at
mrs. osgood's birthday dance, as godfrey cass was.  and in consequence
of this, the party on the high-screened seats in the kitchen was more
numerous than usual; several personages, who would otherwise have been
admitted into the parlour and enlarged the opportunity of hectoring and
condescension for their betters, being content this evening to vary
their enjoyment by taking their spirits-and-water where they could
themselves hector and condescend in company that called for beer.



chapter vi

the conversation, which was at a high pitch o
 
 ___________________________
 
o kench's in the rain, let them go as like
it--you won't get me to go, i can tell you."

by the landlord's intervention, however, the dispute was accommodated.
mr. dowlas consented to go as a second person disinclined to act
officially; and so poor silas, furnished with some old coverings,
turned out with his two companions into the rain again, thinking of the
long night-hours before him, not as those do who long to rest, but as
those who expect to "watch for the morning".



chapter viii

when godfrey cass returned from mrs. osgood's party at midnight, he was
not much surprised to learn that dunsey had not come home. perhaps he
had not sold wildfire, and was waiting for another chance--perhaps, on
that foggy afternoon, he had preferred housing himself at the red lion
at batherley for the night, if the run had kept him in that
neighbourhood; for he was not likely to feel much concern about leaving
his brother in suspense.  godfrey's mind was too full of nancy
lammeter's looks and behaviour, too fu
 
 ___________________________
 
 how came he to leave his tinder-box in the
ditch close by, if he hadn't been lingering there?  doubtless, he had
made his observations when he saw marner at the door.  anybody might
know--and only look at him--that the weaver was a half-crazy miser.  it
was a wonder the pedlar hadn't murdered him; men of that sort, with
rings in their ears, had been known for murderers often and often;
there had been one tried at the 'sizes, not so long ago but what there
were people living who remembered it.

godfrey cass, indeed, entering the rainbow during one of mr. snell's
frequently repeated recitals of his testimony, had treated it lightly,
stating that he himself had bought a pen-knife of the pedlar, and
thought him a merry grinning fellow enough; it was all nonsense, he
said, about the man's evil looks.  but this was spoken of in the
village as the random talk of youth, "as if it was only mr. snell who
had seen something odd about the pedlar!"  on the contrary, there were
at least half-a-dozen who were r
 
 ___________________________
 
me on pillions sent their
bandboxes before them, supplied with more than their evening costume;
for the feast was not to end with a single evening, like a paltry town
entertainment, where the whole supply of eatables is put on the table
at once, and bedding is scanty.  the red house was provisioned as if
for a siege; and as for the spare feather-beds ready to be laid on
floors, they were as plentiful as might naturally be expected in a
family that had killed its own geese for many generations.

godfrey cass was looking forward to this new year's eve with a foolish
reckless longing, that made him half deaf to his importunate companion,
anxiety.

"dunsey will be coming home soon: there will be a great blow-up, and
how will you bribe his spite to silence?"  said anxiety.

"oh, he won't come home before new year's eve, perhaps," said godfrey;
"and i shall sit by nancy then, and dance with her, and get a kind look
from her in spite of herself."

"but money is wanted in another quarter," said anxiety, i
 
 ___________________________
 
llion behind her tall, erect father, she held one arm
round him, and looked down, with open-eyed anxiety, at the treacherous
snow-covered pools and puddles, which sent up formidable splashings of
mud under the stamp of dobbin's foot.  a painter would, perhaps, have
preferred her in those moments when she was free from
self-consciousness; but certainly the bloom on her cheeks was at its
highest point of contrast with the surrounding drab when she arrived at
the door of the red house, and saw mr. godfrey cass ready to lift her
from the pillion.  she wished her sister priscilla had come up at the
same time behind the servant, for then she would have contrived that
mr. godfrey should have lifted off priscilla first, and, in the
meantime, she would have persuaded her father to go round to the
horse-block instead of alighting at the door-steps.  it was very
painful, when you had made it quite clear to a young man that you were
determined not to marry him, however much he might wish it, that he
would sti
 
 ___________________________
 
ll continue to pay you marked attentions; besides, why didn't
he always show the same attentions, if he meant them sincerely, instead
of being so strange as mr. godfrey cass was, sometimes behaving as if
he didn't want to speak to her, and taking no notice of her for weeks
and weeks, and then, all on a sudden, almost making love again?
moreover, it was quite plain he had no real love for her, else he would
not let people have _that_ to say of him which they did say. did he
suppose that miss nancy lammeter was to be won by any man, squire or no
squire, who led a bad life?  that was not what she had been used to see
in her own father, who was the soberest and best ma
 
 ___________________________
 
n in that
country-side, only a little hot and hasty now and then, if things were
not done to the minute.

all these thoughts rushed through miss nancy's mind, in their habitual
succession, in the moments between her first sight of mr. godfrey cass
standing at the door and her own arrival there. happily, the squire
came out too and gave a loud greeting to her father, so that, somehow,
under cover of this noise she seemed to find concealment for her
confusion and neglect of any suitably formal behaviour, while she was
being lifted from the pillion by strong arms which seemed to find her
ridiculously small and light. and there was the best reason for
hastening into the house at once, since the snow was beginning to fall
again, threatening a
 
 ___________________________
 
 cass", the squire's
wife.  these circumstances exalted her inward drama in her own eyes,
and deepened the emphasis with which she declared to herself that not
the most dazzling rank should induce her to marry a man whose conduct
showed him careless of his character, but that, "love once, love
always", was the motto of a true and pure woman, and no man should ever
have any right over her which would be a call on her to destroy the
dried flowers that she treasured, and always would treasure, for
godfrey cass's sake.  and nancy was capable of keeping her word to
herself under very trying conditions.  nothing but a becoming blush
betrayed the moving thoughts that urged themselves upon her as she
accepted the seat next to mr. crackenthorp; for she was so
instinctively neat and adroit in all her actions, and her pretty lips
met each other with such quiet firmness, that it would have been
difficult for her to appear agitated.

it was not the rector's practice to let a charming blush pass without
an appr
 
 ___________________________
 
 go or stay," said that frank lady,
searching for something in her pocket, with a preoccupied brow.

"do _you_ want me to go?"  said godfrey, looking at nancy, who was now
standing up by priscilla's order.

"as you like," said nancy, trying to recover all her former coldness,
and looking down carefully at the hem of her gown.

"then i like to stay," said godfrey, with a reckless determination to
get as much of this joy as he could to-night, and think nothing of the
morrow.



chapter xii

while godfrey cass was taking draughts of forgetfulness from the sweet
presence of nancy, willingly losing all sense of that hidden bond which
at other moments galled and fretted him so as to mingle irritation with
the very sunshine, godfrey's wife was walking with slow uncertain steps
through the snow-covered raveloe lanes, carrying her child in her arms.

this journey on new year's eve was a premeditated act of vengeance
which she had kept in her heart ever since godfrey, in a fit of
passion, had told her he wo
 
 ___________________________
 
cannot say that he
was.  the child was being taken care of, and would very likely be
happy, as people in humble stations often were--happier, perhaps, than
those brought up in luxury.

that famous ring that pricked its owner when he forgot duty and
followed desire--i wonder if it pricked very hard when he set out on
the chase, or whether it pricked but lightly then, and only pierced to
the quick when the chase had long been ended, and hope, folding her
wings, looked backward and became regret?

godfrey cass's cheek and eye were brighter than ever now.  he was so
undivided in his aims, that he seemed like a man of firmness.  no
dunsey had come back: people had made up their minds that he was gone
for a soldier, or gone "out of the country", and no one cared to be
specific in their inquiries on a subject delicate to a respectable
family.  godfrey had ceased to see the shadow of dunsey across his
path; and the path now lay straight forward to the accomplishment of
his best, longest-cherished wishes. 
 
 ___________________________
 

church-going.  it was the rural fashion of that time for the more
important members of the congregation to depart first, while their
humbler neighbours waited and looked on, stroking their bent heads or
dropping their curtsies to any large ratepayer who turned to notice
them.

foremost among these advancing groups of well-clad people, there are
some whom we shall recognize, in spite of time, who has laid his hand
on them all.  the tall blond man of forty is not much changed in
feature from the godfrey cass of six-and-twenty: he is only fuller in
flesh, and has only lost the indefinable look of youth--a loss which is
marked even when the eye is undulled and the wrinkles are not yet come.
perhaps the pretty woman, not much younger than he, who is leaning on
his arm, is more changed than her husband: the lovely bloom that used
to be always on her cheek now comes but fitfully, with the fresh
morning air or with some strong surprise; yet to all who love human
faces best for what they tell of human exp
 
 ___________________________
 
he soul is ripened into fuller goodness
while age has spread an ugly film, so that mere glances can never
divine the preciousness of the fruit.  but the years have not been so
cruel to nancy.  the firm yet placid mouth, the clear veracious glance
of the brown eyes, speak now of a nature that has been tested and has
kept its highest qualities; and even the costume, with its dainty
neatness and purity, has more significance now the coquetries of youth
can have nothing to do with it.

mr. and mrs. godfrey cass (any higher title has died away from raveloe
lips since the old squire was gathered to his fathers and his
inheritance was divided) have turned round to look for the tall aged
man and the plainly dressed woman who are a little behind--nancy having
observed that they must wait for "father and priscilla"--and now they
all turn into a narrower path leading across the churchyard to a small
gate opposite the red house.  we will not follow them now; for may
there not be some others in this departing 
 
 ___________________________
 
going to take any trouble for them.

the presence of this happy animal life was not the only change which
had come over the interior of the stone cottage.  there was no bed now
in the living-room, and the small space was well filled with decent
furniture, all bright and clean enough to satisfy dolly winthrop's eye.
the oaken table and three-cornered oaken chair were hardly what was
likely to be seen in so poor a cottage: they had come, with the beds
and other things, from the red house; for mr. godfrey cass, as every
one said in the village, did very kindly by the weaver; and it was
nothing but right a man should be looked on and helped by those who
could afford it, when he had brought up an orphan child, and been
father and mother to her--and had lost his money too, so as he had
nothing but what he worked for week by week, and when the weaving was
going down too--for there was less and less flax spun--and master
marner was none so young.  nobody was jealous of the weaver, for he was
regarded as a
 
 ___________________________
 
t she started back in surprise.

"oh, father, just come and look here," she exclaimed--"come and see how
the water's gone down since yesterday.  why, yesterday the pit was ever
so full!"

"well, to be sure," said silas, coming to her side.  "why, that's the
draining they've begun on, since harvest, i' mr. osgood's fields, i
reckon.  the foreman said to me the other day, when i passed by 'em,
"master marner," he said, "i shouldn't wonder if we lay your bit o'
waste as dry as a bone."  it was mr. godfrey cass, he said, had gone
into the draining: he'd been taking these fields o' mr. osgood."

"how odd it'll seem to have the old pit dried up!"  said eppie, turning
away, and stooping to lift rather a large stone.  "see, daddy, i can
carry this quite well," she said, going along with much energy for a
few steps, but presently letting it fall.

"ah, you're fine and strong, aren't you?"  said silas, while eppie
shook her aching arms and laughed.  "come, come, let us go and sit down
on the bank against th
 
 ___________________________
 
he said, ponderingly--"the money doesn't.  i wonder if
it ever could again--i doubt it might, if i lost you, eppie.  i might
come to think i was forsaken again, and lose the feeling that god was
good to me."

at that moment there was a knocking at the door; and eppie was obliged
to rise without answering silas.  beautiful she looked, with the
tenderness of gathering tears in her eyes and a slight flush on her
cheeks, as she stepped to open the door.  the flush deepened when she
saw mr. and mrs. godfrey cass.  she made her little rustic curtsy, and
held the door wide for them to enter.

"we're disturbing you very late, my dear," said mrs. cass, taking
eppie's hand, and looking in her face with an expression of anxious
interest and admiration.  nancy herself was pale and tremulous.

eppie, after placing chairs for mr. and mrs. cass, went to stand
against silas, opposite to them.

"well, marner," said godfrey, trying to speak with perfect firmness,
"it's a great comfort to me to see you with your mon
 
 ___________________________
 
should like to have eppie, and treat her in every
way as our own child.  it 'ud be a great comfort to you in your old
age, i hope, to see her fortune made in that way, after you've been at
the trouble of bringing her up so well.  and it's right you should have
every reward for that.  and eppie, i'm sure, will always love you and
be grateful to you: she'd come and see you very often, and we should
all be on the look-out to do everything we could towards making you
comfortable."

a plain man like godfrey cass, speaking under some embarrassment,
necessarily blunders on words that are coarser than his intentions, and
that are likely to fall gratingly on susceptible feelings. while he had
been speaking, eppie had quietly passed her arm behind silas's head,
and let her hand rest against it caressingly: she felt him trembling
violently.  he was silent for some moments when mr. cass had
ended--powerless under the conflict of emotions, all alike painful.
eppie's heart was swelling at the sense that her fat
 
 ___________________________
 
st become when the full cheese-making and the
mowing had set in; and besides, it was a time when a light bridal dress
could be worn with comfort and seen to advantage.

happily the sunshine fell more warmly than usual on the lilac tufts the
morning that eppie was married, for her dress was a very light one.
she had often thought, though with a feeling of renunciation, that the
perfection of a wedding-dress would be a white cotton, with the tiniest
pink sprig at wide intervals; so that when mrs. godfrey cass begged to
provide one, and asked eppie to choose what it should be, previous
meditation had enabled her to give a decided answer at once.

seen at a little distance as she walked across the churchyard and down
the village, she seemed to be attired in pure white, and her hair
looked like the dash of gold on a lily.  one hand was on her husband's
arm, and with the other she clasped the hand of her father silas.

"you won't be giving me away, father," she had said before they went to
church; "you'