age to get that little sum o' money, and
i'll bid you good-bye, though i'm sorry to part."

dunstan was moving off, but godfrey rushed after him and seized him by
the arm, saying, with an oath--

"i tell you, i have no money: i can get no money."

"borrow of old kimble."

"i tell you, he won't lend me any more, and i shan't ask him."

"well, then, sell wildfire."

"yes, that's easy talking.  i must have the money directly."

"well, you've only got to ride him to the hunt to-morrow.  there'll be
bryce and keating there, for sure.  you'll get more bids than one."

"i daresay, and get back home at eight o'clock, splashed up to the
chin.  i'm going to mrs. osgood's birthday dance."

"oho!"  said dunsey, turning his head on one side, and trying to speak
in a small mincing treble.  "and there's sweet miss nancy coming; and
we shall dance with her, and promise never to be naughty again, and be
taken into favour, and--"

"hold your tongue about miss nancy, you fool," said godfrey, turning
red, "els
 
 ___________________________
 
 stronger
even than his resentment.  when he spoke again, it was in a
half-conciliatory tone.

"well, you mean no nonsense about the horse, eh?  you'll sell him all
fair, and hand over the money?  if you don't, you know, everything 'ull
go to smash, for i've got nothing else to trust to. and you'll have
less pleasure in pulling the house over my head, when your own skull's
to be broken too."

"aye, aye," said dunstan, rising; "all right.  i thought you'd come
round.  i'm the fellow to bring old bryce up to the scratch. i'll get
you a hundred and twenty for him, if i get you a penny."

"but it'll perhaps rain cats and dogs to-morrow, as it did yesterday,
and then you can't go," said godfrey, hardly knowing whether he wished
for that obstacle or not.

"not _it_," said dunstan.  "i'm always lucky in my weather.  it might
rain if you wanted to go yourself.  you never hold trumps, you know--i
always do.  you've got the beauty, you see, and i've got the luck, so
you must keep me by you for your c
 
 ___________________________
 
 go on
grew strong and prevailed.  he didn't want to give godfrey that
pleasure: he preferred that master godfrey should be vexed. moreover,
dunstan enjoyed the self-important consciousness of having a horse to
sell, and the opportunity of driving a bargain, swaggering, and
possibly taking somebody in.  he might have all the satisfaction
attendant on selling his brother's horse, and not the less have the
further satisfaction of setting godfrey to borrow marner's money.  so
he rode on to cover.

bryce and keating were there, as dunstan was quite sure they would
be--he was such a lucky fellow.

"heyday!"  said bryce, who had long had his eye on wildfire, "you're on
your brother's horse to-day: how's that?"

"oh, i've swopped with him," said dunstan, whose delight in lying,
grandly independent of utility, was not to be diminished by the
likelihood that his hearer would not believe him--"wildfire's mine now."

"what!  has he swopped with you for that big-boned hack of yours?" said
bryce, quite 
 
 ___________________________
 
s against my will, for i'd got an itch for a mare o'
jortin's--as rare a bit o' blood as ever you threw your leg across.
but i shall keep wildfire, now i've got him, though i'd a bid of a
hundred and fifty for him the other day, from a man over at
flitton--he's buying for lord cromleck--a fellow with a cast in his
eye, and a green waistcoat.  but i mean to stick to wildfire: i shan't
get a better at a fence in a hurry.  the mare's got more blood, but
she's a bit too weak in the hind-quarters."

bryce of course divined that dunstan wanted to sell the horse, and
dunstan knew that he divined it (horse-dealing is only one of many
human transactions carried on in this ingenious manner); and they both
considered that the bargain was in its first stage, when bryce replied
ironically--

"i wonder at that now; i wonder you mean to keep him; for i never heard
of a man who didn't want to sell his horse getting a bid of half as
much again as the horse was worth.  you'll be lucky if you get a
hundred."

 
 ___________________________
 

keating rode up now, and the transaction became more complicated. it
ended in the purchase of the horse by bryce for a hundred and twenty,
to be paid on the delivery of wildfire, safe and sound, at the
batherley stables.  it did occur to dunsey that it might be wise for
him to give up the day's hunting, proceed at once to batherley, and,
having waited for bryce's return, hire a horse to carry him home with
the money in his pocket.  but the inclination for a run, encouraged by
confidence in his luck, and by a draught of brandy from his
pocket-pistol at the conclusion of the bargain, was not easy to
overcome, especially with a horse under him that would take the fences
to the admiration of the field.  dunstan, however, took one fence too
many, and got his horse pierced with a hedge-stake. his own
ill-favoured person, which was quite unmarketable, escape
 
 ___________________________
 
ng to still his fears, he encouraged them, with that
superstitious impression which clings to us all, that if we expect evil
very strongly it is the less likely to come; and when he heard a horse
approaching at a trot, and saw a hat rising above a hedge beyond an
angle of the lane, he felt as if his conjuration had succeeded.  but no
sooner did the horse come within sight, than his heart sank again.  it
was not wildfire; and in a few moments more he discerned that the rider
was not dunstan, but bryce, who pulled up to speak, with a face that
implied something disagreeable.

"well, mr. godfrey, that's a lucky brother of yours, that master
dunsey, isn't he?"

"what do you mean?"  said godfrey, hastily.

"why, hasn't he been home yet?"  said bryce.

"home?  no.  what has happened?  be quick.  what has he done with my
horse?"

"ah, i thought it was yours, though he pretended you had parted with it
to him."

"has he thrown him down and broken his knees?"  said godfrey, flushed
with exasperation.
 
 ___________________________
 


"worse than that," said bryce.  "you see, i'd made a bargain with him
to buy the horse for a hundred and twenty--a swinging price, but i
always liked the horse.  and what does he do but go and stake him--fly
at a hedge with stakes in it, atop of a bank with a ditch before it.
the horse had been dead a pretty good while when he was found.  so he
hasn't been home since, has he?"

"home?  no," said godfrey, "and he'd better keep away.  confound me for
a fool!  i might have known this would be the end of it."

"well, to tell yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u the truth," said bryce, "after i'd bargained for the
horse, it did come into my head that he might be riding and selling the
horse without your knowledge, for i didn't believe it was his own.  i
knew master dunsey was up to his tricks sometimes. but where can he be
gone?  he's never been seen at batherley.  he couldn't have been hurt,
for he must have walked off."

"hurt?"  said godfrey, bitterly.  "he'll never be hurt--he's made to
hurt other people."

"and so you _did_ give him leave to sell the horse, eh?"  said b
 
 ___________________________
 
ryce.

"yes; i wanted to part with the horse--he was always a little too hard
in the mouth for me," said godfrey; his pride making him wince under
the idea that bryce guessed the sale to be a matter of necessity.  "i
was going to see after him--i thought some mischief had happened.  i'll
go back now," he added, turning the horse's head, and wishing he could
get rid of bryce; for he felt that the long-dreaded crisis in his life
was close upon him. "you're coming on to raveloe, aren't you?"

"well, no, not now," said bryce.  "i _was_ coming round there, for i
had to go to flitton, and i thought i might as well take you in my way,
and just let you know all i knew myself about the horse. i suppose
master dunsey didn't like to show himself till the ill news had blown
over a bit.  he's perhaps gone to pay a visit at the three crowns, by
whitbridge--i know he's fond of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he house."

"perhaps he is," said godfrey, rather absently.  then rousing himself,
he said, with an effort at carelessness, "we shall hear of him soon
enough, i'll be bound."

"well, here's my turning," said bryce, not surprised to perceive that
godfrey was rather "down"; "so i'll bid you good-day, and wish i may
bring you better news another time."

godfrey rode along slowly, representing to himself the scene of
confession to his father from which he felt that there was now no
longer any escape.  the revelation about the money must be made the
very next morning; and if he withheld the rest, dunstan would be sure
to come back shortly, and, finding that he must bear the brunt of his
father's anger, would 
 
 ___________________________
 
e for his own disclosure. but he must go on,
now he had begun.

"it's worse than breaking the horse's knees--he's been staked and
killed," he said, as soon as his father was silent, and had begun to
cut his meat.  "but i wasn't thinking of asking you to buy me another
horse; i was only thinking i'd lost the means of paying you with the
price of wildfire, as i'd meant to do.  dunsey took him to the hunt to
sell him for me the other day, and after he'd made a bargain for a
hundred and twenty with bryce, he went after the hounds, and took some
fool's leap or other that did for the horse at once.  if it hadn't been
for that, i should have paid you a hundred pounds this morning."

the squire had laid down his knife and fork, and was staring at his son
in amazement, not being sufficiently quick of brain to form a probable
guess as to what could have caused so strange an inversion of the
paternal and filial relations as this proposition of his son to pay him
a hundred pounds.

"the truth is, sir--