d have done;
and that, on coming up to him, he saw that marner's eyes were set like
a dead man's, and he spoke to him, and shook him, and his limbs were
stiff, and his hands clutched the bag as if they'd been made of iron;
but just as he had made up his mind that the weaver was dead, he came
all right again, like, as you might say, in the winking of an eye, and
said "good-night", and walked off.  all this jem swore he had seen,
more by token that it was the very day he had been mole-catching on
squire cass's land, down by the old saw-pit.  some said marner must
have been in a "fit", a word which seemed to explain things otherwise
incredible; but the argumentative mr. macey, clerk of the parish, shook
his head, and asked if anybody was ever known to go off in a fit and
not fall down.  a fit was a stroke, wasn't it?  and it was in the
nature of a stroke to partly take away the use of a man's limbs and
throw him on the parish, if he'd got no children to look to.  no, no;
it was no stroke that would 
 
 ___________________________
 
ide in search of
the once familiar herbs: these too belonged to the past, from which his
life had shrunk away, like a rivulet that has sunk far down from the
grassy fringe of its old breadth into a little shivering thread, that
cuts a groove for itself in the barren sand.

but about the christmas of that fifteenth year, a second great change
came over marner's life, and his history became blent in a singular
manner with the life of his neighbours.



chapter iii

the greatest man in raveloe was squire cass, who lived in the large red
house with the handsome flight of stone steps in front and the high
stables behind it, nearly opposite the church.  he was only one among
several landed parishioners, but he alone was honoured with the title
of squire; for though mr. osgood's family was also understood to be of
timeless origin--the raveloe imagination having never ventured back to
that fearful blank when there were no osgoods--still, he merely owned
the farm he occupied; whereas squire cass had a ten
 
 ___________________________
 
 other with
incalculable results.  raveloe lay low among the bushy trees and the
rutted lanes, aloof from the currents of industrial energy and puritan
earnestness: the rich ate and drank freely, accepting gout and apoplexy
as things that ran mysteriously in respectable families, and the poor
thought that the rich were entirely in the right of it to lead a jolly
life; besides, their feasting caused a multiplication of orts, which
were the heirlooms of the poor.  betty jay scented the boiling of
squire cass's hams, but her longing was arrested by the unctuous liquor
in which they were boiled; and when the seasons brought round the great
merry-makings, they were regarded on all hands as a fine thing for the
poor.  for the raveloe feasts were like the rounds of beef and the
barrels of ale--they were on a large scale, and lasted a good while,
especially in the winter-time.  after ladies had packed up their best
gowns and top-knots in bandboxes, and had incurred the risk of fording
streams on pillions
 
 ___________________________
 
ng, that several
neighbours should keep open house in succession. so soon as squire
cass's standing dishes diminished in plenty and freshness, his guests
had nothing to do but to walk a little higher up the village to mr.
osgood's, at the orchards, and they found hams and chines uncut,
pork-pies with the scent of the fire in them, spun butter in all its
freshness--everything, in fact, that appetites at leisure could desire,
in perhaps greater perfection, though not in greater abundance, than at
squire cass's.

for the squire's wife had died long ago, and the red house was without
that presence of the wife and mother which is the fountain of wholesome
love and fear in parlour and kitchen; and this helped to account not
only for there being more profusion than finished excellence in the
holiday provisions, but also for the frequency with which the proud
squire condescended to preside in the parlour of the rainbow rather
than under the shadow of his own dark wainscot; perhaps, also, for the
fact tha
 
 ___________________________
 
was to be allowed to young men whose fathers could afford
it, people shook their heads at the courses of the second son, dunstan,
commonly called dunsey cass, whose taste for swopping and betting might
turn out to be a sowing of something worse than wild oats.  to be sure,
the neighbours said, it was no matter what became of dunsey--a spiteful
jeering fellow, who seemed to enjoy his drink the more when other
people went dry--always provided that his doings did not bring trouble
on a family like squire cass's, with a monument in the church, and
tankards older than king george.  but it would be a thousand pities if
mr. godfrey, the eldest, a fine open-faced good-natured young man who
was to come into the land some day, should take to going along the same
road with his brother, as he had seemed to do of late.  if he went on
in that way, he would lose miss nancy lammeter; for it was well known
that she had looked very shyly on him ever since last whitsuntide
twelvemonth, when there was so much talk a
 
 ___________________________
 
w, in marner's view, was a place of luxurious resort for rich
and stout husbands, whose wives had superfluous stores of linen; it was
the place where he was likely to find the powers and dignities of
raveloe, and where he could most speedily make his loss public.  he
lifted the latch, and turned into the bright bar or kitchen on the
right hand, where the less lofty customers of the house were in the
habit of assembling, the parlour on the left being reserved for the
more select society in which squire cass frequently enjoyed the double
pleasure of conviviality and condescension.  but the parlour was dark
to-night, the chief personages who ornamented its circle being all at
mrs. osgood's birthday dance, as godfrey cass was.  and in consequence
of this, the party on the high-screened seats in the kitchen was more
numerous than usual; several personages, who would otherwise have been
admitted into the parlour and enlarged the opportunity of hectoring and
condescension for their betters, being conten
 
 ___________________________
 
meter's done to keep it whole.  for there was allays a talk as
nobody could get rich on the warrens: though he holds it cheap, for
it's what they call charity land."

"aye, and there's few folks know so well as you how it come to be
charity land, eh, mr. macey?"  said the butcher.

"how should they?"  said the old clerk, with some contempt. "why, my
grandfather made the grooms' livery for that mr. cliff as came and
built the big stables at the warrens.  why, they're stables four times
as big as squire cass's, for he thought o' nothing but hosses and
hunting, cliff didn't--a lunnon tailor, some folks said, as had gone
mad wi' cheating.  for he couldn't ride; lor bless you!  they said he'd
got no more grip o' the hoss than if his legs had been cross-sticks: my
grandfather heared old squire cass say so many and many a time.  but
ride he would, as if old harry had been a-driving him; and he'd a son,
a lad o' sixteen; and nothing would his father have him do, but he must
ride and ride--though the lad 
 
 ___________________________
 
as a dead silence, marner's want of breath and agitation
not allowing him to speak.  the landlord, under the habitual sense that
he was bound to keep his house open to all company, and confident in
the protection of his unbroken neutrality, at last took on himself the
task of adjuring the ghost.

"master marner," he said, in a conciliatory tone, "what's lacking to
you?  what's your business here?"

"robbed!"  said silas, gaspingly.  "i've been robbed!  i want the
constable--and the justice--and squire cass--and mr. crackenthorp."

"lay hold on him, jem rodney," said the landlord, the idea of a ghost
subsiding; "he's off his head, i doubt.  he's wet through."

jem rodney was the outermost man, and sat conveniently near marner's
standing-place; but he declined to give his services.

"come and lay hold on him yourself, mr. snell, if you've a mind," said
jem, rather sullenly.  "he's been robbed, and murdered too, for what i
know," he added, in a muttering tone.

"jem rodney!"  said silas, turning and
 
 ___________________________
 
one and hit, you think there's summat better than
hitting, and you try to throw a stone beyond. what i said was against
the tinder-box: i said nothing against justices and constables, for
they're o' king george's making, and it 'ud be ill-becoming a man in a
parish office to fly out again' king george."

while these discussions were going on amongst the group outside the
rainbow, a higher consultation was being carried on within, under the
presidency of mr. crackenthorp, the rector, assisted by squire cass and
other substantial parishioners.  it had just occurred to mr. snell, the
landlord--he being, as he observed, a man accustomed to put two and two
together--to connect with the tinder-box, which, as deputy-constable,
he himself had had the honourable distinction of finding, certain
recollections of a pedlar who had called to drink at the house about a
month before, and had actually stated that he carried a tinder-box
about with him to light his pipe.  here, surely, was a clue to be
followed ou
 
 ___________________________
 
y read on rare
occasions--brought a vague exulting sense, for which the grown men
could as little have found words as the children, that something great
and mysterious had been done for them in heaven above and in earth
below, which they were appropriating by their presence.  and then the
red faces made their way through the black biting frost to their own
homes, feeling themselves free for the rest of the day to eat, drink,
and be merry, and using that christian freedom without diffidence.

at squire cass's family party that day nobody mentioned dunstan--nobody
was sorry for his absence, or feared it would be too long. the doctor
and his wife, uncle and aunt kimble, were there, and the annual
christmas talk was carried through without any omissions, rising to the
climax of mr. kimble's experience when he walked the london hospitals
thirty years back, together with striking professional anecdotes then
gathered.  whereupon cards followed, with aunt kimble's annual failure
to follow suit, and uncle
 
 ___________________________
 
fail to all
neighbours from time to time, however often they might have declined
the favour.  at present, the squire had only given an express welcome
to the heads of families as they appeared; but always as the evening
deepened, his hospitality rayed out more widely, till he had tapped the
youngest guests on the back and shown a peculiar fondness for their
presence, in the full belief that they must feel their lives made happy
by their belonging to a parish where there was such a hearty man as
squire cass to invite them and wish them well.  even in this early
stage of the jovial mood, it was natural that he should wish to supply
his son's deficiencies by looking and speaking for him.

"aye, aye," he began, offering his snuff-box to mr. lammeter, who for
the second time bowed his head and waved his hand in stiff rejection of
the offer, "us old fellows may wish ourselves young to-night, when we
see the mistletoe-bough in the white parlour. it's true, most things
are gone back'ard in these last thi