 talk about the cock-fighting: everybody
was there, and what else was there to be done?  though, for his own
part, he did not care a button for cock-fighting. snuff, the brown
spaniel, who had placed herself in front of him, and had been watching
him for some time, now jumped up in impatience for the expected caress.
but godfrey thrust her away without looking at her, and left the room,
followed humbly by the unresenting snuff--perhaps because she saw no
other career open to her.



chapter iv

dunstan cass, setting off in the raw morning, at the judiciously quiet
pace of a man who is obliged to ride to cover on his hunter, had to
take his way along the lane which, at its farther extremity, passed by
the piece of unenclosed ground called the stone-pit, where stood the
cottage, once a stone-cutter's shed, now for fifteen years inhabited by
silas marner.  the spot looked very dreary at this season, with the
moist trodden clay about it, and the red, muddy water high up in the
deserted quarry.  that w
 
 ___________________________
 
as dunstan's first thought as he approached it;
the second was, that the old fool of a weaver, whose loom he heard
rattling already, had a great deal of money hidden somewhere.  how was
it that he, dunstan cass, who had often heard talk of marner's
miserliness, had never thought of suggesting to godfrey that he should
frighten or persuade the old fellow into lending the money on the
excellent security of the young squire's prospects?  the resource
occurred to him now as so easy and agreeable, especially as marner's
hoard was likely to be large enough to leave godfrey a handsome surplus
beyond his immediate needs, and enable him to accommodate his faithful
brother, that he had almost turned the horse's
 
 ___________________________
 
d him immediately, that he
might shut in the stream of light: a few steps would be enough to carry
him beyond betrayal by the gleams from the shutter-chinks and the
latch-hole.  the rain and darkness had got thicker, and he was glad of
it; though it was awkward walking with both hands filled, so that it
was as much as he could do to grasp his whip along with one of the
bags.  but when he had gone a yard or two, he might take his time.  so
he stepped forward into the darkness.



chapter v

when dunstan cass turned his back on the cottage, silas marner was not
more than a hundred yards away from it, plodding along from the village
with a sack thrown round his shoulders as an overcoat, and with a horn
lantern in his hand.  his legs were weary, but his mind was at ease,
free from the presentiment of change.  the sense of security more
frequently springs from habit than from conviction, and for this reason
it often subsists after such a change in the conditions as might have
been expected to suggest a
 
 ___________________________
 
n inquiry was set on foot concerning a
pedlar, name unknown, with curly black hair and a foreign complexion,
carrying a box of cutlery and jewellery, and wearing large rings in his
ears.  but either because inquiry was too slow-footed to overtake him,
or because the description applied to so many pedlars that inquiry did
not know how to choose among them, weeks passed away, and there was no
other result concerning the robbery than a gradual cessation of the
excitement it had caused in raveloe.  dunstan cass's absence was hardly
a subject of remark: he had once before had a quarrel with his father,
and had gone off, nobody knew whither, to return at the end of six
weeks, take up his old quarters unforbidden, and swagger as usual.  his
own family, who equally expected this issue, with the sole difference
that the squire was determined this time to forbid him the old
quarters, never mentioned his absence; and when his uncle kimble or mr.
osgood noticed it, the story of his having killed wildfire, and