 most brutal,--just as a chair or table, which once decorated the
superb saloon, comes, at last, battered and defaced, to the barroom of
some filthy tavern, or some low haunt of vulgar debauchery. the great
difference is, that the table and chair cannot feel, and the _man_ can;
for even a legal enactment that he shall be “taken, reputed, adjudged in
law, to be a chattel personal,” cannot blot out his soul, with its own
private little world of memories, hopes, loves, fears, and desires.

mr. simon legree, tom’s master, had purchased slaves at one place
and another, in new orleans, to the number of eight, and driven them,
handcuffed, in couples of two and two, down to the good steamer pirate,
which lay at the levee, ready for a trip up the red river.

having got them fairly on board, and the boat being off, he came round,
with that air of efficiency which ever characterized him, to take a
review of them. stopping opposite to tom, who had been attired for sale
in his best broadcloth suit, with 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng,
praying, singing niggers on my place; so remember. now, mind yourself,”
 he said, with a stamp and a fierce glance of his gray eye, directed at
tom, “_i’m_ your church now! you understand,--you’ve got to be as _i_
say.”

something within the silent black man answered _no!_ and, as if repeated
by an invisible voice, came the words of an old prophetic scroll, as eva
had often read them to him,--“fear not! for i have redeemed thee. i have
called thee by name. thou art mine!”

but simon legree heard no voice. that voice is one he never shall hear.
he only glared for a moment on the downcast face of tom, and walked off.
he took tom’s trunk, which contained a very neat and abundant wardrobe,
to the forecastle, where it was soon surrounded by various hands of
the boat. with much laughing, at the expense of niggers who tried to be
gentlemen, the articles very readily were sold to one and another, and
the empty trunk finally put up at auction. it was a good joke, they all
thought, espec
 
 ___________________________
 
turbid current, through the abrupt tortuous windings of the red
river; and sad eyes gazed wearily on the steep red-clay banks, as they
glided by in dreary sameness. at last the boat stopped at a small town,
and legree, with his party, disembarked.



chapter xxxii

dark places


“the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.” *

     * ps. 74:20.

trailing wearily behind a rude wagon, and over a ruder road, tom and his
associates faced onward.

in the wagon was seated simon legree and the two women, still fettered
together, were stowed away with some baggage in the back part of it,
and the whole company were seeking legree’s plantation, which lay a good
distance off.

it was a wild, forsaken road, now winding through dreary pine barrens,
where the wind whispered mournfully, and now over log causeways, through
long cypress swamps, the doleful trees rising out of the slimy, spongy
ground, hung with long wreaths of funeral black moss, while ever and
anon the loathsome for
 
 ___________________________
 
too!”

“you lie, you jade! i’ll be up to my word. either behave yourself, or
stay down to the quarters, and fare and work with the rest.”

“i’d rather, ten thousand times,” said the woman, “live in the dirtiest
hole at the quarters, than be under your hoof!”

“but you _are_ under my hoof, for all that,” said he, turning upon her,
with a savage grin; “that’s one comfort. so, sit down here on my knee,
my dear, and hear to reason,” said he, laying hold on her wrist.

“simon legree, take care!” said the woman, with a sharp flash of her
eye, a glance so wild and insane in its light as to be almost appalling.
“you’re afraid of me, simon,” she said, deliberately; “and you’ve reason
to be! but be careful, for i’ve got the devil in me!”

the last words she whispered in a hissing tone, close to his ear.

“get out! i believe, to my soul, you have!” said legree, pushing her
from him, and looking uncomfortably at her. “after all, cassy,” he said,
“why can
 
 ___________________________
 
small mattresses
and some pillows; a box near by was plentifully stored with candles,
provisions, and all the clothing necessary to their journey, which cassy
had arranged into bundles of an astonishingly small compass.

“there,” said cassy, as she fixed the lamp into a small hook, which she
had driven into the side of the box for that purpose; “this is to be our
home for the present. how do you like it?”

“are you sure they won’t come and search the garret?”

“i’d like to see simon legree doing that,” said cassy. “no, indeed; he
will be too glad to keep away. as to the servants, they would any of
them stand and be shot, sooner than show their faces here.”

somewhat reassured, emmeline settled herself back on her pillow.

“what did you mean, cassy, by saying you would kill me?” she said,
simply.

“i meant to stop your fainting,” said cassy, “and i did do it. and now i
tell you, emmeline, you must make up your mind _not_ to faint, let what
will come; there’s no s