differences
we had a good deal in common. all of us were interested in science.

terry was rich enough to do as he pleased. his great aim was
exploration. he used to make all kinds of a row because there was
nothing left to explore now, only patchwork and filling in, he said. he
filled in well enough--he had a lot of talents--great on mechanics and
electricity. had all kinds of boats and motorcars, and was one of the
best of our airmen.

we never could have done the thing at all without terry.

jeff margrave was born to be a poet, a botanist--or both--but his folks
persuaded him to be a doctor instead. he was a good one, for his age,
but his real interest was in what he loved to call “the wonders of
science.”

as for me, sociology’s my major. you have to back that up with a lot of
other sciences, of course. i’m interested in them all.

terry was strong on facts--geography and meteorology and those; jeff
could beat him any time on biology, and i didn’t care what it was they
talked about, s
 
 ___________________________
 
g
there before us, wholly at ease, staring as we stared, till first one,
and then all of them burst into peals of delighted laughter.

then there was a torrent of soft talk tossed back and forth; no savage
sing-song, but clear musical fluent speech.

we met their laughter cordially, and doffed our hats to them, at which
they laughed again, delightedly.

then terry, wholly in his element, made a polite speech, with
explanatory gestures, and proceeded to introduce us, with pointing
finger. “mr. jeff margrave,” he said clearly; jeff bowed as gracefully
as a man could in the fork of a great limb. “mr. vandyck jennings”--i
also tried to make an effective salute and nearly lost my balance.

then terry laid his hand upon his chest--a fine chest he had, too,
and introduced himself; he was braced carefully for the occasion and
achieved an excellent obeisance.

again they laughed delightedly, and the one nearest me followed his
tactics.

“celis,” she said distinctly, pointing to the one in blue; 