 got to be done somehow; the rest of the world needs to know about
that country.

i haven’t said where it was for fear some self-appointed missionaries,
or traders, or land-greedy expansionists, will take it upon themselves
to push in. they will not be wanted, i can tell them that, and will fare
worse than we did if they do find it.

it began this way. there were three of us, classmates and friends--terry
o. nicholson (we used to call him the old nick, with good reason), jeff
margrave, and i, vandyck jennings.

we had known each other years and years, and in spite of our differences
we had a good deal in common. all of us were interested in science.

terry was rich enough to do as he pleased. his great aim was
exploration. he used to make all kinds of a row because there was
nothing left to explore now, only patchwork and filling in, he said. he
filled in well enough--he had a lot of talents--great on mechanics and
electricity. had all kinds of boats and motorcars, and was one of the
best of our air
 
 ___________________________
 
of delighted laughter.

then there was a torrent of soft talk tossed back and forth; no savage
sing-song, but clear musical fluent speech.

we met their laughter cordially, and doffed our hats to them, at which
they laughed again, delightedly.

then terry, wholly in his element, made a polite speech, with
explanatory gestures, and proceeded to introduce us, with pointing
finger. “mr. jeff margrave,” he said clearly; jeff bowed as gracefully
as a man could in the fork of a great limb. “mr. vandyck jennings”--i
also tried to make an effective salute and nearly lost my balance.

then terry laid his hand upon his chest--a fine chest he had, too,
and introduced himself; he was braced carefully for the occasion and
achieved an excellent obeisance.

again they laughed delightedly, and the one nearest me followed his
tactics.

“celis,” she said distinctly, pointing to the one in blue; “alima”--the
one in rose; then, with a vivid imitation of terry’s impressive manner,
she laid a firm delicat