 timidly, but they were promptly
silenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. then, as usual, the sheep
broke into "four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardness
was smoothed over. finally napoleon raised his trotter for silence and
announced that he had already made all the arrangements. there would be no
need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which
would clearly be most undesirable. he intended to take the whole burden
upon his own shoulders. a mr. whymper, a solicitor living in willingdon,
had agreed to act as intermediary between animal farm and the outside
world, and would visit the farm every monday morning to receive his
instructions. napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of "long live
animal farm!" and after the singing of 'beasts of england' the animals
were dismissed.

afterwards squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals' minds at
rest. he assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade and
using money had ne
 
 ___________________________
 
een passed, or even suggested. it was pure
imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated by
snowball. a few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but squealer asked
them shrewdly, "are you certain that this is not something that you have
dreamed, comrades? have you any record of such a resolution? is it written
down anywhere?" and since it was certainly true that nothing of the kind
existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.

every monday mr. whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. he was a
sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way
of business, but sharp enough to have realised earlier than anyone else
that animal farm would need a broker and that the commissions would be
worth having. the animals watched his coming and going with a kind of
dread, and avoided him as much as possible. nevertheless, the sight of
napoleon, on all fours, delivering orders to whymper, who stood on two
legs, roused their pr
 
 ___________________________
 
or that if it
did stand up, then that it would never work. and yet, against their will,
they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which the
animals were managing their own affairs. one symptom of this was that they
had begun to call animal farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend
that it was called the manor farm. they had also dropped their championship
of jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live
in another part of the county. except through whymper, there was as yet no
contact between animal farm and the outside world, but there were constant
rumours that napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement
either with mr. pilkington of foxwood or with mr. frederick of
pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

it was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and
took up their residence there. again the animals seemed to remember that a
resolution against this had been passed in the e
 
 ___________________________
 
cessary to conceal this fact from the outside world.
emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings were
inventing fresh lies about animal farm. once again it was being put about
that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they were
continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and
infanticide. napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow
if the real facts of the food situation were known, and he decided to make
use of mr. whymper to spread a contrary impression. hitherto the animals
had had little or no contact with whymper on his weekly visits: now,
however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark
casually in his hearing that rations had been increased. in addition,
napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled
nearly to the brim with sand, which was then covered up with what remained
of the grain and meal. on some suitable pretext whymper was led through
the store-shed a
 
 ___________________________
 
hich smashed to pieces on the floor. napoleon acted swiftly and
ruthlessly. he ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed that
any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished
by death. the dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. for five
days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their
nesting boxes. nine hens had died in the meantime. their bodies were
buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of
coccidiosis. whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly
delivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take them
away.

all this while no more had been seen of snowball. he was rumoured to be
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either foxwood or pinchfield.
napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers
than before. it happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which
had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared
 
 ___________________________
 
.
it was well seasoned, and whymper had advised napoleon to sell it; both
mr. pilkington and mr. frederick were anxious to buy it. napoleon was
hesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. it was noticed
that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with
frederick, snowball was declared to be in hiding at foxwood, while, when
he inclined toward pilkington, snowball was said to be at pinchfield.

suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. snowball
was secretly frequenting the farm 
 
 ___________________________
 
tchest over all,
comrade napoleon!

had i a sucking-pig,
ere he had grown as big
even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,
he should have learned to be
faithful and true to thee,
yes, his first squeak should be
"comrade napoleon!"


napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall
of the big barn, at the opposite end from the seven commandments. it was
surmounted by a portrait of napoleon, in profile, executed by squealer in
white paint.

meanwhile, through the agency of whymper, napoleon was engaged in
complicated negotiations with frederick and pilkington. the pile of timber
was still unsold. of the two, frederick was the more anxious to get hold
of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. at the same time there
were renewed rumours that frederick and his men were plotting to attack
animal farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused
furious jealousy in him. snowball was known to be still skulking on
pinchfield farm. in the middle of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
n. four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young
pig named pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate
it, lest it should be poisoned.

at about the same time it was given out that napoleon had arranged to sell
the pile of timber to mr. pilkington; he was also going to enter into a
regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between animal farm
and foxwood. the relations between napoleon and pilkington, though they
were only conducted through whymper, were now almost friendly. the animals
distrusted pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to
frederick, whom they both feared and hated. as the summer wore on, and the
windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack
grew stronger and stronger. frederick, it was said, intended to bring
against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the
magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the
title-deeds of animal farm the
 
 ___________________________
 
 been spread some time after the battle of the
cowshed by snowball himself. so far from being decorated, he had been
censured for showing cowardice in the battle. once again some of the
animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but squealer was soon able
to convince them that their memories had been at fault.

in the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort--for the harvest had to
be gathered at almost the same time--the windmill was finished. the
machinery had still to be installed, and whymper was negotiating the
purchase of it, but the structure was completed. in the teeth of every
difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck
and of snowball's treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the
very day! tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their
masterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it
had been built the first time. moreover, the walls were twice as thick as
before. nothing short of explosives wo
 
 ___________________________
 
al meeting was held in the barn for the animals to
inspect frederick's bank-notes. smiling beatifically, and wearing both his
decorations, napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the
money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. the animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. and boxer
put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things
stirred and rustled in his breath.

three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. whymper, his face deadly
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard
and rushed straight into the farmhouse. the next moment a choking roar of
rage sounded from napoleon's apartments. the news of what had happened
sped round the farm like wildfire. the banknotes were forgeries! frederick
had got the timber for nothing!

napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice
pronounced the death sentence upon frederick. when captured, he said,
frederick shou
 
 ___________________________
 
oison into napoleon's food. at eleven o'clock squealer came
out to make another announcement. as his last act upon earth, comrade
napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be
punished by death.

by the evening, however, napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the
following morning squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the
way to recovery. by the evening of that day napoleon was back at work, and
on the next day it was learned that he had instructed whymper to purchase
in willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. a week later
napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it
had previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals
who were past work, was to be ploughed up. it was given out that the
pasture was exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known that
napoleon intended to sow it with barley.

about this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was
able to unde
 
 ___________________________
 
ld about
the rebellion and the principles of animalism, especially from clover, for
whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they
understood very much of it.

the farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even been
enlarged by two fields which had been bought from mr. pilkington. the
windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a
threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings
had been added to it. whymper had bought himself a dogcart. the windmill,
however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. it
was used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. the
animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was
finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. but the luxuries
of which snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with
electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no
longer talked abou