ad given to the more intelligent animals
on the farm a completely new outlook on life. they did not know when the
rebellion predicted by major would take place, they had no reason for
thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly
that it was their duty to prepare for it. the work of teaching and
organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally
recognised as being the cleverest of the animals. pre-eminent among the
pigs were two young boars named snowball and napoleon, whom mr. jones was
breeding up for sale. napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking
berkshire boar, the only berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but
with a reputation for getting his own way. snowball was a more vivacious
pig than napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was not
considered to have the same depth of character. all the other male pigs on
the farm were porkers. the best known among them was a small fat pig named
squealer, with very round cheeks, 
 
 ___________________________
 
," or made
elementary remarks such as "mr. jones feeds us. if he were gone, we should
starve to death." others asked such questions as "why should we care what
happens after we are dead?" or "if this rebellion is to happen anyway,
what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?", and the pigs
had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the
spirit of animalism. the stupidest questions of all were asked by mollie,
the white mare. the very first question she asked snowball was: "will
there still be sugar after the rebellion?"

"no," said snowball firmly. "we have no means of making sugar on this
farm. besides, you do not need sugar. you will have all the oats and hay
you want."

"and shall i still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked mollie.

"comrade," said snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are
the badge of slavery. can you not understand that liberty is worth more
than ribbons?"

mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

t
 
 ___________________________
 
ildings to
wipe out the last traces of jones's hated reign. the harness-room at the
end of the stables was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the
dog-chains, the cruel knives with which mr. jones had been used to
castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. the reins, the
halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the
rubbish fire which was burning in the yard. so were the whips. all the
animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames.
snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the mark
of a human being. all animals should go naked."

when boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with
the rest.

in a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded
them of mr. jones. napoleo
 
 ___________________________
 
h and snuffed its rich scent. then
they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with
speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool,
the spinney. it was as though they had never seen these things before, and
even now they could hardly believe that it was all their own.

then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside
the door of the farmhouse. that was theirs too, but they were frightened
to go inside. after a moment, however, snowball and napoleon butted the
door open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file,
walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. they tiptoed
from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind
of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather
mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the brussels carpet,
the lithograph of queen victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. they
were just coming down the stairs when moll
 
 ___________________________
 
 and admiring
herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. the others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
a unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be
preserved as a museum. all were agreed that no animal must ever live there.

the animals had their breakfast, and then snowball and napoleon called
them together again.

"comrades," said snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day
before us. today we begin the hay harvest. but there is another matter
that must be attended to first."

the pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught
themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged
to mr. jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap.
napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way 
 
 ___________________________
 
down to
the five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. then snowball (for it
was snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two
knuckles of his trotter, painted out manor farm from the top bar of the
gate and in its place painted animal farm. this was to be the name of the
farm from now onwards. after this they went back to the farm buildings,
where snowball and napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be set
against the end wall of the big barn. they explained that by their studies
of the past three months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles
of animalism to seven commandments. these seven commandments would now be
inscribed on the wall; they would form an unalterable law by which all the
animals on animal farm must live for ever after. with some difficulty
(for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder) snowball

 
 ___________________________
 
irty yards away. they ran thus:


the seven commandments

1. whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy.
2. whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend.
3. no animal shall wear clothes.
4. no animal shall sleep in a bed.
5. no animal shall drink alcohol.
6. no animal shall kill any other animal.
7. all animals are equal.


it was very neatly written, and except that "friend" was written "freind"
and one of the "s's" was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all
the way through. snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. all
the animals nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at once
began to learn the commandments by heart.

"now, comrades," cried snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, "to the
hayfield! let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more
quickly than jones and his men could do."

but at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time
past, set up a loud lowing. they had not been milked for twenty-four
hours, and
 
 ___________________________
 
 and milked the cows fairly successfully, their
trotters being well adapted to this task. soon there were five buckets of
frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable
interest.

"what is going to happen to all that milk?" said someone.

"jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash," said one of the hens.

"never mind the milk, comrades!" cried napoleon, placing himself in front
of the buckets. "that will be attended to. the harvest is more important.
comrade snowball will lead the way. i shall follow in a few minutes.
forward, comrades! the hay is waiting."

so the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when
they came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.




chapter iii



how they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! but their efforts were
rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.

sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human
beings and not for 
 
 ___________________________
 
unteering for extra work either. about the rebellion and its
results he would express no opinion. when asked whether he was not happier
now that jones was gone, he would say only "donkeys live a long time. none
of you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content with
this cryptic answer.

on sundays there was no work. breakfast was an hour later than usual, and
after breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week without
fail. first came the hoisting of the flag. snowball had found in the
harness-room an old green tablecloth of mrs. jones's and had painted on it
a hoof and a horn in white. this was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse
garden every sunday morning. the flag was green, snowball explained, to
represent the green fields of england, while the hoof and horn signified
the future republic of the animals which would arise when the human race
had been finally overthrown. after the hoisting of the flag all the
animals trooped into the big barn for a genera
 
 ___________________________
 
l assembly which was known
as the meeting. here the work of the coming week was planned out and
resolutions were put forward and debated. it was always the pigs who put
forward the resolutions. the other animals understood how to vote, but
could never think of any resolutions of their own. snowball and napoleon
were by far the most active in the debates. but it was noticed that these
two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the
other could be counted on to oppose it. even when it was resolved--a thing
no one could object to in itself--to set aside the small paddock behind
the orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past work, there was a
stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of animal. the
meeting always ended with the singing of 'b
 
 ___________________________
 
easts of england', and the
afternoon was given up to recreation.

the pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves.
here, in the evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other
necessary arts from books which they had brought out of the farmhouse.
snowball also busied himself with organising the other animals into what
he called animal committees. he was indefatigable at this. he formed the
egg production committee for the hens, the clean tails league for the
cows, the wild comrades' re-education committee (the object of this was to
tame the rats and rabbits), the whiter wool movement for the sheep, and
various others, besides instituting classes in reading and writing. on the
whole, these projects were a failure. the attempt to tame the wild
cre
 
 ___________________________
 
hem out once
or twice every day to refresh his memory. mollie refused to learn any but
the six letters which spelt her own name. she would form these very neatly
out of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or two
and walk round them admiring them.

none of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter a.
it was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and
ducks, were unable to learn the seven commandments by heart. after much
thought snowball declared that the seven commandments could in effect be
reduced to a single maxim, namely: "four legs good, two legs bad." this,
he said, contained the essential principle of animalism. whoever had
thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences. the birds at
first objected, since it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but
snowball proved to them that this was not so.

"a bird's wing, comrades," he said, "is an organ of propulsion and not of
manipulation. it should therefore b
 
 ___________________________
 
e regarded as a leg. the distinguishing
mark of man is the hand, the instrument with which he does all his
mischief."

the birds did not understand snowball's long words, but they accepted his
explanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new
maxim by heart. four legs good, two legs bad, was inscribed on the end
wall of the barn, above the seven commandments and in bigger letters. when
they had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this
maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating
"four legs good, two legs bad! four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep it
up for hours on end, never
 
 ___________________________
 
 growing tired of it.

napoleon took no interest in snowball's committees. he said that the
education of the young was more important than anything that could be done
for those who were already grown up. it happened that jessie and bluebell
had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to
nine sturdy puppies. as soon as they were weaned, napoleon took them away
from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for
their education. he took them up into a loft which could only be reached
by a ladder from the harness
 
 ___________________________
 
soon cleared up. it was mixed
every day into the pigs' mash. the early apples were now ripening, and the
grass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. the animals had assumed
as a matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day,
however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected
and brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. at this some of
the other animals murmured, but it was no use. all the pigs were in full
agreement on this point, even snowball and napoleon. squealer was sent to
make the necessary explanations to the others.

"comrades!" he cried. "you do not imagine, i hope, that we pigs are doing
this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? many of us actually dislike
milk and apples. i dislike them myself. our sole object in taking these
things is to preserve our health. milk and apples (this has been proved by
science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the
well-being of a pig. we pigs are brainworkers. the who
 
 ___________________________
 
 completely certain of, it
was that they did not want jones back. when it was put to them in this
light, they had no more to say. the importance of keeping the pigs in good
health was all too obvious. so it was agreed without further argument that
the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when
they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.




chapter iv



by the late summer the news of what had happened on animal farm had spread
across half the county. every day snowball and napoleon sent out flights
of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on
neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the rebellion, and teach them
the tune of 'beasts of england'.

most of this time mr. jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the red
lion at willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the
monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by
a pack of good-for-nothing animals. the other farmers sympathised in
principle, but 
 
 ___________________________
 
ht of pigeons came whirling through the air and
alighted in the yard of animal farm in the wildest excitement. jones and
all his men, with half a dozen others from foxwood and pinchfield, had
entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to
the farm. they were all carrying sticks, except jones, who was marching
ahead with a gun in his hands. obviously they were going to attempt the
recapture of the farm.

this had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. snowball,
who had studied an old book of julius caesar's campaigns which he had
found in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. he gave
his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at his
post.

as the human beings approached the farm buildings, snowball launched his
first attack. all the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and
fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the
men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hidi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng behind the
hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
however, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a
little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks.
snowball now launched his second line of attack. muriel, benjamin, and all
the sheep, with snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded
and butted the men from every side, while benjamin turned around and
lashed at them with his small hoofs. but once again the men, with their
sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly,
at a squeal from snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the
animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

the men gave a shout of triumph. they saw, as they imagined, their enemies
in flight, and they rushed after
 
 ___________________________
 
 them in disorder. this was just what
snowball had intended. as soon as they were well inside the yard, the
three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying
in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them
off. snowball now gave the signal for the charge. he himself dashed
straight for jones. jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. the
pellets scored bloody streaks along snowball's back, and a sheep dropped
dead. without halting for an instant, snowball flung his fifteen stone
against jones's legs. jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun
flew out of his hands. but the most terrifying spectacle of all was boxer,
rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shod
hoofs like a stallion. his very first blow took a stable-lad from foxwood
on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. at the sight, several
men dropped their sticks and tried t
 
 ___________________________
 
t by the same way as they
had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their
calves all the way.

all the men were gone except one. back in the yard boxer was pawing with
his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn
him over. the boy did not stir.

"he is dead," said boxer sorrowfully. "i had no intention of doing that.
i forgot that i was wearing iron shoes. who will believe that i did not do
this on purpose?"

"no sentimentality, comrade!" cried snowball from whose wounds the blood
was still dripping. "war is war. the only good human being is a dead one."

"i have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated boxer, and
his eyes were full of tears.

"where is mollie?" exclaimed somebody.

mollie in fact was missing. for a moment there was great alarm; it was
feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her
off with them. in the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with
her head buried among the hay in
 
 ___________________________
 
or
her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had
already recovered and made off.

the animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recounting
his own exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. an impromptu
celebration of the victory was held immediately. the flag was run up and
'beasts of england' was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been
killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her
grave. at the graveside snowball made a little speech, emphasising the
need for all animals to be ready to die for animal farm if need be.

the animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, "animal
hero, first class," which was conferred there and then on snowball and
boxer. it consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old
horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on
sundays and holidays. there was also "animal hero, second class," which
was conferred posthumously on the dead sh
 
 ___________________________
 
erly hard weather. the earth was like iron, and
nothing could be done in the fields. many meetings were held in the big
barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the
coming season. it had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were
manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of
farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.
this arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for the
disputes between snowball and napoleon. these two disagreed at every point
where disagreement was possible. if one of them suggested sowing a bigger
acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of
oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right
for cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything
except roots. each had his own following, and there were some violent
debates. at the meetings snowball often won over the majority by his
brilliant speeches, b
 
 ___________________________
 
ut napoleon was better at canvassing support for
himself in between times. he was especially successful with the sheep. of
late the sheep had taken to bleating "four legs good, two legs bad" both
in and out of season, and they often interrupted the meeting with this. it
was noticed that they were especially liable to break into "four legs
good, two legs bad" at crucial moments in snowball's speeches. snowball
had made a close study of some back numbers of the 'farmer and
stockbreeder' which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans
for innovations and improvements. he talked learnedly about field drains,
silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for all
the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot
every day, to save the labour of cartage. napoleon produced no schemes of
his own, but said quietly that snowball's would come to nothing, and
 
 ___________________________
 

seemed to be biding his time. but of all their controversies, none was so
bitter as the one that took place over the windmill.

in the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small
knoll which was the highest point on the farm. after surveying the ground,
snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could
be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power.
this would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a
circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking
machine. the animals had never heard of anything of this kind before
(for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive
machinery), and they listened in astonishment while snowball conjured up
pict
 
 ___________________________
 
ures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while
they grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with
reading and conversation.

within a few weeks snowball's plans for the windmill were fully worked
out. the mechanical details came mostly from three books which had
belonged to mr. jones--'one thousand useful things to do about the house',
'every man his own bricklayer', and 'electricity for beginners'. snowball
used as his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had a
smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. he was closeted there for
hours at a time. with his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of
chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly
to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers of
excitement. gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks and
cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the ot
 
 ___________________________
 
her animals
found completely unintelligible but very impressive. all of them came to
look at snowball's drawings at least once a day. even the hens and ducks
came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. only napoleon
held aloof. he had declared himself against the windmill from the start.
one day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. he walked
heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and
snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplating
them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg,
urinated o
 
 ___________________________
 
ver the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.

the whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. snowball
did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. stone would
have to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to
be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (how
these were to be procured, snowball did not say.) but he maintained that
it could all be done in a year. and thereafter, he declared, so much
labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days
a week. napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the
moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on
the windmill they would all starve to death. the animals formed themselves
into two factions under the slogan, "vote for snowball and the three-day
week" and "vote for napoleon
 
 ___________________________
 
--that is, badly.

apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the
defence of the farm. it was fully realised that though the human beings
had been defeated in the battle of the cowshed they might make another and
more determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate mr. jones.
they had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat
had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring
farms more restive than ever. as usual, snowball and napoleon were in
disagreement. according to napoleon, what the animals must do was to
procure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. according to
snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion
among the animals on the other farms. the one argued that if they could
not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued
that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend
themselves. the animals listened first to napole
 
 ___________________________
 
on, then to snowball, and
could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they always found
themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.

at last the day came when snowball's plans were completed. at the meeting
on the following sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on
the windmill was to be put to the vote. when the animals had assembled in
the big barn, snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by
bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the building
of the windmill. then napoleon stood up to reply. he said very quietly
that the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it,
and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and
seemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. at this snowball
sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleating
again, brok
 
 ___________________________
 
e into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. until now
the animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a
moment snowball's eloquence had carried them away. in glowing sentences he
painted a picture of animal farm as it might be when sordid labour was
lifted from the animals' backs. his imagination had now run far beyond
chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. electricity, he said, could operate
threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders,
besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold
water, and an electric heater. by the time he had finished speaking, there
was no do
 
 ___________________________
 
ubt as to which way the vote would go. but just at this moment
napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at snowball,
uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter
before.

at this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs
wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. they dashed
straight for snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to
escape their snapping jaws. in a moment he was out of the door and they
were after him. too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals
crowded through the door to watch the chase. snowball was racing across
the long pasture that led to the road. he was running as only a pig can
run, but the dogs were close on his heels. suddenly he slipped and it
seemed certain that they had him. then he was up again, running faster
than ever, then the dogs w
 
 ___________________________
 
ere gaining on him again. one of them all but
closed his jaws on snowball's tail, but snowball whisked it free just in
time. then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare,
slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.

silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. in a moment
the dogs came bounding back. at first no one had been able to imagine
where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they
were the puppies whom napoleon had taken away from their mothers and
reared privately. though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs,
 
 ___________________________
 
etings would
come to an end. they were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. in future
all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a
special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. these would meet in
private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. the
animals would still assemble on sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing
'beasts of england', and receive their orders for the week; but there would
be no more debates.

in spite of the shock that snowball's expulsion had given them, the
animals were dismayed by this announcement. several of them would have
protested if they could have found the right arguments. even boxer was
vaguely troubled. he set his ears back, shook his forelock several times,
and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think
of anything to say. some of the pigs themselves, however, were more
articulate. four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of
disapproval, and all four of them s
 
 ___________________________
 
 animal here appreciates the
sacrifice that comrade napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon
himself. do not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! on the
contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. no one believes more
firmly than comrade napoleon that all animals are equal. he would be only
too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. but sometimes you
might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?
suppose you had decided to follow snowball, with his moonshine of
windmills--snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

"he fought bravely at the battle of the cowshed," said somebody.

"bravery is not enough," said squealer. "loyalty and obedience are more
important. and as to the battle of the cowshed, i believe the time will
come when we shall find that snowball's part in it was much exaggerated.
discipline, comrades, iron discipline! that is the watchword for today.
one false step, and our enemies would be upon 
 
 ___________________________
 
certainly the animals did not
want jones back; if the holding of debates on sunday mornings was liable
to bring him back, then the debates must stop. boxer, who had now had time
to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "if comrade
napoleon says it, it must be right." and from then on he adopted the
maxim, "napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "i
will work harder."

by this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.
the shed where snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut
up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. every
sunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn to
receive their orders for the week. the skull of old major, now clean of
flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the
foot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. after the hoisting of the flag, the
animals were required to file past the skull in a reverent manner before
entering t
 
 ___________________________
 
he past. napoleon, with squealer and another pig named minimus, who
had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of
the raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round
them, and the other pigs sitting behind. the rest of the animals sat
facing them in the main body of the barn. napoleon read out the orders for
the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of 'beasts
of england', all the animals dispersed.

on the third sunday after snowball's expulsion, the animals were somewhat
surprised to hear napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built
after all. he did not give any reason for having changed his mind, but
merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work,
it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. the plans, however,
had all been prepared, down to the last detail. a special committee of
pigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. the building of
the windmill, with various o
 
 ___________________________
 
ther improvements, was expected to take two
years.

that evening squealer explained privately to the other animals that
napoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. on the
contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan
which snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually
been stolen from among napoleon's papers. the windmill was, in fact,
napoleon's own creation. why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so
strongly against it? here squealer looked very sly. that, he said, was
comrade napoleon's cunning. he had seemed to oppose the windmill, simply
as a manoeuvre to get rid of snowball, who was a dangerous character and a
bad influence. now that snowball was out of the way, the plan could go
forward witho
 
 ___________________________
 
uld visit the farm every monday morning to receive his
instructions. napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of "long live
animal farm!" and after the singing of 'beasts of england' the animals
were dismissed.

afterwards squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals' minds at
rest. he assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade and
using money had never been passed, or even suggested. it was pure
imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated by
snowball. a few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but squealer asked
them shrewdly, "are you certain that this is not something that you have
dreamed, comrades? have you any record of such a resolution? is it written
down anywhere?" and since it was certainly true that nothing of the kind
existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.

every monday mr. whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. he was a
sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very 
 
 ___________________________
 
oriously scattered all around. unable at first to
speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. napoleon
paced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. his tail
had grown rigid and twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of
intense mental activity. suddenly he halted as though his mind were
made up.

"comrades," he said quietly, "do you know who is responsible for this? do
you know the enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill?
snowball!" he suddenly roared in a voice of thunder. "snowball has done
this thing! in sheer malignity, thinking to set back our plans and avenge
himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept here under
cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year. comrades, here
and now i pronounce the death sentence upon snowball. 'animal hero, second
class,' and half a bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to
justice. a full bushel to anyone who captures him alive!"

the animals were
 
 ___________________________
 
 shocked beyond measure to learn that even snowball could
be guilty of such an action. there was a cry of indignation, and everyone
began thinking out ways of catching snowball if he should ever come back.
almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass at
a little distance from the knoll. they could only be traced for a few
yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. napoleon snuffed
deeply at them and pronounced them to be snowball's. he gave it as his
opinion that snowball had probably come from the direction of foxwood farm.

"no more delays, comrades!" cried napoleon when the footprints had been
examined. "there is work to be done. this very morning we begin rebuilding
the windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. we
will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily.
remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall
be carried out to the day. forwar
 
 ___________________________
 
 windmill! long
live animal farm!"




chapter vii



it was a bitter winter. the stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow,
and then by a hard frost which did not break till well into february. the
animals carried on as best they could with the rebuilding of the windmill,
well knowing that the outside world was watching them and that the envious
human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not finished
on time.

out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was
snowball who had destroyed the windmill: they said that it had fallen down
because the walls were too thin. the animals knew that this was not the
case. still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet thick this
time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much
larger quantities of stone. for a long time the quarry was full of
snowdrifts and nothing could be done. some progress was made in the dry
frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work, and the animals could
no
 
 ___________________________
 
o a hen should be punished
by death. the dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. for five
days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their
nesting boxes. nine hens had died in the meantime. their bodies were
buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of
coccidiosis. whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly
delivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take them
away.

all this while no more had been seen of snowball. he was rumoured to be
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either foxwood or pinchfield.
napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers
than before. it happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which
had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.
it was well seasoned, and whymper had advised napoleon to sell it; both
mr. pilkington and mr. frederick were anxious to buy it. napoleon was
hesitating between the two, unable to m
 
 ___________________________
 
ake up his mind. it was noticed
that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with
frederick, snowball was declared to be in hiding at foxwood, while, when
he inclined toward pilkington, snowball was said to be at pinchfield.

suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. snowball
was secretly frequenting the farm by night! the animals were so disturbed
that they could hardly sleep in their stalls. every night, it was said, he
came creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds of
mischief. he stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs,
he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. whenever
anything went wrong it became usual to attribute it to snowball. if a
window was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain
 
 ___________________________
 
 to say
that snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the
store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that snowball had thrown
it down the well. curiously enough, they went on believing this even after
the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal. the cows declared
unanimously that snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their
sleep. the rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to
be in league with snowball.

napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into snowball's
activities. with his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour
of inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at a
respectful distance. at every few steps napoleon stopped and snuffed the
ground for traces of snowball's footsteps, which, he said, he could detect
by the smell. he snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed,
in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found trac
 
 ___________________________
 
es of snowball
almost everywhere. he would put his snout to the ground, give several deep
sniffs, ad exclaim in a terrible voice, "snowball! he has been here! i can
smell him distinctly!" and at the word "snowball" all the dogs let out
blood-curdling growls and showed their side teeth.

the animals were thoroughly frightened. it seemed to them as though
snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about
them and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. in the evening squealer
called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told
them that he had some serious news to report.

"comrades!" cried squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terrible
thing has been discovered. snowball has sold himself to frederick of
pinchfield farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm
away from us! snowball is to 
 
 ___________________________
 
act as his guide when the attack begins. but
there is worse than that. we had thought that snowball's rebellion was
caused simply by his vanity and ambition. but we were wrong, comrades. do
you know what the real reason was? snowball was in league with jones from
the very start! he was jones's secret agent all the time. it has all been
proved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only just
discovered. to my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. did we not
see for ourselves how he attempted--fortunately without success--to get us
defeated and destroyed at the battle of the cowshed?"

the animals were stupefied. this was a wickedness far outdoing snowball's
destruction of the windmill. but it was some m
 
 ___________________________
 
inutes before they could
fully take it in. they all remembered, or thought they remembered, how
they had seen snowball charging ahead of them at the battle of the
cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he
had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from jones's gun had
wounded his back. at first it was a little difficult to see how this
fitted in with his being on jones's side. even boxer, who seldom asked
questions, was puzzled. he lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him,
shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.

"i do not believe that
 
 ___________________________
 
," he said. "snowball fought bravely at the battle
of the cowshed. i saw him myself. did we not give him 'animal hero, first
class,' immediately afterwards?"

"that was our mistake, comrade. for we know now--it is all written down in
the secret documents that we have found--that in reality he was trying to
lure us to our doom."

"but he was wounded," said boxer. "we all saw him running with blood."

"that was part of the arrangement!" cried squealer. "jones's shot only
grazed him. i could show you this in his own wr
 
 ___________________________
 
iting, if you were able to
read it. the plot was for snowball, at the critical moment, to give the
signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. and he very nearly
succeeded--i will even say, comrades, he would have succeeded if it had
not been for our heroic leader, comrade napoleon. do you not remember how,
just at the moment when jones and his men had got inside the yard,
snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? and do
you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was
spreading and all seemed lost, that comrade napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of 'death to humanity!' and sank his teeth in jones's leg? surely you
remember that, comrades?" exclaimed squealer, frisking from side to side.

now when squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the
animals that they did remember it. at any rate, they remembered that 
 
 ___________________________
 
at
the critical moment of the battle snowball had turned to flee. but boxer
was still a little uneasy.

"i do not believe that snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said
finally. "what he has done since is different. but i believe that at the
battle of the cowshed he was a good comrade."

"our leader, comrade napoleon," announced squealer, speaking very slowly
and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that
snowball was jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long
before the rebellion was ever thought of."

"ah, that is different!" said boxer. "if comrade napoleon says it, it must
be right."

"that is the true spirit, comrade!" cried squealer, but it was noticed he
cast a very ugly look at boxer with his little twinkling eyes. he turned
to go, then paused and added impressively: "i warn every animal on this
farm to keep his eyes very wide open. for we have reason to think that
some of snowball
 
 ___________________________
 
 to change
countenance, and sharply ordered boxer to let the dog go, whereat boxer
lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.

presently the tumult died down. the four pigs waited, trembling, with
guilt written on every line of their countenances. napoleon now called
upon them to confess their crimes. they were the same four pigs as had
protested when napoleon abolished the sunday meetings. without any further
prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in
destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with
him to hand over animal farm to mr. frederick. they added that snowball
had privately admitted to them that he had been jones's secret agent for
years past. when they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly
tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice napoleon demanded whether
any other animal had anything to confess.

the three hens who had been
 
 ___________________________
 
 the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion
over the eggs now came forward and stated that snowball had appeared to
them in a dream and incited them to disobey napoleon's orders. they, too,
were slaughtered. then a goose came forward and confessed to having
secreted six ears of corn during the last year's harvest and eaten them in
the night. then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking
pool--urged to do this, so she said, by snowball--and two other sheep
confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of
napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering
from a cough. they were all slain on the spot. and so the tale of
confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses
lying before napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell of
blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of jones.

when it was all over, the remaining animals, except for th
 
 ___________________________
 
e pigs and dogs,
crept away in a body. they were shaken and miserable. they did not know
which was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leagued
themselves with snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just
witnessed. in the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. since jones had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. not even a rat had been
killed. they had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--
 
 ___________________________
 
quare with this.
clover asked benjamin to read her the sixth commandment, and when
benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she
fetched muriel. muriel read the commandment for her. it ran: "no animal
shall kill any other animal without cause." somehow or other, the last two
words had slipped out of the animals' memory. but they saw now that the
commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for
killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with snowball.

throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in
the previous year. to rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as
before, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regular
work of the farm, was a tremendous labour. there were times when it seemed
to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they
had done in jones's day. on sunday mornings squealer, holding down a long
strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to th
 
 ___________________________
 
e, executed by squealer in
white paint.

meanwhile, through the agency of whymper, napoleon was engaged in
complicated negotiations with frederick and pilkington. the pile of timber
was still unsold. of the two, frederick was the more anxious to get hold
of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. at the same time there
were renewed rumours that frederick and his men were plotting to attack
animal farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused
furious jealousy in him. snowball was known to be still skulking on
pinchfield farm. in the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to
hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by
snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder napoleon. they were
executed immediately, and fresh precautions for napoleon's safety were
taken. four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young
pig named pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate
it, lest it should be poisoned.

 
 ___________________________
 
y
morning napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at
any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to frederick; he
considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with
scoundrels of that description. the pigeons who were still sent out to
spread tidings of the rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on
foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "death to
humanity" in favour of "death to frederick." in the late summer yet
another of snowball's machinations was laid bare. the wheat crop was full
of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits
snowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn. a gander who had been
privy to the plot had confessed his guilt to squealer and immediately
committed suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries. the animals
now also learned that snowball had never--as many of them had believed
hitherto--received the order of "animal hero, first class." this was
merely a legend which ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d been spread some time after the battle of the
cowshed by snowball himself. so far from being decorated, he had been
censured for showing cowardice in the battle. once again some of the
animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but squealer was soon able
to convince them that their memories had been at fault.

in the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort--for the harvest had to
be gathered at almost the same time--the windmill was finished. the
machinery had still to be installed, and whymper was negotiating the
purchase of it, but the structure was
 
 ___________________________
 
 completed. in the teeth of every
difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck
and of snowball's treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the
very day! tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their
masterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it
had been built the first time. moreover, the walls were twice as thick as
before. nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! and when
they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had
overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives
when
 
 ___________________________
 
derick.

all relations with foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had
been sent to pilkington. the pigeons had been told to avoid pinchfield
farm and to alter their slogan from "death to frederick" to "death to
pilkington." at the same time napoleon assured the animals that the
stories of an impending attack on animal farm were completely untrue, and
that the tales about frederick's cruelty to his own animals had been
greatly exaggerated. all these rumours had probably originated with
snowball and his agents. it now appeared that snowball was not, after all,
hiding on pinchfield farm, and in fact had never been there in his life:
he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at foxwood, and had
in reality been a pensioner of pilkington for years past.

the pigs were in ecstasies over napoleon's cunning. by seeming to be
friendly with pilkington he had forced frederick to raise his price by
twelve pounds. but the superior quality of napoleon's mind, said squealer,
was shown i
 
 ___________________________
 
owly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail
hanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously
ill. he called the animals together and told them that he had a terrible
piece of news to impart. comrade napoleon was dying!

a cry of lamentation went up. straw was laid down outside the doors of the
farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. with tears in their eyes they
asked one another what they should do if their leader were taken away from
them. a rumour went round that snowball had after all contrived to
introduce poison into napoleon's food. at eleven o'clock squealer came
out to make another announcement. as his last act upon earth, comrade
napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be
punished by death.

by the evening, however, napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the
following morning squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the
way to recovery. by the evening of that day napoleon was back at work, and
on the next da
 
 ___________________________
 
he songs, the processions, squealer's
lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,
and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their
bellies were empty, at least part of the time.

in april, animal farm was proclaimed a republic, and it became necessary
to elect a president. there was only one candidate, napoleon, who was
elected unanimously. on the same day it was given out that fresh documents
had been discovered which revealed further details about snowball's
complicity with jones. it now appeared that snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the battle of
the cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on
jones's side. in fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the
human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "long live
humanity!" on his lips. the wounds on snowball's back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by napoleon's

 
 ___________________________
 
r remained, and benjamin who lay down at
boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. after about a quarter of an hour squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. he said that comrade napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on
the farm, and was already making arrangements to send boxer to be treated
in the hospital at willingdon. the animals felt a little uneasy at this.
except for mollie and snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. however, squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in willingdon could treat boxer's case more satisfactorily than
could be done on the farm. and about half an hour later, when boxer had
somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed
to limp back to his stall, where clover and benjamin had prepared a good
bed of straw for him.


 
 ___________________________
 
nt round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




chapter x



years passed. the seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
a time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
rebellion, except clover, benjamin, moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

muriel was dead; bluebell, jessie, and pincher were dead. jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
snowball was forgotten. boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. she was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. the talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. squealer was
so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. only old
benjamin
 
 ___________________________
 
lly completed at last, and the farm possessed a
threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings
had been added to it. whymper had bought himself a dogcart. the windmill,
however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. it
was used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. the
animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was
finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. but the luxuries
of which snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with
electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no
longer talked about. napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the
spirit of animalism. the truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard
and living frugally.

somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the
animals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the
dogs. perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs a