rance in
spite of the fact that his tushes had never been cut. before long the
other animals began to arrive and make themselves comfortable after their
different fashions. first came the three dogs, bluebell, jessie, and
pincher, and then the pigs, who settled down in the straw immediately in
front of the platform. the hens perched themselves on the window-sills,
the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down
behind the pigs and began to chew the cud. the two cart-horses, boxer and
clover, came in together, walking very slowly and setting down their vast
hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some small animal
concealed in the straw. clover was a stout motherly mare approaching
middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.
boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as
any two ordinary horses put together. a white stripe down his nose gave
him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of fir
 
 ___________________________
 
the white goat, and benjamin, the donkey. benjamin was the oldest animal
on the farm, and the worst tempered. he seldom talked, and when he did, it
was usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say that
god had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner
have had no tail and no flies. alone among the animals on the farm he
never laughed. if asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at.
nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted to boxer; the
two of them usually spent their sundays together in the small paddock
beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.

the two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had
lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from
side to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. clover
made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings
nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. at the last moment

 
 ___________________________
 
mollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew mr. jones's trap, came
mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. she took a place near the
front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the
red ribbons it was plaited with. last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in
between boxer and clover; there she purred contentedly throughout major's
speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

all the animals were now present except moses, the tame raven, who slept
on a perch behind the back door. when major saw that they had all made
themselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throat
and began:

"comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that i had last
night. but i will come to the dream later. i have something else to say
fir
 
 ___________________________
 
 are not allowed to reach their
natural span. for myself i do not grumble, for i am one of the lucky ones.
i am twelve years old and have had over four hundred children. such is the
natural life of a pig. but no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end.
you young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will
scream your lives out at the block within a year. to that horror we all
must come--cows, pigs, hens, sheep, everyone. even the horses and the dogs
have no better fate. you, boxer, the very day that those great muscles of
yours lose their power, jones will sell you to the knacker, who will cut
your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. as for the dogs, when
they grow old and toothless, jones ties a brick round their necks and
drowns them in the nearest pond.

"is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life
of ours spring from the tyranny of human beings? only get rid of man, and
the produce of our labour would be our own. almost overnight 
 
 ___________________________
 
y died. it was situated somewhere up in the sky,
a little distance beyond the clouds, moses said. in sugarcandy mountain it
was sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and
lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. the animals hated moses
because he told tales and did no work, but some of them believed in
sugarcandy mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade them
that there was no such place.

their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, boxer and clover.
these two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves,
but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed
everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by
simple arguments. they were unfailing in their attendance at the secret
meetings in the barn, and led the singing of 'beasts of england', with
which the meetings always ended.

now, as it turned out, the rebellion was achieved much earlier and more
easily than anyone had exp
 
 ___________________________
 
ung down the well. the reins, the
halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the
rubbish fire which was burning in the yard. so were the whips. all the
animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames.
snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the mark
of a human being. all animals should go naked."

when boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with
the rest.

in a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded
them of mr. jones. napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and
served out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for
each dog. then they sang 'beasts of england' from end to end seven times
running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept a
 
 ___________________________
 
ming down the stairs when mollie was discovered to be missing.
going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best
bedroom. she had taken a piece of blue ribbon from mrs. jones's
dressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiring
herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. the others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
a unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be
preserved as a museum. all were agreed that no animal must ever live there.

the animals had their breakfast, and then snowball and napoleon called
them together again.

"comrades," said snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day
before us. today we begin the hay harvest. but there is another matter
that must be attended to first."

the pigs now revealed that
 
 ___________________________
 
s a great drawback that no animal was
able to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. but the pigs
were so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. as
for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood
the business of mowing and raking far better than jones and his men had
ever done. the pigs did not actually work, but directed and supervised the
others. with their superior knowledge it was natural that they should
assume the leadership. boxer and clover would harness themselves to the
cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of
course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking
behind and calling out "gee up, comrade!" or "whoa back, comrade!" as the
case might be. and every animal down to the humblest worked at turning the
hay and gathering it. even the ducks and hens toiled to and fro all day in
the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks. in the end they
finished the harves
 
 ___________________________
 
 themselves and for themselves, not doled out
to them by a grudging master. with the worthless parasitical human beings
gone, there was more for everyone to eat. there was more leisure too,
inexperienced though the animals were. they met with many difficulties--for
instance, later in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had to
tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff with their
breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine--but the pigs with
their cleverness and boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them
through. boxer was the admiration of everybody. he had been a hard worker
even in jones's time, but now he seemed more like three horses than one;
there were days when the entire work of the farm seemed to rest on his
mighty shoulders. from morning to night he was pushing and pulling, always
at the spot where the work was hardest. he had made an arrangement with
one of the cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than
anyone else,
 
 ___________________________
 
ctly. the dogs
learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anything
except the seven commandments. muriel, the goat, could read somewhat
better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the
evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.
benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.
so far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. clover learnt
the whole alphabet, but could not put words together. boxer could not get
beyond the letter d. he would trace out a, b, c, d, in the dust with his
great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears
back, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to
remember what came next and never succeeding. on several occasions,
indeed, he did learn e, f, g, h, but by the time he knew them, it was
always discovered that he had forgotten a, b, c, and d. finally he decided
to be content with the first four letters, and used to write t
 
 ___________________________
 
lying
in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them
off. snowball now gave the signal for the charge. he himself dashed
straight for jones. jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. the
pellets scored bloody streaks along snowball's back, and a sheep dropped
dead. without halting for an instant, snowball flung his fifteen stone
against jones's legs. jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun
flew out of his hands. but the most terrifying spectacle of all was boxer,
rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shod
hoofs like a stallion. his very first blow took a stable-lad from foxwood
on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. at the sight, several
men dropped their sticks and tried to run. panic overtook them, and the
next moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round the
yard. they were gored, kicked, bitten, trampled on. there was not an
animal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his
 
 ___________________________
 
on. even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman's shoulders
and sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. at a moment
when the opening was clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the
yard and make a bolt for the main road. and so within five minutes of
their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same way as they
had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their
calves all the way.

all the men were gone except one. back in the yard boxer was pawing with
his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn
him over. the boy did not stir.

"he is dead," said boxer sorrowfully. "i had no intention of doing that.
i forgot that i was wearing iron shoes. who will believe that i did not do
this on purpose?"

"no sentimentality, comrade!" cried snowball from whose wounds the blood
was still dripping. "war is war. the only good human being is a dead one."

"i have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated b
 
 ___________________________
 
ration of the victory was held immediately. the flag was run up and
'beasts of england' was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been
killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her
grave. at the graveside snowball made a little speech, emphasising the
need for all animals to be ready to die for animal farm if need be.

the animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, "animal
hero, first class," which was conferred there and then on snowball and
boxer. it consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old
horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on
sundays and holidays. there was also "animal hero, second class," which
was conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.

there was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. in the
end, it was named the battle of the cowshed, since that was where the
ambush had been sprung. mr. jones's gun had been found lying in the mud,
and it was known that there was a s
 
 ___________________________
 
ttee of pigs, presided over by himself. these would meet in
private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. the
animals would still assemble on sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing
'beasts of england', and receive their orders for the week; but there would
be no more debates.

in spite of the shock that snowball's expulsion had given them, the
animals were dismayed by this announcement. several of them would have
protested if they could have found the right arguments. even boxer was
vaguely troubled. he set his ears back, shook his forelock several times,
and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think
of anything to say. some of the pigs themselves, however, were more
articulate. four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of
disapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speaking
at once. but suddenly the dogs sitting round napoleon let out deep,
menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. t
 
 ___________________________
 
t. and as to the battle of the cowshed, i believe the time will
come when we shall find that snowball's part in it was much exaggerated.
discipline, comrades, iron discipline! that is the watchword for today.
one false step, and our enemies would be upon us. surely, comrades, you do
not want jones back?"

once again this argument was unanswerable. certainly the animals did not
want jones back; if the holding of debates on sunday mornings was liable
to bring him back, then the debates must stop. boxer, who had now had time
to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "if comrade
napoleon says it, it must be right." and from then on he adopted the
maxim, "napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "i
will work harder."

by this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.
the shed where snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut
up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. every
sunday morning at ten 
 
 ___________________________
 
he sheep dragged single blocks, even muriel
and benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did their
share. by late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, and
then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.

but it was a slow, laborious process. frequently it took a whole day of
exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and
sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. nothing
could have been achieved without boxer, whose strength seemed equal to
that of all the rest of the animals put together. when the boulder began
to slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged
down the hill, it was always boxer who strained himself against the rope
and brought the boulder to a stop. to see him toiling up the slope inch by
inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground,
and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.
clover warned him someti
 
 ___________________________
 
mes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but
boxer would never listen to her. his two slogans, "i will work harder"
and "napoleon is always right," seemed to him a sufficient answer to all
problems. he had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him
three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour.
and in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would
go alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it down
to the site of the windmill unassisted.

the animals were not badly off th
 
 ___________________________
 
he case. it was
absolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the
farm, should have a quiet place to work in. it was also more suited to the
dignity of the leader (for of late he had taken to speaking of napoleon
under the title of "leader") to live in a house than in a mere sty.
nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the
pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room
as a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. boxer passed it off as
usual with "napoleon is always right!", but clover, who thought she
remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and
tried to puzzle out the seven commandments which were inscribed there.
finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched
muriel.

"muriel," she said, "read me the fourth commandment. does it not say
something about never sleeping in a bed?"

with some difficulty muriel spelt it out.

"it says, 'no animal shall slee
 
 ___________________________
 
 either.

by the autumn the animals were tired but happy. they had had a hard year,
and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the
winter were none too plentiful, but the windmill compensated for
everything. it was almost half built now. after the harvest there was a
stretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever,
thinking it well worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of
stone if by doing so they could raise the walls another foot. boxer would
even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his own by the
light of the harvest moon. in their spare moments the animals would walk
round and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and
perpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever have
been able to build anything so imposing. only old benjamin refused to grow
enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter nothing
beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.

novem
 
 ___________________________
 
als knew that this was not the
case. still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet thick this
time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much
larger quantities of stone. for a long time the quarry was full of
snowdrifts and nothing could be done. some progress was made in the dry
frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work, and the animals could
not feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. they were always
cold, and usually hungry as well. only boxer and clover never lost heart.
squealer made excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of
labour, but the other animals found more inspiration in boxer's strength
and his never-failing cry of "i will work harder!"

in january food fell short. the corn ration was drastically reduced, and
it was announced that an extra potato ration would be issued to make up
for it. then it was discovered that the greater part of the potato crop
had been frosted in the clamps, which had not been cov
 
 ___________________________
 
ess far outdoing snowball's
destruction of the windmill. but it was some minutes before they could
fully take it in. they all remembered, or thought they remembered, how
they had seen snowball charging ahead of them at the battle of the
cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he
had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from jones's gun had
wounded his back. at first it was a little difficult to see how this
fitted in with his being on jones's side. even boxer, who seldom asked
questions, was puzzled. he lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him,
shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.

"i do not believe that," he said. "snowball fought bravely at the battle
of the cowshed. i saw him myself. did we not give him 'animal hero, first
class,' immediately afterwards?"

"that was our mistake, comrade. for we know now--it is all written down in
the secret documents that we have found--that in reality he was trying to
lure 
 
 ___________________________
 
us to our doom."

"but he was wounded," said boxer. "we all saw him running with blood."

"that was part of the arrangement!" cried squealer. "jones's shot only
grazed him. i could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to
read it. the plot was for snowball, at the critical moment, to give the
signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. and he very nearly
succeeded--i will even say, comrades, he would have succeeded if it had
not been for our heroic leader, comrade napoleon. do you not remember how,
just at the moment when j
 
 ___________________________
 
ot remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was
spreading and all seemed lost, that comrade napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of 'death to humanity!' and sank his teeth in jones's leg? surely you
remember that, comrades?" exclaimed squealer, frisking from side to side.

now when squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the
animals that they did remember it. at any rate, they remembered that at
the critical moment of the battle snowball had turned to flee. but boxer
was still a little uneasy.

"i do not believe that snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said
finally. "what he has done since is different. but i believe that at the
battle of the cowshed he was a good comrade."

"our leader, comrade napoleon," announced squealer, speaking very slowly
and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that
snowball was jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long
before the rebellion was ever thought of."

"ah, that is different
 
 ___________________________
 
!" said boxer. "if comrade napoleon says it, it must
be right."

"that is the true spirit, comrade!" cried squealer, but it was noticed he
cast a very ugly look at boxer with his little twinkling eyes. he turned
to go, then paused and added impressively: "i warn every animal on this
farm to keep his eyes very wide open. for we have reason to think that
some of snowball's secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!"

four days later, in the late afternoon, napoleon ordered all the animals
to assemble in the yard. when they were all gathered together, napoleon
emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently
awarded himself "animal 
 
 ___________________________
 
y
in their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was
about to happen.

napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a
high-pitched whimper. immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of
the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to
napoleon's feet. the pigs' ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood,
and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. to the amazement of
everybody, three of them flung themselves upon boxer. boxer saw them
coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned
him to the ground. the dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with
their tails between their legs. boxer looked at napoleon to know whether
he should crush the dog to death or let it go. napoleon appeared to change
countenance, and sharply ordered boxer to let the dog go, whereat boxer
lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.

presently the tumult died down. the four pigs waited, t
 
 ___________________________
 
had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. not even a rat had been
killed. they had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--clover, muriel, benjamin, the cows,
the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except
the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before napoleon ordered the
animals to assemble. for some time nobody spoke. only boxer remained on
his feet. he fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his
sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. finally he
said:

"i do not understand it. i would not have believed that such things could
happen on our farm. it must be due to some fault in ourselves. the
solution, as i see it, is to work harder. from now onwards i shall get up
a full hour earlier in the mornings."

and he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. having got
ther
 
 ___________________________
 
um he had paid was just
enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.

meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. when it was all
gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to
inspect frederick's bank-notes. smiling beatifically, and wearing both his
decorations, napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the
money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. the animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. and boxer
put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things
stirred and rustled in his breath.

three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. whymper, his face deadly
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard
and rushed straight into the farmhouse. the next moment a choking roar of
rage sounded from napoleon's apartments. the news of what had happened
sped round the farm like wildfire. the banknotes were forgeries! frederick
had got the timber for 
 
 ___________________________
 
e racing in with the news that frederick and his
followers had already come through the five-barred gate. boldly enough the
animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the
easy victory that they had had in the battle of the cowshed. there were
fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as
soon as they got within fifty yards. the animals could not face the
terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts
of napoleon and boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. a number
of them were already wounded. they took refuge in the farm buildings and
peeped cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. the whole of the big
pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. for the
moment even napoleon seemed at a loss. he paced up and down without a
word, his tail rigid and twitching. wistful glances were sent in the
direction of foxwood. if pilkington and his men would help them, the day
might yet be won. b
 
 ___________________________
 
 did not heed the cruel pellets that swept
over them like hail. it was a savage, bitter battle. the men fired again
and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with
their sticks and their heavy boots. a cow, three sheep, and two geese were
killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. even napoleon, who was directing
operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. but
the men did not go unscathed either. three of them had their heads broken
by blows from boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's
horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by jessie and bluebell. and
when the nine dogs of napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to
make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's
flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. they saw that they were in
danger of being surrounded. frederick shouted to his men to get out while
the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for
dear
 
 ___________________________
 
ore, make use of the fallen stones. this time the stones
had vanished too. the force of the explosion had flung them to distances
of hundreds of yards. it was as though the windmill had never been.

as they approached the farm squealer, who had unaccountably been absent
during the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and
beaming with satisfaction. and the animals heard, from the direction of
the farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun.

"what is that gun firing for?" said boxer.

"to celebrate our victory!" cried squealer.

"what victory?" said boxer. his knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe
and split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hind
leg.

"what victory, comrade? have we not driven the enemy off our soil--the
sacred soil of animal farm?"

"but they have destroyed the windmill. and we had worked on it for two
years!"

"what matter? we will build another windmill. we will build six windmills
if we feel like it. you do not appreciate, co
 
 ___________________________
 
mrade, the mighty thing that
we have done. the enemy was in occupation of this very ground that we
stand upon. and now--thanks to the leadership of comrade napoleon--we have
won every inch of it back again!"

"then we have won back what we had before," said boxer.

"that is our victory," said squealer.

they limped into the yard. the pellets under the skin of boxer's leg
smarted painfully. he saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the
windmill from the foundations, and already in imagination he braced
himself for the task. but for the first time it occurred to him that he
was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite
what they had once been.

but when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing
again--seven times it was fired in all--and heard the speech that napoleon
made, congratulating them on their
 
 ___________________________
 
 conduct, it did seem to them after all
that they had won a great victory. the animals slain in the battle were
given a solemn funeral. boxer and clover pulled the wagon which served as
a hearse, and napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. two
whole days were given over to celebrations. there were songs, speeches,
and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on
every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for
each dog. it was announced that the battle would be called the battle of
the windmill, and that napoleon had created a new decoration, the order
of the green ba
 
 ___________________________
 
s meant, except old benjamin, who nodded his
muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.

but a few days later muriel, reading over the seven commandments to
herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had
remembered wrong. they had thought the fifth commandment was "no animal
shall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten.
actually the commandment read: "no animal shall drink alcohol to excess."




chapter ix



boxer's split hoof was a long time in healing. they had started the
rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were
ended. boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of
honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. in the evenings he would
admit privately to clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. clover
treated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing
them, and both she and benjamin urged boxer to work less hard. "a horse's
 
 ___________________________
 

lungs do not last for ever," she said to him. but boxer would not listen.
he had, he said, only one real ambition left--to see the windmill well
under way before he reached the age for retirement.

at the beginning, when the laws of animal farm were first formulated,
the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at
fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at
five. liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon. as yet no animal had
actually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been di
 
 ___________________________
 
scussed
more and more. now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set
aside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was
to be fenced off and turned into a grazing-ground for superannuated
animals. for a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds of
corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot or
possibly an apple on public holidays. boxer's twelfth birthday was due in
the late summer of the following year.

meanwhile life was hard. the winter was as cold as the last one had been,
and food was even shorter. once again all rations were reduced, except
those of the pigs and the dogs. a too rigid equality in rations, squealer
explained, would have been contrary to the principles of animalism. in any
case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were
not in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might b
 
 ___________________________
 
ssions. napoleon had
commanded that once a week there should be held something called a
spontaneous demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the
struggles and triumphs of animal farm. at the appointed time the animals
would leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in
military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows,
then the sheep, and then the poultry. the dogs flanked the procession and
at the head of all marched napoleon's black cockerel. boxer and clover
always carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the
horn and the caption, "long live comrade napoleon!" afterwards there were
recitations of poems composed in napoleon's honour, and a speech by
squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of
foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. the sheep were
the greatest devotees of the spontaneous demonstration, and if anyone
complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs 
 
 ___________________________
 
ar growing on the hedges. many of the animals believed him. their
lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and
just that a better world should exist somewhere else? a thing that was
difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards moses. they
all declared contemptuously that his stories about sugarcandy mountain
were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working,
with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.

after his hoof had healed up, boxer worked harder than ever. indeed, all
the animals worked like slaves that year. apart from the regular work of
the farm, and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhouse
for the young pigs, which was started in march. sometimes the long hours
on insufficient food were hard to bear, but boxer never faltered. in
nothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was not
what it had been. it was only his appearance that was a little altered;
his hide was less shiny than i
 
 ___________________________
 
t had used to be, and his great haunches
seemed to have shrunken. the others said, "boxer will pick up when the
spring grass comes on"; but the spring came and boxer grew no fatter.
sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced
his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that
nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. at such times
his lips were seen to form the words, "i will work harder"; he had no
voice left. once again clover and benjamin warned him to take care of his
health, but boxer paid no attention. his twelfth birthday was approaching.
he did not care what happened so long as a good stor
 
 ___________________________
 
e of stone was
accumulated before he went on pension.

late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that
something had happened to boxer. he had gone out alone to drag a load of
stone down to the windmill. and sure enough, the rumour was true. a few
minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; "boxer has fallen!
he is lying on his side and can't get up!"

about half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the
windmill stood. there lay boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neck
stretched out, unable even to raise his head. his eyes were glazed, his
sides matted with sweat. a thin stream of blood had trickled out of his
mouth. clover dropped to her knees at his side.

"boxer!" she cried, "how are you?"

"it is my lung," said boxer in a weak voice. "it does not matter. i think
you will be able to finish the windmill without me. there is a pretty good
store of stone accumulated. i had only another month to go in any case.
to tell
 
 ___________________________
 
 you the truth, i had been looking forward to my retirement. and
perhaps, as benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the
same time and be a companion to me."

"we must get help at once," said clover. "run, somebody, and tell squealer
what has happened."

all the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give
squealer the news. only clover remained, and benjamin who lay down at
boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. after about a quarter of an hour squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. he said that comrade napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on
the farm, and was already making arrangements to send boxer to be treated
in the hospital at willingdon. the animals felt a little uneasy at this.
except for mollie and snowball, no other animal had ever left the fa
 
 ___________________________
 
rm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. however, squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in willingdon could treat boxer's case more satisfactorily than
could be done on the farm. and about half an hour later, when boxer had
somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed
to limp back to his stall, where clover and benjamin had prepared a good
bed of straw for him.

for the next two days boxer remained in his stall. the pigs had sent out a
large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest
in the bathroom, and clover administered it to boxer twice a day after
meals. in the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while
benjamin kept the flies off him. boxer professed not to be sorry for what
had happened. if he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another
three years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he would
spend in the corner o
 
 ___________________________
 
f the big pasture. it would be the first time that he
had had leisure to study and improve his mind. he intended, he said, to
devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters
of the alphabet.

however, benjamin and clover could only be with boxer after working hours,
and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.
the animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a
pig, when they were astonished to see benjamin come galloping from the
direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. it was
the first time that they had ever seen benjamin excited--indeed, it was
the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop. "quick, quick!" he
shouted. "come at once! they're taking boxer a
 
 ___________________________
 
way!" without waiting for
orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farm
buildings. sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by
two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a
low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. and boxer's stall was
empty.

the animals crowded round the van. "good-bye, boxer!" they chorused,
"good-bye!"

"fools! fools!" shouted benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the
earth with his small hoofs. "fools! do you not see what is written on the
side of that van?"

that gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. muriel began to spell
out the words. but benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly
silence he read:

"'alfred simmonds, horse slaughterer and glue boiler, willingdon. dealer
in hides and bone-meal. kennels supplied.' do you not understand w
 
 ___________________________
 
hat that
means? they are taking boxer to the knacker's!"

a cry of horror burst from all the animals. at this moment the man on the
box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart
trot. all the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices.
clover forced her way to the front. the van began to gather speed. clover
tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. "boxer!"
she cried. "boxer! boxer! boxer!" and just at this moment, as though he
had heard the uproar outside, boxer's face, with the white stripe down his
nose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.

"boxer!" cried clover in a terrible voice. "boxer! get out! get out
quickly! they're taking you to your death!"

all the animals took up the cry of "get out, boxer, get out!" but the van
was already gathering speed and drawing away from them. it was uncertain
whether boxer had understood what clover had said. but a moment 
 
 ___________________________
 
later his
face disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendous
drumming of hoofs inside the van. he was trying to kick his way out. the
time had been when a few kicks from boxer's hoofs would have smashed the
van to matchwood. but alas! his strength had left him; and in a few
moments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. in
desperation the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the
van to stop. "comrades, comrades!" they shouted. "don't take your own
brother to his death!" but the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realise
what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace.
boxer's face did not reappear at the window. to
 
 ___________________________
 
o late, someone thought of
racing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the
van was through it and rapidly disappearing down the road. boxer was never
seen again.

three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at
willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have.
squealer came to announce the news to the others. he had, he said, been
present during boxer's last hours.

"it was the most affecting sight i have ever seen!" said squealer, lifting
his trotter and wiping away a tear. "i was at his bedside at the very
last. and at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear
that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was
finished. 'forward, comrades!' he whispered. 'forward in the name of the
rebellion. long live animal farm! long live comrade napoleon! napoleon is
always right.' those were his very last words, comrade
 
 ___________________________
 
s."

here squealer's demeanour suddenly changed. he fell silent for a moment,
and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he
proceeded.

it had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour
had been circulated at the time of boxer's removal. some of the animals
had noticed that the van which took boxer away was marked "horse
slaughterer," and had actually jumped to the conclusion that boxer was
being sent to the knacker's. it was almost unbelievable, said squealer,
that any animal could be so stupid. surely, he cried indignantly, whisking
his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved
leader, comrade napoleon, better than that? but the explanation was really
very simple. the van had previously been the property of the knacker, and
had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old
name out. that was how the mistake had arisen.

the 
 
 ___________________________
 
animals were enormously relieved to hear this. and when squealer went
on to give further graphic details of boxer's death-bed, the admirable
care he had received, and the expensive medicines for which napoleon had
paid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and
the sorrow that they felt for their comrade's death was tempered by the
thought that at least he had died happy.

napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following sunday morning
and pronounced a short oration in boxer's honour. it had not been
possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade's remains for
int
 
 ___________________________
 
erment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from
the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on boxer's
grave. and in a few days' time the pigs intended to hold a memorial
banquet in boxer's honour. napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of
boxer's two favourite maxims, "i will work harder" and "comrade napoleon
is always right"--maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to
adopt as his own.

on the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer's van drove up from
willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. that night
there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. no one stirred in the farmhouse
 
 ___________________________
 
here or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




chapter x



years passed. the seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
a time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
rebellion, except clover, benjamin, moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

muriel was dead; bluebell, jessie, and pincher were dead. jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
snowball was forgotten. boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. she was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. the talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. squealer was
so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. only old
benjamin was much the same as
 
 ___________________________
 
 ever, except for being a little greyer about
the muzzle, and, since boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.

there were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was
not so great as had been expected in earlier years. many animals had been
born to whom the rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of
mouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a
thing before their arrival. the farm possessed three horses now besides
clover. they were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and good
comrades, but very stu