; the
two of them usually spent their sundays together in the small paddock
beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.

the two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had
lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from
side to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. clover
made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings
nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. at the last moment
mollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew mr. jones's trap, came
mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. she took a place near the
front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the
red ribbons it was plaited with. last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in
between boxer and clover; there she purred contentedly throughout major's
speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

all the anim
 
 ___________________________
 

of loyalty to mr. jones, whom they referred to as "master," or made
elementary remarks such as "mr. jones feeds us. if he were gone, we should
starve to death." others asked such questions as "why should we care what
happens after we are dead?" or "if this rebellion is to happen anyway,
what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?", and the pigs
had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the
spirit of animalism. the stupidest questions of all were asked by mollie,
the white mare. the very first question she asked snowball was: "will
there still be sugar after the rebellion?"

"no," said snowball firmly. "we have no means of making sugar on this
farm. besides, you do not need sugar. you will have all the oats and hay
you want."

"and shall i still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked mollie.

"comrade," said snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are
the badge of slavery. can you not understand that liberty is worth more
than ribbon
 
 ___________________________
 
s?"

mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

the pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by
moses, the tame raven. moses, who was mr. jones's especial pet, was a spy
and a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. he claimed to know of
the existence of a mysterious country called sugarcandy mountain, to which
all animals went when they died. it was situated somewhere up in the sky,
a little distance beyond the clouds, moses said. in sugarcandy mountain it
was sun
 
 ___________________________
 
ball and napoleon butted the
door open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file,
walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. they tiptoed
from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind
of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather
mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the brussels carpet,
the lithograph of queen victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. they
were just coming down the stairs when mollie was discovered to be missing.
going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best
bedroom. she had taken a piece of blue ribbon from mrs. jones's
dressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiring
herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. the others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing 
 
 ___________________________
 
regular day's work began. his answer to every
problem, every setback, was "i will work harder!"--which he had adopted as
his personal motto.

but everyone worked according to his capacity. the hens and ducks, for
instance, saved five bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up the
stray grains. nobody stole, nobody grumbled over his rations, the
quarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal features of life
in the old days had almost disappeared. nobody shirked--or almost nobody.
mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a
way of leaving work early on the ground that there was a stone in her
hoof. and the behaviour of the cat was somewhat peculiar. it was soon
noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found.
she would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in
the evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. but she
always made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that
 
 ___________________________
 
a, b, c, d, in the dust with his
great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears
back, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to
remember what came next and never succeeding. on several occasions,
indeed, he did learn e, f, g, h, but by the time he knew them, it was
always discovered that he had forgotten a, b, c, and d. finally he decided
to be content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once
or twice every day to refresh his memory. mollie refused to learn any but
the six letters which spelt her own name. she would form these very neatly
out of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or two
and walk round them admiring them.

none of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter a.
it was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and
ducks, were unable to learn the seven commandments by heart. after much
thought snowball declared that the seven commandments could in effect
 
 ___________________________
 
y face down in the mud, trying to turn
him over. the boy did not stir.

"he is dead," said boxer sorrowfully. "i had no intention of doing that.
i forgot that i was wearing iron shoes. who will believe that i did not do
this on purpose?"

"no sentimentality, comrade!" cried snowball from whose wounds the blood
was still dripping. "war is war. the only good human being is a dead one."

"i have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated boxer, and
his eyes were full of tears.

"where is mollie?" exclaimed somebody.

mollie in fact was missing. for a moment there was great alarm; it was
feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her
off with them. in the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with
her head buried among the hay in the manger. she had taken to flight as
soon as the gun went off. and when the others came back from looking for
her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had
already recovered and made off.

th
 
 ___________________________
 
 was named the battle of the cowshed, since that was where the
ambush had been sprung. mr. jones's gun had been found lying in the mud,
and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges in the farmhouse.
it was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the flagstaff, like a
piece of artillery, and to fire it twice a year--once on october the
twelfth, the anniversary of the battle of the cowshed, and once on
midsummer day, the anniversary of the rebellion.




chapter v



as winter drew on, mollie became more and more troublesome. she was late
for work every morning and excused herself by saying that she had
overslept, and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetite
was excellent. on every kind of pretext she would run away from work and
go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her own
reflection in the water. but there were also rumours of something more
serious. one day, as mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her
long tail and chewin
 
 ___________________________
 
g at a stalk of hay, clover took her aside.

"mollie," she said, "i have something very serious to say to you. this
morning i saw you looking over the hedge that divides animal farm from
foxwood. one of mr. pilkington's men was standing on the other side of the
hedge. and--i was a long way away, but i am almost certain i saw this--he
was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. what
does that mean, mollie?"

"he didn't! i wasn't! it isn't true!" cried mollie, beginning to prance
about and paw the ground.

"mollie! look me in the face. do you give me your word of honour that that
man was not stroking your nose?"

"it isn't true!" repeated mollie, but she could not look clover in the
face, and the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the
field.

a thought struck clover. without saying anything to the others, she went
to mollie's stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. hidden under
the straw was a little pile of lump sugar a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd several bunches of ribbon of
different colours.

three days later mollie disappeared. for some weeks nothing was known of
her whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the
other side of willingdon. she was between the shafts of a smart dogcart
painted red and black, which was standing outside a public-house. a fat
red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who looked like a publican,
was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. her coat was newly
clipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. she appeared to
be enjoying herse
 
 ___________________________
 
lf, so the pigeons said. none of the animals ever
mentioned mollie again.

in january there came bitterly hard weather. the earth was like iron, and
nothing could be done in the fields. many meetings were held in the big
barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the
coming season. it had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were
manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of
farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.
this arrangement would have worked well enough if it had
 
 ___________________________
 
 only clover remained, and benjamin who lay down at
boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. after about a quarter of an hour squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. he said that comrade napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on
the farm, and was already making arrangements to send boxer to be treated
in the hospital at willingdon. the animals felt a little uneasy at this.
except for mollie and snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. however, squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in willingdon could treat boxer's case more satisfactorily than
could be done on the farm. and about half an hour later, when boxer had
somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed
to limp back to his stall, where clover and benjamin had prepared a good
bed of str