 the owners of the two
farms which adjoined animal farm were on permanently bad terms. one of
them, which was named foxwood, was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm,
much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its hedges
in a disgraceful condition. its owner, mr. pilkington, was an easy-going
gentleman farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting
according to the season. the other farm, which was called pinchfield, was
smaller and better kept. its owner was a mr. frederick, a tough, shrewd
man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving hard
bargains. these two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for
them to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.

nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on
animal farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning
too much about it. at first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of
animals managing a farm for themselves. the whol
 
 ___________________________
 
e thing would be over in a
fortnight, they said. they put it about that the animals on the manor farm
(they insisted on calling it the manor farm; they would not tolerate the
name "animal farm") were perpetually fighting among themselves and were
also rapidly starving to death. when time passed and the animals had
evidently not starved to death, frederick and pilkington changed their
tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished on
animal farm. it was given out that the animals there practised cannibalism,
tortured one another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females in
common. this was what came of rebelling against the laws of nature,
frederick and pilkington said.

however, these stories were never fully believed. rumours of a wonderful
farm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managed
thei
 
 ___________________________
 
hey
had begun to call animal farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend
that it was called the manor farm. they had also dropped their championship
of jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live
in another part of the county. except through whymper, there was as yet no
contact between animal farm and the outside world, but there were constant
rumours that napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement
either with mr. pilkington of foxwood or with mr. frederick of
pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

it was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and
took up their residence there. again the animals seemed to remember that a
resolution against this had been passed in the early days, and again
squealer was able to convince them that this was not the case. it was
absolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the
farm, should have a quiet place to work in. it was also more suited 
 
 ___________________________
 
e farm once a week to take them
away.

all this while no more had been seen of snowball. he was rumoured to be
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either foxwood or pinchfield.
napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers
than before. it happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which
had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.
it was well seasoned, and whymper had advised napoleon to sell it; both
mr. pilkington and mr. frederick were anxious to buy it. napoleon was
hesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. it was noticed
that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with
frederick, snowball was declared to be in hiding at foxwood, while, when
he inclined toward pilkington, snowball was said to be at pinchfield.

suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. snowball
was secretly frequenting the farm by night! the animals were so disturbed
that they could hardly sleep in
 
 ___________________________
 
ng growls and showed their side teeth.

the animals were thoroughly frightened. it seemed to them as though
snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about
them and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. in the evening squealer
called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told
them that he had some serious news to report.

"comrades!" cried squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terrible
thing has been discovered. snowball has sold himself to frederick of
pinchfield farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm
away from us! snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. but
there is worse than that. we had thought that snowball's rebellion was
caused simply by his vanity and ambition. but we were wrong, comrades. do
you know what the real reason was? snowball was in league with jones from
the very start! he was jones's secret agent all the time. it has all been
proved by documents which he left behind him and which w
 
 ___________________________
 
our pigs waited, trembling, with
guilt written on every line of their countenances. napoleon now called
upon them to confess their crimes. they were the same four pigs as had
protested when napoleon abolished the sunday meetings. without any further
prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in
destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with
him to hand over animal farm to mr. frederick. they added that snowball
had privately admitted to them that he had been jones's secret agent for
years past. when they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly
tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice napoleon demanded whether
any other animal had anything to confess.

the three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion
over the eggs now came forward and stated that snowball had appeared to
them in a dream and incited them to disobey napoleon's orders. they, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 had grown as big
even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,
he should have learned to be
faithful and true to thee,
yes, his first squeak should be
"comrade napoleon!"


napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall
of the big barn, at the opposite end from the seven commandments. it was
surmounted by a portrait of napoleon, in profile, executed by squealer in
white paint.

meanwhile, through the agency of whymper, napoleon was engaged in
complicated negotiations with frederick and pilkington. the pile of timber
was still unsold. of the two, frederick was the more anxious to get hold
of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. at the same time there
were renewed rumours that frederick and his men were plotting to attack
animal farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused
furious jealousy in him. snowball was known to be still skulking on
pinchfield farm. in the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to
hear that three hens had come 
 
 ___________________________
 
was also going to enter into a
regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between animal farm
and foxwood. the relations between napoleon and pilkington, though they
were only conducted through whymper, were now almost friendly. the animals
distrusted pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to
frederick, whom they both feared and hated. as the summer wore on, and the
windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack
grew stronger and stronger. frederick, it was said, intended to bring
against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the
magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the
title-deeds of animal farm they would ask no questions. moreover, terrible
stories were leaking out from pinchfield about the cruelties that
frederick practised upon his animals. he had flogged an old horse to
death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the
furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by
 
 ___________________________
 
 making cocks fight with
splinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. the animals' blood boiled
with rage when they heard of these things being done to their comrades,
and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack
pinchfield farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. but
squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in comrade
napoleon's strategy.

nevertheless, feeling against frederick continued to run high. one sunday
morning napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at
any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to frederick; he
considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with
scoundrels of that description. the pigeons who were still sent out to
spread tidings of the rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on
foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "death to
humanity" in favour of "death to frederick." i
 
 ___________________________
 
 tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round
the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. napoleon himself, attended by his
dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he
personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced
that the mill would be named napoleon mill.

two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in
the barn. they were struck dumb with surprise when napoleon announced that
he had sold the pile of timber to frederick. tomorrow frederick's wagons
would arrive and begin carting it away. throughout the whole period of his
seeming friendship with pilkington, napoleon had really been in secret
agreement with frederick.

all relations with foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had
been sent to pilkington. the pigeons had been told to avoid pinchfield
farm and to alter their slogan from "death to frederick" to "death to
pilkington." at the same time napoleon assured the animals that the
stories of an imp
 
 ___________________________
 
ending attack on animal farm were completely untrue, and
that the tales about frederick's cruelty to his own animals had been
greatly exaggerated. all these rumours had probably originated with
snowball and his agents. it now appeared that snowball was not, after all,
hiding on pinchfield farm, and in fact had never been there in his life:
he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at foxwood, and had
in reality been a pensioner of pilkington for years past.

the pigs were in ecstasies over napoleon's cunning. by seeming to be
friendly with pilkington he had forced fre
 
 ___________________________
 
derick to raise his price by
twelve pounds. but the superior quality of napoleon's mind, said squealer,
was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even frederick.
frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque,
which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon
it. but napoleon was too clever for him. he had demanded payment in real
five-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber was
removed. already frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was just
enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.

meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. when it was all
gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to
inspect frederick's bank-notes. smiling beatifically, and wearing both his
decorations, napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the
money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. the animals filed slowly past, and ea
 
 ___________________________
 
ch gazed his fill. and boxer
put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things
stirred and rustled in his breath.

three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. whymper, his face deadly
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard
and rushed straight into the farmhouse. the next moment a choking roar of
rage sounded from napoleon's apartments. the news of what had happened
sped round the farm like wildfire. the banknotes were forgeries! frederick
had got the timber for nothing!

napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice
pronounced the death sentence upon frederick. when captured, he said,
frederick should be boiled alive. at the same time he warned them that
after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. frederick and
his men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. sentinels
were placed at all the approaches to the farm. in addition, four pigeons
were sent to foxwood with a concilia
 
 ___________________________
 
tory message, which it was hoped might
re-establish good relations with pilkington.

the very next morning the attack came. the animals were at breakfast when
the look-outs came racing in with the news that frederick and his
followers had already come through the five-barred gate. boldly enough the
animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the
easy victory that they had had in the battle of the cowshed. there were
fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as
soon as they got within fifty yards. the animals could not face the
terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts
of napoleon and boxer to rally them, they were soon driv
 
 ___________________________
 
re, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. for the
moment even napoleon seemed at a loss. he paced up and down without a
word, his tail rigid and twitching. wistful glances were sent in the
direction of foxwood. if pilkington and his men would help them, the day
might yet be won. but at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sent
out on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from
pilkington. on it was pencilled the words: "serves you right."

meanwhile frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. the animals
watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. two of the men had
produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. they were going to knock the
windmill down.

"impossible!" cried napoleon. "we have built the walls far too thick for
that. they could not knock it down in a week. courage, comrades!"

but benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. the two with
the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the
windmill
 
 ___________________________
 
is tail chipped by a pellet. but
the men did not go unscathed either. three of them had their heads broken
by blows from boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's
horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by jessie and bluebell. and
when the nine dogs of napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to
make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's
flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. they saw that they were in
danger of being surrounded. frederick shouted to his men to get out while
the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for
dear life. the animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field,
and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through the
thorn hedge.

they had won, but they were weary and bleeding. slowly they began to limp
back towards the farm. the sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the
grass moved some of them to tears. and for a little while they halted in
sorrow