mare who drew mr. jones's trap, came
mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. she took a place near the
front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the
red ribbons it was plaited with. last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in
between boxer and clover; there she purred contentedly throughout major's
speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

all the animals were now present except moses, the tame raven, who slept
on a perch behind the back door. when major saw that they had all made
themselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throat
and began:

"comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that i had last
night. but i will come to the dream later. i have something else to say
first. i do not think, comrades, that i shall be with you for many months
longer, and before i die, i feel it my duty to pass on to you such wisdom
as i have acquired. 
 
 ___________________________
 
all firmly. "we have no means of making sugar on this
farm. besides, you do not need sugar. you will have all the oats and hay
you want."

"and shall i still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked mollie.

"comrade," said snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are
the badge of slavery. can you not understand that liberty is worth more
than ribbons?"

mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

the pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by
moses, the tame raven. moses, who was mr. jones's especial pet, was a spy
and a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. he claimed to know of
the existence of a mysterious country called sugarcandy mountain, to which
all animals went when they died. it was situated somewhere up in the sky,
a little distance beyond the clouds, moses said. in sugarcandy mountain it
was sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and
lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. the animal
 
 ___________________________
 
s hated moses
because he told tales and did no work, but some of them believed in
sugarcandy mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade them
that there was no such place.

their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, boxer and clover.
these two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves,
but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed
everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by
simple arguments. they were unfailing in
 
 ___________________________
 
eetings always ended.

now, as it turned out, the rebellion was achieved much earlier and more
easily than anyone had expected. in past years mr. jones, although a hard
master, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days.
he had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and had
taken to drinking more than was good for him. for whole days at a time he
would lounge in his windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers,
drinking, and occasionally feeding moses on crusts of bread soaked in
beer. his men were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the
buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were neglected, and the animals were
underfed.

june came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. on midsummer's eve,
which was a saturday, mr. jones went into willingdon and got so drunk at
the red lion that he did not come back till midday on sunday. the men had
milked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting,
without bothering to f
 
 ___________________________
 
e used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, frightened them
almost out of their wits. after only a moment or two they gave up trying
to defend themselves and took to their heels. a minute later all five of
them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road,
with the animals pursuing them in triumph.

mrs. jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening,
hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of
the farm by another way. moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her,
croaking loudly. meanwhile the animals had chased jones and his men out on
to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. and so, almost
before they knew what was happening, the rebellion had been successfully
carried through: jones was expelled, and the manor farm was theirs.

for the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good
fortune. their first act was to gallop in a body right round the
boundaries of the farm, as 
 
 ___________________________
 
eared that snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the battle of
the cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on
jones's side. in fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the
human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "long live
humanity!" on his lips. the wounds on snowball's back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by napoleon's
teeth.

in the middle of the summer moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the
farm, after an absence of several years. he was quite unchanged, still did
no work, and talked in the same strain as ever about sugarcandy mountain.
he would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour to
anyone who would listen. "up there, comrades," he would say solemnly,
pointing to the sky with his large beak--"up there, just on the other side
of that dark cloud that you can see--there it lies, sugarcandy mountain,
that happy country whe
 
 ___________________________
 
re we poor animals shall rest for ever from our
labours!" he even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights,
and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake and
lump sugar growing on the hedges. many of the animals believed him. their
lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and
just that a better world should exist somewhere else? a thing that was
difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards moses. they
all declared contemptuously that his stories about sugarcandy mountain
were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working,
with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.

after his hoof had healed up, boxer worked harder than ever. indeed, all
the animals worked like slaves that year. apart from the regular work of
the farm, and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhouse
for the young pigs, which was started in march. sometimes the long hours
on insufficient
 
 ___________________________
 
 by what
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. no one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




chapter x



years passed. the seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
a time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
rebellion, except clover, benjamin, moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

muriel was dead; bluebell, jessie, and pincher were dead. jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
snowball was forgotten. boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. she was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. the talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for 