
chapter i



mr. jones, of the manor farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, but
was too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes. with the ring of light
from his lantern dancing from side to side, he lurched across the yard,
kicked off his boots at the back door, drew himself a last glass of beer
from the barrel in the scullery, and made his way up to bed, where
mrs. jones was already snoring.

as soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and a
fluttering all through the farm buildings. word had gone round during the
day that old major, the prize middle white boar, had had a strange dream
on the previous night and wished to communicate it to the other animals.
it had been agreed that they should all meet in the big barn as soon as
mr. jones was safely out of the way. old major (so he was always called,
though the name under which he had been 
 
 ___________________________
 
her in the small paddock
beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.

the two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had
lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from
side to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. clover
made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings
nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. at the last moment
mollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew mr. jones's trap, came
mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. she took a place near the
front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the
red ribbons it was plaited with. last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in
between boxer and clover; there she purred contentedly throughout major's
speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

all the animals were now present except moses, the tame raven, 
 
 ___________________________
 
rtilises it, and yet there is not one of
us that owns more than his bare skin. you cows that i see before me, how
many thousands of gallons of milk have you given during this last year?
and what has happened to that milk which should have been breeding up
sturdy calves? every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies.
and you hens, how many eggs have you laid in this last year, and how many
of those eggs ever hatched into chickens? the rest have all gone to market
to bring in money for jones and his men. and you, clover, where are those
four foals you bore, who should have been the support and pleasure of your
old age? each was sold at a year old--you will never see one of them
again. in return for your four confinements and all your labour in the
fields, what have you ever had except your bare rations and a stall?

"and even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their
natural span. for myself i do not grumble, for i am one of the lucky ones.
i am twelve years old an
 
 ___________________________
 
d have had over four hundred children. such is the
natural life of a pig. but no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end.
you young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will
scream your lives out at the block within a year. to that horror we all
must come--cows, pigs, hens, sheep, everyone. even the horses and the dogs
have no better fate. you, boxer, the very day that those great muscles of
yours lose their power, jones will sell you to the knacker, who will cut
your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. as for the dogs, when
they grow old and toothless, jones ties a brick round their necks and
drowns them in the nearest pond.

"is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life
of ours spring from the tyranny of human beings? only get rid of man, and
the produce of our labour would be our own. almost overnight we could
become rich and free. what then must we do? why, work night and
 
 ___________________________
 
gs and dogs,
they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes. and then, after a
few preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into 'beasts of england' in
tremendous unison. the cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep
bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks quacked it. they were so
delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in
succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had not
been interrupted.

unfortunately, the uproar awoke mr. jones, who sprang out of bed, making
sure that there was a fox in the yard. he seized the gun which always
stood in a corner of his bedroom, and let fly a charge of number 6 shot
into the darkness. the pellets buried themselves in the wall of the barn
and the meeting broke up hurriedly. everyone fled to his own
sleeping-place. the birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled
down in the straw, and the whole farm was asleep in a moment.




chapter ii



three nights later old major died peac
 
 ___________________________
 
t animals
on the farm a completely new outlook on life. they did not know when the
rebellion predicted by major would take place, they had no reason for
thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly
that it was their duty to prepare for it. the work of teaching and
organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally
recognised as being the cleverest of the animals. pre-eminent among the
pigs were two young boars named snowball and napoleon, whom mr. jones was
breeding up for sale. napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking
berkshire boar, the only berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but
with a reputation for getting his own way. snowball was a more vivacious
pig than napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was not
considered to have the same depth of character. all the other male pigs on
the farm were porkers. the best known among them was a small fat pig named
squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble moveme
 
 ___________________________
 
nts, and a
shrill voice. he was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some
difficult point he had a way of skipping from side to side and whisking
his tail which was somehow very persuasive. the others said of squealer
that he could turn black into white.

these three had elaborated old major's teachings into a complete system of
thought, to which they gave the name of animalism. several nights a week,
after mr. jones was asleep, they held secret meetings in the barn and
expounded the principles of animalism to the others. at the beginning they
met with much stupidity and apathy. some of the animals talked of the duty
of loyalty to mr. jones, whom they referred to as "master," or made
elementary remarks such as "mr. jones feeds us. if he were gone, we should
starve to death." others asked such questions as "why should we care what
happens after we are dead?" or "if this rebellion is to happen anyway,
what di
 
 ___________________________
 
ugar on this
farm. besides, you do not need sugar. you will have all the oats and hay
you want."

"and shall i still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked mollie.

"comrade," said snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are
the badge of slavery. can you not understand that liberty is worth more
than ribbons?"

mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

the pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by
moses, the tame raven. moses, who was mr. jones's especial pet, was a spy
and a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. he claimed to know of
the existence of a mysterious country called sugarcandy mountain, to which
all animals went when they died. it was situated somewhere up in the sky,
a little distance beyond the clouds, moses said. in sugarcandy mountain it
was sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and
lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. the animals hated moses
because he told tales and di
 
 ___________________________
 
ad great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves,
but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed
everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by
simple arguments. they were unfailing in their attendance at the secret
meetings in the barn, and led the singing of 'beasts of england', with
which the meetings always ended.

now, as it turned out, the rebellion was achieved much earlier and more
easily than anyone had expected. in past years mr. jones, although a hard
master, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days.
he had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and had
taken to drinking more than was good for him. for whole days at a time he
would lounge in his windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers,
drinking, and occasionally feeding moses on crusts of bread soaked in
beer. his men were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the
buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were 
 
 ___________________________
 
neglected, and the animals were
underfed.

june came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. on midsummer's eve,
which was a saturday, mr. jones went into willingdon and got so drunk at
the red lion that he did not come back till midday on sunday. the men had
milked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting,
without bothering to feed the animals. when mr. jones got back he
immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the news of the
world over his face, so that when evening came, the animals were still
unfed. at last they could stand it no longer. one of the cows broke in the
door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals began to help
themselves from the bins. it was just then that mr. jones woke up. the
next moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in their
hands, lashing out in all directions. this was more 
 
 ___________________________
 
than the hungry
animals could bear. with one accord, though nothing of the kind had been
planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their tormentors. jones and
his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all sides.
the situation was quite out of their control. they had never seen animals
behave like this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom they
were used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, frightened them
almost out of their wits. after only a moment or two they gave up trying
to defend themselves and took to their heels. a minute later all five of
them were in full flight down the cart-track that led
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the main road,
with the animals pursuing them in triumph.

mrs. jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening,
hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of
the farm by another way. moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her,
croaking loudly. meanwhile the animals had chased jones and his men out on
to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. and so, almost
before they knew what was happening, the rebellion had been successfully
carried through: jones was expelled, and the manor farm was theirs.

for the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good
fortune. their first act was to gallop in a body right round the
boundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure that no human being
was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to t
 
 ___________________________
 
he farm buildings to
wipe out the last traces of jones's hated reign. the harness-room at the
end of the stables was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the
dog-chains, the cruel knives with which mr. jones had been used to
castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. the reins, the
halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the
rubbish fire which was burning in the yard. so were the whips. all the
animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames.
snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the m
 
 ___________________________
 
ark
of a human being. all animals should go naked."

when boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with
the rest.

in a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded
them of mr. jones. napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and
served out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for
each dog. then they sang 'beasts of england' from end to end seven times
running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they
had never slept before.

but they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious
thing that had happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. a
little way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a
 
 ___________________________
 
they tiptoed
from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind
of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather
mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the brussels carpet,
the lithograph of queen victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. they
were just coming down the stairs when mollie was discovered to be missing.
going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best
bedroom. she had taken a piece of blue ribbon from mrs. jones's
dressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiring
herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. the others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
a unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be
preserved as a museum. all were agreed that no animal must ev
 
 ___________________________
 
er live there.

the animals had their breakfast, and then snowball and napoleon called
them together again.

"comrades," said snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day
before us. today we begin the hay harvest. but there is another matter
that must be attended to first."

the pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught
themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged
to mr. jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap.
napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down to
the five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. then snowball (for it
was snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two
knuckles of his trotter, painted out manor farm from the top bar of the
gate and in its place painted animal farm. this was to be the name of the
farm from now onwards. after this they went back to the farm buildings,
where snow
 
 ___________________________
 
ual.


it was very neatly written, and except that "friend" was written "freind"
and one of the "s's" was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all
the way through. snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. all
the animals nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at once
began to learn the commandments by heart.

"now, comrades," cried snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, "to the
hayfield! let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more
quickly than jones and his men could do."

but at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time
past, set up a loud lowing. they had not been milked for twenty-four
hours, and their udders were almost bursting. after a little thought, the
pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, their
trotters being well adapted to this task. soon there were five buckets of
frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable
interest.

"what is going to happen to all 
 
 ___________________________
 
s were
rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.

sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human
beings and not for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal was
able to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. but the pigs
were so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. as
for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood
the business of mowing and raking far better than jones and his men had
ever done. the pigs did not actually work, but directed and supervised the
others. with their superior knowledge it was natural that they should
assume the leadership. boxer and clover would harness themselves to the
cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of
course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking
behind and calling out "gee up, comrade!" or "whoa back, comrade!" as the
case might be. and every animal down to the hum
 
 ___________________________
 
s more for everyone to eat. there was more leisure too,
inexperienced though the animals were. they met with many difficulties--for
instance, later in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had to
tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff with their
breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine--but the pigs with
their cleverness and boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them
through. boxer was the admiration of everybody. he had been a hard worker
even in jones's time, but now he seemed more like three horses than one;
there were days when the entire work of the farm seemed to rest on his
mighty shoulders. from morning to night he was pushing and pulling, always
at the spot where the work was hardest. he had made an arrangement with
one of the cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than
anyone else, and would put in some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to
be most needed, before the regular day's work began. his answer to every

 
 ___________________________
 
. it was soon
noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found.
she would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in
the evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. but she
always made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it
was impossible not to believe in her good intentions. old benjamin, the
donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the rebellion. he did his work in the
same slow obstinate way as he had done it in jones's time, never shirking
and never volunteering for extra work either. about the rebellion and its
results he would express no opinion. when asked whether he was not happier
now that jones was gone, he would say only "donkeys live a long time. none
of you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content with
this cryptic answer.

on sundays there was no work. breakfast was an hour later than usual, and
after breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week without
fail. 
 
 ___________________________
 
first came the hoisting of the flag. snowball had found in the
harness-room an old green tablecloth of mrs. jones's and had painted on it
a hoof and a horn in white. this was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse
garden every sunday morning. the flag was green, snowball explained, to
represent the green fields of england, while the hoof and horn signified
the future republic of the animals which would arise when the human race
had been finally overthrown. after the hoisting of the flag all the
animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known
as the meeting. here the work of the comi
 
 ___________________________
 
milk and apples. i dislike them myself. our sole object in taking these
things is to preserve our health. milk and apples (this has been proved by
science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the
well-being of a pig. we pigs are brainworkers. the whole management and
organisation of this farm depend on us. day and night we are watching over
your welfare. it is for your sake that we drink that milk and eat those
apples. do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our duty? jones
would come back! yes, jones would come back! surely, comrades," cried
squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his
tail, "surely there is no one among you who wants to see jones come back?"

now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it
was that they did not want jones back. when it was put to them in this
light, they had no more to say. the importance of keeping the pigs in good
health was all too obvious. so it was agreed without further
 
 ___________________________
 
 argument that
the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when
they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.




chapter iv



by the late summer the news of what had happened on animal farm had spread
across half the county. every day snowball and napoleon sent out flights
of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on
neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the rebellion, and teach them
the tune of 'beasts of england'.

most of this time mr. jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the red
lion at willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the
monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by
a pack of good-for-nothing animals. the other farmers sympathised in
principle, but they did not at first give him much help. at heart, each of
them was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn jones's
misfortune to his own advantage. it was lucky that the owners of the two
farms which adjoined animal
 
 ___________________________
 
nd yet the song was irrepressible. the blackbirds whistled it in the
hedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got into the din of the
smithies and the tune of the church bells. and when the human beings
listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of their
future doom.

early in october, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was
already threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and
alighted in the yard of animal farm in the wildest excitement. jones and
all his men, with half a dozen others from foxwood and pinchfield, had
entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to
the farm. they were all carrying sticks, except jones, who was marching
ahead with a gun in his hands. obviously they were going to attempt the
recapture of the farm.

this had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. snowball,
who had studied an old book of julius caesar's campaigns which he had
found in the farmhouse, was in charg
 
 ___________________________
 
nimals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

the men gave a shout of triumph. they saw, as they imagined, their enemies
in flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. this was just what
snowball had intended. as soon as they were well inside the yard, the
three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying
in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them
off. snowball now gave the signal for the charge. he himself dashed
straight for jones. jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. the
pellets scored bloody streaks along snowball's back, and a sheep dropped
dead. without halting for an instant, snowball flung his fifteen stone
against jones's legs. jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun
flew out of his hands. but the most terrifying spectacle of all was boxer,
rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shod
hoofs like a stallion. his very first blow took a stable-lad from foxwood
on the skull
 
 ___________________________
 
imal
hero, first class," which was conferred there and then on snowball and
boxer. it consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old
horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on
sundays and holidays. there was also "animal hero, second class," which
was conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.

there was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. in the
end, it was named the battle of the cowshed, since that was where the
ambush had been sprung. mr. jones's gun had been found lying in the mud,
and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges in the farmhouse.
it was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the flagstaff, like a
piece of artillery, and to fire it twice a year--once on october the
twelfth, the anniversary of the battle of the cowshed, and once on
midsummer day, the anniversary of the rebellion.




chapter v



as winter drew on, mollie became more and more troublesome. she was late
for work every morning and excused herself
 
 ___________________________
 
rd of anything of this kind before
(for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive
machinery), and they listened in astonishment while snowball conjured up
pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while
they grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with
reading and conversation.

within a few weeks snowball's plans for the windmill were fully worked
out. the mechanical details came mostly from three books which had
belonged to mr. jones--'one thousand useful things to do about the house',
'every man his own bricklayer', and 'electricity for beginners'. snowball
used as his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had a
smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. he was closeted there for
hours at a time. with his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of
chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly
to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers of
excitem
 
 ___________________________
 
h either faction. he refused to believe either
that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save
work. windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had always
gone on--that is, badly.

apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the
defence of the farm. it was fully realised that though the human beings
had been defeated in the battle of the cowshed they might make another and
more determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate mr. jones.
they had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat
had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring
farms more restive than ever. as usual, snowball and napoleon were in
disagreement. according to napoleon, what the animals must do was to
procure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. according to
snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion
among the animals on the other farms. the one argued that if they
 
 ___________________________
 
 the animals crept back into the barn. in a moment
the dogs came bounding back. at first no one had been able to imagine
where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they
were the puppies whom napoleon had taken away from their mothers and
reared privately. though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as
fierce-looking as wolves. they kept close to napoleon. it was noticed that
they wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been
used to do to mr. jones.

napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised
portion of the floor where major had previously stood to deliver his
speech. he announced that from now on the sunday-morning meetings would
come to an end. they were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. in future
all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a
special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. these would meet in
private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. th
 
 ___________________________
 
owball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

"he fought bravely at the battle of the cowshed," said somebody.

"bravery is not enough," said squealer. "loyalty and obedience are more
important. and as to the battle of the cowshed, i believe the time will
come when we shall find that snowball's part in it was much exaggerated.
discipline, comrades, iron discipline! that is the watchword for today.
one false step, and our enemies would be upon us. surely, comrades, you do
not want jones back?"

once again this argument was unanswerable. certainly the animals did not
want jones back; if the holding of debates on sunday mornings was liable
to bring him back, then the debates must stop. boxer, who had now had time
to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "if comrade
napoleon says it, it must be right." and from then on he adopted the
maxim, "napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "i
will work harder."

by this time the weather had broken
 
 ___________________________
 
ey were needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of
eggs, for which there was always a market in willingdon. the hens, said
napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contribution
towards the building of the windmill.

once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. never to have
any dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make
use of money--had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed at
that first triumphant meeting after jones was expelled? all the animals
remembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that they
remembered it. the four young pigs who had protested when napoleon
abolished the meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly
silenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. then, as usual, the sheep
broke into "four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardness
was smoothed over. finally napoleon raised his trotter for silence and
announced that he had already made a
 
 ___________________________
 
ld meet in the public-houses and prove to one another by
means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it
did stand up, then that it would never work. and yet, against their will,
they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which the
animals were managing their own affairs. one symptom of this was that they
had begun to call animal farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend
that it was called the manor farm. they had also dropped their championship
of jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live
in another part of the county. except through whymper, there was as yet no
contact between animal farm and the outside world, but there were constant
rumours that napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement
either with mr. pilkington of foxwood or with mr. frederick of
pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

it was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and
took
 
 ___________________________
 
eep
in. a pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly regarded. the rule was
against sheets, which are a human invention. we have removed the sheets
from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets. and very comfortable
beds they are too! but not more comfortable than we need, i can tell you,
comrades, with all the brainwork we have to do nowadays. you would not rob
us of our repose, would you, comrades? you would not have us too tired to
carry out our duties? surely none of you wishes to see jones back?"

the animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said
about the pigs sleeping in the farmhouse beds. and when, some days
afterwards, it was announced that from now on the pigs would get up an
hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no complaint was made
about that either.

by the autumn the animals were tired but happy. they had had a hard year,
and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the
winter were none too plentiful, but t
 
 ___________________________
 
four hundred eggs a week. the price of these would
pay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came on
and conditions were easier.

when the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. they had been
warned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had not
believed that it would really happen. they were just getting their
clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the
eggs away now was murder. for the first time since the expulsion of jones,
there was something resembling a rebellion. led by three young black
minorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart napoleon's
wishes. their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their
eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. napoleon acted swiftly and
ruthlessly. he ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed that
any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished
by death. the dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. for f
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"comrades!" cried squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terrible
thing has been discovered. snowball has sold himself to frederick of
pinchfield farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm
away from us! snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. but
there is worse than that. we had thought that snowball's rebellion was
caused simply by his vanity and ambition. but we were wrong, comrades. do
you know what the real reason was? snowball was in league with jones from
the very start! he was jones's secret agent all the time. it has all been
proved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only just
discovered. to my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. did we not
see for ourselves how he attempted--fortunately without success--to get us
defeated and destroyed at the battle of the cowshed?"

the animals were stupefied. this was a wickedness far outdoing snowball's
destruction of the windmill. but it was some minutes before they could

 
 ___________________________
 
fully take it in. they all remembered, or thought they remembered, how
they had seen snowball charging ahead of them at the battle of the
cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he
had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from jones's gun had
wounded his back. at first it was a little difficult to see how this
fitted in with his being on jones's side. even boxer, who seldom asked
questions, was puzzled. he lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him,
shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.

"i do not believe that," he said. "snowball fought bravely at the battle
of the cowshed. i saw him myself. did we not give him 'animal hero, first
class,' immediately afterwards?"

"that was our mistake, comrade. for we know now--it is all written down in
the secret documents that we have found--that in reality he 
 
 ___________________________
 
er. "we all saw him running with blood."

"that was part of the arrangement!" cried squealer. "jones's shot only
grazed him. i could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to
read it. the plot was for snowball, at the critical moment, to give the
signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. and he very nearly
succeeded--i will even say, comrades, he would have succeeded if it had
not been for our heroic leader, comrade napoleon. do you not remember how,
just at the moment when jones and his men had got inside the yard,
snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? and do
you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was
spreading and all seemed lost, that comrade napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of 'death to humanity!' and sank his teeth in jones's leg? surely you
remember that, comrades?" exclaimed squealer, frisking from side to side.

now when squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the
animals that they did r
 
 ___________________________
 
emember it. at any rate, they remembered that at
the critical moment of the battle snowball had turned to flee. but boxer
was still a little uneasy.

"i do not believe that snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said
finally. "what he has done since is different. but i believe that at the
battle of the cowshed he was a good comrade."

"our leader, comrade napoleon," announced squealer, speaking very slowly
and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that
snowball was jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long
before the rebellion was ever thought of."

"ah, that is different!" said boxer. "if comrade napoleon says it, it must
be right."

"that is the true spirit, comrade!" cried squealer, but it was noticed he
cast a very ugly look at boxer with his little twinkling eyes. he turned
to go, then paused and added impressively: "i warn every animal on this
farm to keep his eyes very wide open. for we have reason to think that
some of snowball's secret 
 
 ___________________________
 
napoleon now called
upon them to confess their crimes. they were the same four pigs as had
protested when napoleon abolished the sunday meetings. without any further
prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in
destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with
him to hand over animal farm to mr. frederick. they added that snowball
had privately admitted to them that he had been jones's secret agent for
years past. when they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly
tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice napoleon demanded whether
any other animal had anything to confess.

the three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion
over the eggs now came forward and stated that snowball had appeared to
them in a dream and incited them to disobey napoleon's orders. they, too,
were slaughtered. then a goose came forward and confessed to having
secrete
 
 ___________________________
 
ed in the drinking
pool--urged to do this, so she said, by snowball--and two other sheep
confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of
napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering
from a cough. they were all slain on the spot. and so the tale of
confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses
lying before napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell of
blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of jones.

when it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs,
crept away in a body. they were shaken and miserable. they did not know
which was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leagued
themselves with snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just
witnessed. in the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. since jones had left the farm,
unt
 
 ___________________________
 
tecting the weak, as she
had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of
major's speech. instead--she did not know why--they had come to a time
when no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed
everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after
confessing to shocking crimes. there was no thought of rebellion or
disobedience in her mind. she knew that, even as things were, they were
far better off than they had been in the days of jones, and that before
all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.
whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the
orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of napoleon. but
still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped
and toiled. it was not for this that they had built the windmill and faced
the bullets of jones's gun. such were her thoughts, though she lacked the
words to express them.

at last, feeling this to b
 
 ___________________________
 
t been violated; for clearly there was good reason for
killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with snowball.

throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in
the previous year. to rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as
before, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regular
work of the farm, was a tremendous labour. there were times when it seemed
to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they
had done in jones's day. on sunday mornings squealer, holding down a long
strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures
proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by
two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent,
as the case might be. the animals saw no reason to disbelieve him,
especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions
had been like before the rebellion. all the same, there were days when
they felt that
 
 ___________________________
 
nferred upon himself. in the general
rejoicings the unfortunate affair of the banknotes was forgotten.

it was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky
in the cellars of the farmhouse. it had been overlooked at the time when
the house was first occupied. that night there came from the farmhouse the
sound of loud singing, in which, to everyone's surprise, the strains of
'beasts of england' were mixed up. at about half past nine napoleon,
wearing an old bowler hat of mr. jones's, was distinctly seen to emerge
from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors
again. but in the morning a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. not a
pig appeared to be stirring. it was nearly nine o'clock when squealer made
his appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail
hanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously
ill. he called the animals together and told them that he had a terrible
piece of news to impart. comra
 
 ___________________________
 
ed, except
those of the pigs and the dogs. a too rigid equality in rations, squealer
explained, would have been contrary to the principles of animalism. in any
case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were
not in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be. for the
time being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment
of rations (squealer always spoke of it as a "readjustment," never as a
"reduction"), but in comparison with the days of jones, the improvement
was enormous. reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he proved
to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than
they had had in jones's day, that they worked shorter hours, that their
drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that a
larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had
more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. the animals
believed every word of it. truth to tell, jones and a
 
 ___________________________
 
a week, so that that year the hens barely
hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. rations,
reduced in december, were reduced again in february, and lanterns in the
stalls were forbidden to save oil. but the pigs seemed comfortable enough,
and in fact were putting on weight if anything. one afternoon in late
february a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had never
smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house,
which had been disused in jones's time, and which stood beyond the
kitchen. someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. the animals
sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being
prepared for their supper. but no warm mash appeared, and on the following
sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved
for the pigs. the field beyond the orchard had already been sown with
barley. and the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a
ration of a pint of beer daily, wi
 
 ___________________________
 
 squealer's
lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,
and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their
bellies were empty, at least part of the time.

in april, animal farm was proclaimed a republic, and it became necessary
to elect a president. there was only one candidate, napoleon, who was
elected unanimously. on the same day it was given out that fresh documents
had been discovered which revealed further details about snowball's
complicity with jones. it now appeared that snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the battle of
the cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on
jones's side. in fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the
human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "long live
humanity!" on his lips. the wounds on snowball's back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by napoleon's
teeth.

in the middle of
 
 ___________________________
 
glass. no one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




chapter x



years passed. the seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
a time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
rebellion, except clover, benjamin, moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

muriel was dead; bluebell, jessie, and pincher were dead. jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
snowball was forgotten. boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. she was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. the talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone
 
 ___________________________
 
s produced any food by
their own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetites
were always good.

as for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had always
been. they were generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from the
pool, they laboured in the fields; in winter they were troubled by the
cold, and in summer by the flies. sometimes the older ones among them
racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early
days of the rebellion, when jones's expulsion was still recent, things had
been better or worse than now. they could not remember. there was nothing
with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go
upon except squealer's lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated
that everything was getting better and better. the animals found the
problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on
such things now. only old benjamin professed to remember every detail of
his long life and to know
 
 ___________________________
 
 privilege in being members of animal
farm. they were still the only farm in the whole county--in all
england!--owned and operated by animals. not one of them, not even the
youngest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or
twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that. and when they heard the
gun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their
hearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towards
the old heroic days, the expulsion of jones, the writing of the seven
commandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had been
defeated. none of the old dreams had been abandoned. the republic of the
animals which major had foretold, when the green fields of england should
be untrodden by human feet, was still believed in. some day it was coming:
it might not be soon, it might not be with in the lifetime of any animal
now living, but still it was coming. even the tune of 'beasts of england'
was perhaps hummed secretly here an
 
 ___________________________
 
than others

after that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were
supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. it
did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a
wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out
subscriptions to 'john bull', 'tit-bits', and the 'daily mirror'. it did
not seem strange when napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden
with a pipe in his mouth--no, not even when the pigs took mr. jones's
clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, napoleon himself appearing
in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his
favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which mrs. jones had been
used to wearing on sundays.

a week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm.
a deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of
inspection. they were shown all over the farm, and expressed great
admiration for everything they saw,