nimal
concealed in the straw. clover was a stout motherly mare approaching
middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.
boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as
any two ordinary horses put together. a white stripe down his nose gave
him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate
intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of
character and tremendous powers of work. after the horses came muriel,
the white goat, and benjamin, the donkey. benjamin was the oldest animal
on the farm, and the worst tempered. he seldom talked, and when he did, it
was usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say that
god had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner
have had no tail and no flies. alone among the animals on the farm he
never laughed. if asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at.
nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted t
 
 ___________________________
 
re just out of her reach. she was telling
them that all animals were now comrades and that any sparrow who chose
could come and perch on her paw; but the sparrows kept their distance.

the reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. by the
autumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree.

as for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. the dogs
learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anything
except the seven commandments. muriel, the goat, could read somewhat
better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the
evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.
benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.
so far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. clover learnt
the whole alphabet, but could not put words together. boxer could not get
beyond the letter d. he would trace out a, b, c, d, in the dust with his
great hoof, and then would stand
 
 ___________________________
 
all launched his
first attack. all the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and
fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the
men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the
hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
however, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a
little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks.
snowball now launched his second line of attack. muriel, benjamin, and all
the sheep, with snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded
and butted the men from every side, while benjamin turned around and
lashed at them with his small hoofs. but once again the men, with their
sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly,
at a squeal from snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the
animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

the men gave a shout of triumph. they saw, as they imagined, th
 
 ___________________________
 
bed of the quarry. the animals lashed ropes round these, and then all
together, cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the
rope--even the pigs sometimes joined in at critical moments--they dragged
them with desperate slowness up the slope to the top of the quarry, where
they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below. transporting
the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. the horses
carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even muriel
and benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did their
share. by late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, and
then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.

but it was a slow, laborious process. frequently it took a whole day of
exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and
sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. nothing
could have been achieved without boxer, whose strength seemed equal to
that 
 
 ___________________________
 
heless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the
pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room
as a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. boxer passed it off as
usual with "napoleon is always right!", but clover, who thought she
remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and
tried to puzzle out the seven commandments which were inscribed there.
finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched
muriel.

"muriel," she said, "read me the fourth commandment. does it not say
something about never sleeping in a bed?"

with some difficulty muriel spelt it out.

"it says, 'no animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,"' she announced
finally.

curiously enough, clover had not remembered that the fourth commandment
mentioned sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so.
and squealer, who happened to be passing at this moment, attended by two
or three dogs, was able to put the whole ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 cruel retribution they had just
witnessed. in the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. since jones had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. not even a rat had been
killed. they had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--clover, muriel, benjamin, the cows,
the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except
the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before napoleon ordered the
animals to assemble. for some time nobody spoke. only boxer remained on
his feet. he fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his
sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. finally he
said:

"i do not understand it. i would not have believed that such things could
happen on our farm. it must be due
 
 ___________________________
 
ls
sitting round her took it up, and they sang it three times over--very
tunefully, but slowly and mournfully, in a way they had never sung it
before.

they had just finished singing it for the third time when squealer,
attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something
important to say. he announced that, by a special decree of comrade
napoleon, 'beasts of england' had been abolished. from now onwards it was
forbidden to sing it.

the animals were taken aback.

"why?" cried muriel.

"it's no longer needed, comrade," said squealer stiffly. "'beasts of
england' was the song of the rebellion. but the rebellion is now
completed. the execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act.
the enemy both external and internal has been defeated. in 'beasts of
england' we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come.
but that society has now been established. clearly this song has no longer
any purpose."

frightened though they were, some of the animals might p
 
 ___________________________
 
ater, when the terror caused by the executions had died down,
some of the animals remembered--or thought they remembered--that the sixth
commandment decreed "no animal shall kill any other animal." and though no
one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was
felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.
clover asked benjamin to read her the sixth commandment, and when
benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she
fetched muriel. muriel read the commandment for her. it ran: "no animal
shall kill any other animal without cause." somehow or other, the last two
words had slipped out of the animals' memory. but they saw now that the
commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for
killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with snowball.

throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in
the previous year. to rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as
before, an
 
 ___________________________
 
 lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand
there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint.
the dogs immediately made a ring round squealer, and escorted him back to
the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. none of the animals could
form any idea as to what this meant, except old benjamin, who nodded his
muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.

but a few days later muriel, reading over the seven commandments to
herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had
remembered wrong. they had thought the fifth commandment was "no animal
shall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten.
actually the commandment read: "no animal shall drink alcohol to excess."




chapter ix



boxer's split hoof was a long time in healing. they had started the
rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were
ended. box
 
 ___________________________
 
, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by
two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a
low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. and boxer's stall was
empty.

the animals crowded round the van. "good-bye, boxer!" they chorused,
"good-bye!"

"fools! fools!" shouted benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the
earth with his small hoofs. "fools! do you not see what is written on the
side of that van?"

that gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. muriel began to spell
out the words. but benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly
silence he read:

"'alfred simmonds, horse slaughterer and glue boiler, willingdon. dealer
in hides and bone-meal. kennels supplied.' do you not understand what that
means? they are taking boxer to the knacker's!"

a cry of horror burst from all the animals. at this moment the man on the
box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart
trot. all the animals followed, crying out at the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. no one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




chapter x



years passed. the seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
a time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
rebellion, except clover, benjamin, moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

muriel was dead; bluebell, jessie, and pincher were dead. jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
snowball was forgotten. boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. she was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. the talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dro