. clover was a stout motherly mare approaching
middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.
boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as
any two ordinary horses put together. a white stripe down his nose gave
him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate
intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of
character and tremendous powers of work. after the horses came muriel,
the white goat, and benjamin, the donkey. benjamin was the oldest animal
on the farm, and the worst tempered. he seldom talked, and when he did, it
was usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say that
god had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner
have had no tail and no flies. alone among the animals on the farm he
never laughed. if asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at.
nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted to boxer; the
two of them usual
 
 ___________________________
 
 had a
way of leaving work early on the ground that there was a stone in her
hoof. and the behaviour of the cat was somewhat peculiar. it was soon
noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found.
she would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in
the evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. but she
always made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it
was impossible not to believe in her good intentions. old benjamin, the
donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the rebellion. he did his work in the
same slow obstinate way as he had done it in jones's time, never shirking
and never volunteering for extra work either. about the rebellion and its
results he would express no opinion. when asked whether he was not happier
now that jones was gone, he would say only "donkeys live a long time. none
of you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content with
this cryptic answer.

on sundays there was no 
 
 ___________________________
 
nce.

the reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. by the
autumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree.

as for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. the dogs
learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anything
except the seven commandments. muriel, the goat, could read somewhat
better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the
evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.
benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.
so far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. clover learnt
the whole alphabet, but could not put words together. boxer could not get
beyond the letter d. he would trace out a, b, c, d, in the dust with his
great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears
back, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to
remember what came next and never succeeding. on several occasions,
indeed, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ched his
first attack. all the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and
fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the
men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the
hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
however, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a
little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks.
snowball now launched his second line of attack. muriel, benjamin, and all
the sheep, with snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded
and butted the men from every side, while benjamin turned around and
lashed at them with his small hoofs. but once again the men, with their
sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly,
at a squeal from snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the
animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

the men gave a shout of triumph. they saw, as they imagined, their enemie
 
 ___________________________
 
aintained that
it could all be done in a year. and thereafter, he declared, so much
labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days
a week. napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the
moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on
the windmill they would all starve to death. the animals formed themselves
into two factions under the slogan, "vote for snowball and the three-day
week" and "vote for napoleon and the full manger." benjamin was the only
animal who did not side with either faction. he refused to believe either
that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save
work. windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had always
gone on--that is, badly.

apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the
defence of the farm. it was fully realised that though the human beings
had been defeated in the battle of the cowshed they might make another and
more determined attemp
 
 ___________________________
 
quarry. the animals lashed ropes round these, and then all
together, cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the
rope--even the pigs sometimes joined in at critical moments--they dragged
them with desperate slowness up the slope to the top of the quarry, where
they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below. transporting
the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. the horses
carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even muriel
and benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did their
share. by late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, and
then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.

but it was a slow, laborious process. frequently it took a whole day of
exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and
sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. nothing
could have been achieved without boxer, whose strength seemed equal to
that of all the re
 
 ___________________________
 
oiled harder than ever,
thinking it well worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of
stone if by doing so they could raise the walls another foot. boxer would
even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his own by the
light of the harvest moon. in their spare moments the animals would walk
round and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and
perpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever have
been able to build anything so imposing. only old benjamin refused to grow
enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter nothing
beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.

november came, with raging south-west winds. building had to stop because
it was now too wet to mix the cement. finally there came a night when the
gale was so violent that the farm buildings rocked on their foundations
and several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn. the hens woke up
squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultan
 
 ___________________________
 
etribution they had just
witnessed. in the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. since jones had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. not even a rat had been
killed. they had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--clover, muriel, benjamin, the cows,
the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except
the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before napoleon ordered the
animals to assemble. for some time nobody spoke. only boxer remained on
his feet. he fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his
sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. finally he
said:

"i do not understand it. i would not have believed that such things could
happen on our farm. it must be due to some f
 
 ___________________________
 
somehow neither the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals to
come up to 'beasts of england'.




chapter viii



a few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down,
some of the animals remembered--or thought they remembered--that the sixth
commandment decreed "no animal shall kill any other animal." and though no
one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was
felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.
clover asked benjamin to read her the sixth commandment, and when
benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she
fetched muriel. muriel read the commandment for her. it ran: "no animal
shall kill any other animal without cause." somehow or other, the last two
words had slipped out of the animals' memory. but they saw now that the
commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for
killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with snowball.

throughout the year the ani
 
 ___________________________
 
day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from
pilkington. on it was pencilled the words: "serves you right."

meanwhile frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. the animals
watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. two of the men had
produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. they were going to knock the
windmill down.

"impossible!" cried napoleon. "we have built the walls far too thick for
that. they could not knock it down in a week. courage, comrades!"

but benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. the two with
the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the
windmill. slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, benjamin nodded his
long muzzle.

"i thought so," he said. "do you not see what they are doing? in another
moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole."

terrified, the animals waited. it was impossible now to venture out of the
shelter of the buildings. after a few minutes the men were seen to b
 
 ___________________________
 
alls. it was a
moonlit night. at the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the
seven commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand
there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint.
the dogs immediately made a ring round squealer, and escorted him back to
the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. none of the animals could
form any idea as to what this meant, except old benjamin, who nodded his
muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.

but a few days later muriel, reading over the seven commandments to
herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had
remembered wrong. they had thought the fifth commandment was "no animal
shall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten.
actually the commandment read: "no animal shall drink alcohol to excess."




chapter ix



boxer's split hoof was a lon
 
 ___________________________
 
g time in healing. they had started the
rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were
ended. boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of
honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. in the evenings he would
admit privately to clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. clover
treated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing
them, and both she and benjamin urged boxer to work less hard. "a horse's
lungs do not last for ever," she said to him. but boxer would not listen.
he had, he said, only one real ambition left--to see the windmill well
under way before he reached the age for retirement.

at the beginning, when the laws of animal farm were first formulated,
the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at
fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at
five. liberal old-age pensions had been 
 
 ___________________________
 
 it had used to be, and his great haunches
seemed to have shrunken. the others said, "boxer will pick up when the
spring grass comes on"; but the spring came and boxer grew no fatter.
sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced
his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that
nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. at such times
his lips were seen to form the words, "i will work harder"; he had no
voice left. once again clover and benjamin warned him to take care of his
health, but boxer paid no attention. his twelfth birthday was approaching.
he did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone was
accumulated before he went on pension.

late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that
something had happened to boxer. he had gone out alone to drag a load of
stone down to the windmill. and sure enough, the rumour was true. a few
minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; "boxer has fa
 
 ___________________________
 
e his head. his eyes were glazed, his
sides matted with sweat. a thin stream of blood had trickled out of his
mouth. clover dropped to her knees at his side.

"boxer!" she cried, "how are you?"

"it is my lung," said boxer in a weak voice. "it does not matter. i think
you will be able to finish the windmill without me. there is a pretty good
store of stone accumulated. i had only another month to go in any case.
to tell you the truth, i had been looking forward to my retirement. and
perhaps, as benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the
same time and be a companion to me."

"we must get help at once," said clover. "run, somebody, and tell squealer
what has happened."

all the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give
squealer the news. only clover remained, and benjamin who lay down at
boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. after about a quarter of an hour squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. he said tha
 
 ___________________________
 
ittle uneasy at this.
except for mollie and snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. however, squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in willingdon could treat boxer's case more satisfactorily than
could be done on the farm. and about half an hour later, when boxer had
somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed
to limp back to his stall, where clover and benjamin had prepared a good
bed of straw for him.

for the next two days boxer remained in his stall. the pigs had sent out a
large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest
in the bathroom, and clover administered it to boxer twice a day after
meals. in the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while
benjamin kept the flies off him. boxer professed not to be sorry for what
had happened. if he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another
three years, and he 
 
 ___________________________
 
looked forward to the peaceful days that he would
spend in the corner of the big pasture. it would be the first time that he
had had leisure to study and improve his mind. he intended, he said, to
devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters
of the alphabet.

however, benjamin and clover could only be with boxer after working hours,
and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.
the animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a
pig, when they were astonished to see benjamin come galloping from the
direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. it was
the first time that they had ever seen benjamin excited--indeed, it was
the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop. "quick, quick!" he
shouted. "
 
 ___________________________
 
come at once! they're taking boxer away!" without waiting for
orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farm
buildings. sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by
two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a
low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. and boxer's stall was
empty.

the animals crowded round the van. "good-bye, boxer!" they chorused,
"good-bye!"

"fools! fools!" shouted benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the
earth with his small hoofs. "fools! do you not see what is written on the
side of that van?"

that gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. muriel began to spell
out the words. but benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly
silence he read:

"'alfred simmonds, horse slaughterer and glue boiler, willingdon. dealer
in hides and bone-meal. kennels supplied.' do you not understand what that
means? they are taking boxer to the knacker's!"

a cry
 
 ___________________________
 
s followed by what
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. no one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




chapter x



years passed. the seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
a time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
rebellion, except clover, benjamin, moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

muriel was dead; bluebell, jessie, and pincher were dead. jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
snowball was forgotten. boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. she was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. the talk of setting aside a
corner of the pastu
 
 ___________________________
 
re for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. squealer was
so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. only old
benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about
the muzzle, and, since boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.

there were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was
not so great as had been expected in earlier years. many animals had been
born to whom the rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of
mouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a
thing before their arrival. the farm possessed three horses now be
 
 ___________________________
 
ried to determine whether in the early
days of the rebellion, when jones's expulsion was still recent, things had
been better or worse than now. they could not remember. there was nothing
with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go
upon except squealer's lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated
that everything was getting better and better. the animals found the
problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on
such things now. only old benjamin professed to remember every detail of
his long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could be
much better or much worse--hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, so
he said, the unalterable law of life.

and yet the animals never gave up hope. more, they never lost, even for an
instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of animal
farm. they were still the only farm in the whole county--in all
england!--owned and operated by animals. not one of them, not eve
 
 ___________________________
 
ever complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened--they
might have uttered some word of protest. but just at that moment, as
though at a signal, all the sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of--

"four legs good, two legs better! four legs good, two legs better! four
legs good, two legs better!"

it went on for five minutes without stopping. and by the time the sheep
had quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs
had marched back into the farmhouse.

benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. he looked round. it was
clover. her old eyes looked dimmer than ever. without saying anything, she
tugged gently at his mane and led him round to the end of the big barn,
where the seven commandments were written. for a minute or two they stood
gazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.

"my sight is failing," she said finally. "even when i was young i could
not have read what was written there. but it appears to me that that wall
looks different. 
 
 ___________________________
 
are the seven commandments the same as they used to be,
benjamin?"

for once benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what
was written on the wall. there was nothing there now except a single
commandment. it ran:

all animals are equal
but some animals are more equal than others

after that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were
supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. it
did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a
wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out
subsc