he more intelligent animals
on the farm a completely new outlook on life. they did not know when the
rebellion predicted by major would take place, they had no reason for
thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly
that it was their duty to prepare for it. the work of teaching and
organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally
recognised as being the cleverest of the animals. pre-eminent among the
pigs were two young boars named snowball and napoleon, whom mr. jones was
breeding up for sale. napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking
berkshire boar, the only berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but
with a reputation for getting his own way. snowball was a more vivacious
pig than napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was not
considered to have the same depth of character. all the other male pigs on
the farm were porkers. the best known among them was a small fat pig named
squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eye
 
 ___________________________
 
nowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the mark
of a human being. all animals should go naked."

when boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with
the rest.

in a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded
them of mr. jones. napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and
served out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for
each dog. then they sang 'beasts of england' from end to end seven times
running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they
had never slept before.

but they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious
thing that had happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. a
little way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a view of
m
 
 ___________________________
 
 its rich scent. then
they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with
speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool,
the spinney. it was as though they had never seen these things before, and
even now they could hardly believe that it was all their own.

then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside
the door of the farmhouse. that was theirs too, but they were frightened
to go inside. after a moment, however, snowball and napoleon butted the
door open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file,
walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. they tiptoed
from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind
of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather
mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the brussels carpet,
the lithograph of queen victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. they
were just coming down the stairs when mollie was discov
 
 ___________________________
 

herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. the others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
a unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be
preserved as a museum. all were agreed that no animal must ever live there.

the animals had their breakfast, and then snowball and napoleon called
them together again.

"comrades," said snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day
before us. today we begin the hay harvest. but there is another matter
that must be attended to first."

the pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught
themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged
to mr. jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap.
napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down to
the f
 
 ___________________________
 
ive-barred gate that gave on to the main road. then snowball (for it
was snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two
knuckles of his trotter, painted out manor farm from the top bar of the
gate and in its place painted animal farm. this was to be the name of the
farm from now onwards. after this they went back to the farm buildings,
where snowball and napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be set
against the end wall of the big barn. they explained that by their studies
of the past three months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles
of animalism to seven commandments. these seven commandments would now be
inscribed on the wall; they would form an unalterable law by which all the
animals on animal farm must live for ever after. with some difficulty
(for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder) snowball
climbed up an
 
 ___________________________
 
ilked for twenty-four
hours, and their udders were almost bursting. after a little thought, the
pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, their
trotters being well adapted to this task. soon there were five buckets of
frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable
interest.

"what is going to happen to all that milk?" said someone.

"jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash," said one of the hens.

"never mind the milk, comrades!" cried napoleon, placing himself in front
of the buckets. "that will be attended to. the harvest is more important.
comrade snowball will lead the way. i shall follow in a few minutes.
forward, comrades! the hay is waiting."

so the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when
they came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.




chapter iii



how they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! but their efforts were
rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger succ
 
 ___________________________
 
ignified
the future republic of the animals which would arise when the human race
had been finally overthrown. after the hoisting of the flag all the
animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known
as the meeting. here the work of the coming week was planned out and
resolutions were put forward and debated. it was always the pigs who put
forward the resolutions. the other animals understood how to vote, but
could never think of any resolutions of their own. snowball and napoleon
were by far the most active in the debates. but it was noticed that these
two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the
other could be counted on to oppose it. even when it was resolved--a thing
no one could object to in itself--to set aside the small paddock behind
the orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past work, there was a
stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of animal. the
meeting always ended with the singing of 'beasts of engl
 
 ___________________________
 
 accepted his
explanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new
maxim by heart. four legs good, two legs bad, was inscribed on the end
wall of the barn, above the seven commandments and in bigger letters. when
they had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this
maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating
"four legs good, two legs bad! four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep it
up for hours on end, never growing tired of it.

napoleon took no interest in snowball's committees. he said that the
education of the young was more important than anything that could be done
for those who were already grown up. it happened that jessie and bluebell
had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to
nine sturdy puppies. as soon as they were weaned, napoleon took them away
from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for
their education. he took them up into a loft which could only be reached
 
 ___________________________
 
up. it was mixed
every day into the pigs' mash. the early apples were now ripening, and the
grass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. the animals had assumed
as a matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day,
however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected
and brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. at this some of
the other animals murmured, but it was no use. all the pigs were in full
agreement on this point, even snowball and napoleon. squealer was sent to
make the necessary explanations to the others.

"comrades!" he cried. "you do not imagine, i hope, that we pigs are doing
this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? many of us actually dislike
milk and apples. i dislike them myself. our sole object in taking these
things is to preserve our health. milk and apples (this has been proved by
science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the
well-being of a pig. we pigs are brainworkers. the whole management
 
 ___________________________
 
ertain of, it
was that they did not want jones back. when it was put to them in this
light, they had no more to say. the importance of keeping the pigs in good
health was all too obvious. so it was agreed without further argument that
the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when
they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.




chapter iv



by the late summer the news of what had happened on animal farm had spread
across half the county. every day snowball and napoleon sent out flights
of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on
neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the rebellion, and teach them
the tune of 'beasts of england'.

most of this time mr. jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the red
lion at willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the
monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by
a pack of good-for-nothing animals. the other farmers sympathised in
principle, but they did not 
 
 ___________________________
 
ther. the earth was like iron, and
nothing could be done in the fields. many meetings were held in the big
barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the
coming season. it had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were
manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of
farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.
this arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for the
disputes between snowball and napoleon. these two disagreed at every point
where disagreement was possible. if one of them suggested sowing a bigger
acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of
oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right
for cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything
except roots. each had his own following, and there were some violent
debates. at the meetings snowball often won over the majority by his
brilliant speeches, but napoleon w
 
 ___________________________
 
ble to break into "four legs
good, two legs bad" at crucial moments in snowball's speeches. snowball
had made a close study of some back numbers of the 'farmer and
stockbreeder' which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans
for innovations and improvements. he talked learnedly about field drains,
silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for all
the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot
every day, to save the labour of cartage. napoleon produced no schemes of
his own, but said quietly that snowball's would come to nothing, and
seemed to be biding his time. but of all their controversies, none was so
bitter as the one that took place over the windmill.

in the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small
knoll which was the highest point on the farm. after surveying the ground,
snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could
be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with elec
 
 ___________________________
 
f
chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly
to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers of
excitement. gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks and
cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals
found completely unintelligible but very impressive. all of them came to
look at snowball's drawings at least once a day. even the hens and ducks
came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. only napoleon
held aloof. he had declared himself against the windmill from the start.
one day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. he walked
heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and
snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplating
them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg,
urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.

the whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. snowb
 
 ___________________________
 
all
did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. stone would
have to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to
be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (how
these were to be procured, snowball did not say.) but he maintained that
it could all be done in a year. and thereafter, he declared, so much
labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days
a week. napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the
moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on
the windmill they would all starve to death. the animals formed themselves
into two factions under the slogan, "vote for snowball and the three-day
week" and "vote for napoleon and the full manger." benjamin was the only
animal who did not side with either faction. he refused to believe either
that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save
work. wi
 
 ___________________________
 
dly.

apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the
defence of the farm. it was fully realised that though the human beings
had been defeated in the battle of the cowshed they might make another and
more determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate mr. jones.
they had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat
had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring
farms more restive than ever. as usual, snowball and napoleon were in
disagreement. according to napoleon, what the animals must do was to
procure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. according to
snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion
among the animals on the other farms. the one argued that if they could
not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued
that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend
themselves. the animals listened first to napoleon, then to s
 
 ___________________________
 
ich was right; indeed, they always found
themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.

at last the day came when snowball's plans were completed. at the meeting
on the following sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on
the windmill was to be put to the vote. when the animals had assembled in
the big barn, snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by
bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the building
of the windmill. then napoleon stood up to reply. he said very quietly
that the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it,
and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and
seemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. at this snowball
sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleating
again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. until now
the animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a
moment snowball's 
 
 ___________________________
 
nted a picture of animal farm as it might be when sordid labour was
lifted from the animals' backs. his imagination had now run far beyond
chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. electricity, he said, could operate
threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders,
besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold
water, and an electric heater. by the time he had finished speaking, there
was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. but just at this moment
napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at snowball,
uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter
before.

at this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs
wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. they dashed
straight for snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to
escape their snapping jaws. in a moment he was out of the door and they
were after him. too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals
cr
 
 ___________________________
 
r, then the dogs were gaining on him again. one of them all but
closed his jaws on snowball's tail, but snowball whisked it free just in
time. then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare,
slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.

silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. in a moment
the dogs came bounding back. at first no one had been able to imagine
where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they
were the puppies whom napoleon had taken away from their mothers and
reared privately. though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as
fierce-looking as wolves. they kept close to napoleon. it was noticed that
they wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been
used to do to mr. jones.

napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised
portion of the floor where major had previously stood to deliver his
speech. he announced that from now on the sunday-morning meetings would
come
 
 ___________________________
 
 of them would have
protested if they could have found the right arguments. even boxer was
vaguely troubled. he set his ears back, shook his forelock several times,
and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think
of anything to say. some of the pigs themselves, however, were more
articulate. four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of
disapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speaking
at once. but suddenly the dogs sitting round napoleon let out deep,
menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. then the
sheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of "four legs good, two legs
bad!" which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to any
chance of discussion.

afterwards squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement
to the others.

"comrades," he said, "i trust that every animal here appreciates the
sacrifice that comrade napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon
himself. do
 
 ___________________________
 
 not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! on the
contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. no one believes more
firmly than comrade napoleon that all animals are equal. he would be only
too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. but sometimes you
might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?
suppose you had decided to follow snowball, with his moonshine of
windmills--snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

"he fought bravely at the battle of the cowshed," said somebody.

"bravery is not enough," said squealer. "loyalty and obedience are more
important. and as to the batt
 
 ___________________________
 
l's part in it was much exaggerated.
discipline, comrades, iron discipline! that is the watchword for today.
one false step, and our enemies would be upon us. surely, comrades, you do
not want jones back?"

once again this argument was unanswerable. certainly the animals did not
want jones back; if the holding of debates on sunday mornings was liable
to bring him back, then the debates must stop. boxer, who had now had time
to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "if comrade
napoleon says it, it must be right." and from then on he adopted the
maxim, "napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "i
will work harder."

by this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.
the shed where snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut
up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. every
sunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn to
receive their orders for the week. the skull of old ma
 
 ___________________________
 
jor, now clean of
flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the
foot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. after the hoisting of the flag, the
animals were required to file past the skull in a reverent manner before
entering the barn. nowadays they did not sit all together as they had done
in the past. napoleon, with squealer and another pig named minimus, who
had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of
the raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round
them, and the other pigs sitting behind. the rest of the animals sat
facing them in the main body of the barn. napoleon read out the orders for
the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of 'beasts
of england', all the animals dispersed.

on the third sunday after snowball's expuls
 
 ___________________________
 
ion, the animals were somewhat
surprised to hear napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built
after all. he did not give any reason for having changed his mind, but
merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work,
it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. the plans, however,
had all been prepared, down to the last detail. a special committee of
pigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. the building of
the windmill, with various other improvements, was expected to take two
years.

that evening s
 
 ___________________________
 
quealer explained privately to the other animals that
napoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. on the
contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan
which snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually
been stolen from among napoleon's papers. the windmill was, in fact,
napoleon's own creation. why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so
strongly against it? here squealer looked very sly. that, he said, was
comrade napoleon's cunning. he had seemed to oppose the windmill, simply
as a manoeuvre to get rid of snowball, who was a dangerous character and a
bad influence. now that snowball was out of the way, the plan could go
forward without his interference. this, said squealer, was something
called tactics. he repeated a number of times, "tactics, comrades,
tactics!" skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry laugh. the
animals were not certain what the word meant, but squealer spoke so
persuasively, and the 
 
 ___________________________
 
ened to be with him growled so
threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further
questions.




chapter vi



all that year the animals worked like slaves. but they were happy in their
work; they grudged no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that
they did was for the benefit of themselves and those of their kind who
would come after them, and not for a pack of idle, thieving human beings.

throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in
august napoleon announced that there would be work on sunday afternoons
as well. this work was strictly voluntary, but any animal who absented
himself from it would have his rations reduced by half. even so, it was
found necessary to leave certain tasks undone. the harvest was a little
less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should
have been sown with roots in the early summer were not sown because the
ploughing had not been completed early enough. it was possible to foresee
that the co
 
 ___________________________
 
mals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged
down the hill, it was always boxer who strained himself against the rope
and brought the boulder to a stop. to see him toiling up the slope inch by
inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground,
and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.
clover warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but
boxer would never listen to her. his two slogans, "i will work harder"
and "napoleon is always right," seemed to him a sufficient answer to all
problems. he had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him
three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour.
and in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would
go alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it down
to the site of the windmill unassisted.

the animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the
hardness of their work. if they had no mo
 
 ___________________________
 
evertheless, as the summer wore on, various unforeseen shortages began to
make them selves felt. there was need of paraffin oil, nails, string, dog
biscuits, and iron for the horses' shoes, none of which could be produced
on the farm. later there would also be need for seeds and artificial
manures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the
windmill. how these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.

one sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders,
napoleon announced that he had decided upon a new policy. from now onwards
animal farm would engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: not, of
course, for any commercial purpose, but simply in order to obtain certain
materials which were urgently necessary. the needs of the windmill must
override everything else, he said. he was therefore making arrangements to
sell a stack of hay and part of the current year's wheat crop, and later
on, if more money were needed, it would have to be made up by the sa
 
 ___________________________
 
le of
eggs, for which there was always a market in willingdon. the hens, said
napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contribution
towards the building of the windmill.

once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. never to have
any dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make
use of money--had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed at
that first triumphant meeting after jones was expelled? all the animals
remembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that they
remembered it. the four young 
 
 ___________________________
 
pigs who had protested when napoleon
abolished the meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly
silenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. then, as usual, the sheep
broke into "four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardness
was smoothed over. finally napoleon raised his trotter for silence and
announced that he had already made all the arrangements. there would be no
need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which
would clearly be most undesirable. he intended to take the whole burden
upon his own shoulders. a mr. whymper, a solicitor living in willingdon,
had agreed to act as intermediary between animal farm and the outside
world, and would visit the farm every monday morning to receive his
instructions. napoleon ended his s
 
 ___________________________
 
n writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.

every monday mr. whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. he was a
sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way
of business, but sharp enough to have realised earlier than anyone else
that animal farm would need a broker and that the commissions would be
worth having. the animals watched his coming and going with a kind of
dread, and avoided him as much as possible. nevertheless, the sight of
napoleon, on all fours, delivering orders to whymper, who stood on two
legs, roused their pride and partly reconciled them to the new
arrangement. their relations with the human race were now not quite the
same as they had been before. the human beings did not hate animal farm
any less now that it was prospering; indeed, they hated it more than ever.
every human being held it as an article of faith that the farm would go
bankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the windmill would be a
failure. the
 
 ___________________________
 
espect for the efficiency with which the
animals were managing their own affairs. one symptom of this was that they
had begun to call animal farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend
that it was called the manor farm. they had also dropped their championship
of jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live
in another part of the county. except through whymper, there was as yet no
contact between animal farm and the outside world, but there were constant
rumours that napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement
either with mr. pilkington of foxwood or with mr. frederick of
pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

it was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and
took up their residence there. again the animals seemed to remember that a
resolution against this had been passed in the early days, and again
squealer was able to convince them that this was not the case. it was
absolutely necessary, he sa
 
 ___________________________
 
id, that the pigs, who were the brains of the
farm, should have a quiet place to work in. it was also more suited to the
dignity of the leader (for of late he had taken to speaking of napoleon
under the title of "leader") to live in a house than in a mere sty.
nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the
pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room
as a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. boxer passed it off as
usual with "napoleon is always right!", but clover, who thought she
remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and
tried to puzzle out the seven commandments which were inscribed there.
finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched
muriel.

"muriel," she said, "read me the fourth commandment. does it not say
something about never sleeping in a bed?"

with some difficulty muriel spelt it out.

"it says, 'no animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,"' she announce
 
 ___________________________
 
arn. the hens woke up
squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of
hearing a gun go off in the distance. in the morning the animals came out
of their stalls to find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elm
tree at the foot of the orchard had been plucked up like a radish. they
had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from every animal's
throat. a terrible sight had met their eyes. the windmill was in ruins.

with one accord they dashed down to the spot. napoleon, who seldom moved
out of a walk, raced ahead of them all. yes, there it lay, the fruit of
all their struggles, levelled to its foundations, the stones they had
broken and carried so laboriously scattered all around. unable at first to
speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. napoleon
paced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. his tail
had grown rigid and twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of
intense mental activity. suddenly he hal
 
 ___________________________
 
mal who brings him to
justice. a full bushel to anyone who captures him alive!"

the animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even snowball could
be guilty of such an action. there was a cry of indignation, and everyone
began thinking out ways of catching snowball if he should ever come back.
almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass at
a little distance from the knoll. they could only be traced for a few
yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. napoleon snuffed
deeply at them and pronounced them to be snowball's. he gave it as his
opinion that snowball had probably come from the direction of foxwood farm.

"no more delays, comrades!" cried napoleon when the footprints had been
examined. "there is work to be done. this very morning we begin rebuilding
the windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. we
will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily.
remember, comrades, there must be no alteration 
 
 ___________________________
 
e edible.
for days at a time the animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels.
starvation seemed to stare them in the face.

it was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world.
emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings were
inventing fresh lies about animal farm. once again it was being put about
that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they were
continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and
infanticide. napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow
if the real facts of the food situation were known, and he decided to make
use of mr. whymper to spread a contrary impression. hitherto the animals
had had little or no contact with whymper on his weekly visits: now,
however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark
casually in his hearing that rations had been increased. in addition,
napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled
nearly to the bri
 
 ___________________________
 
m with sand, which was then covered up with what remained
of the grain and meal. on some suitable pretext whymper was led through
the store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the bins. he was
deceived, and continued to report to the outside world that there was no
food shortage on animal farm.

nevertheless, towards the end of january it became obvious that it would
be necessary to procure some more grain from somewhere. in these days
napoleon rarely appeared in public, but spent all his time in the
farmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking dogs. when he
did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who
closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. frequently he
did not even appear on sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one
of the other pigs, usually squealer.

one sunday morning squealer announced that the hens, who had just come in
to lay again, must surrender their
 
 ___________________________
 
 eggs. napoleon had accepted, through
whymper, a contract for four hundred eggs a week. the price of these would
pay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came on
and conditions were easier.

when the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. they had been
warned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had not
believed that it would really happen. they were just getting their
clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the
eggs away now was mu
 
 ___________________________
 
rder. for the first time since the expulsion of jones,
there was something resembling a rebellion. led by three young black
minorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart napoleon's
wishes. their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their
eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. napoleon acted swiftly and
ruthlessly. he ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed that
any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished
by death. the dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. for five
days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their
nesting boxes. nine hens had died in the meantime. their bodies were
buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of
coccidiosis. whymper heard nothing of this affair, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
e eggs were duly
delivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take them
away.

all this while no more had been seen of snowball. he was rumoured to be
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either foxwood or pinchfield.
napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers
than before. it happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which
had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.
it was well seasoned, and whymper had advised napoleon to sell it; both
mr. pilkington and mr. frederick were anxious to buy it. napoleon was
hesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. it was noticed
that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with
fre
 
 ___________________________
 
 up, someone was certain to say
that snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the
store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that snowball had thrown
it down the well. curiously enough, they went on believing this even after
the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal. the cows declared
unanimously that snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their
sleep. the rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to
be in league with snowball.

napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into snowball's
activities. with his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour
of inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at a
respectful distance. at every few steps napoleon stopped and snuffed the
ground for traces of snowball's footsteps, which, he said, he could detect
by the smell. he snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed,
in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found traces of snowb
 
 ___________________________
 
g to
lure us to our doom."

"but he was wounded," said boxer. "we all saw him running with blood."

"that was part of the arrangement!" cried squealer. "jones's shot only
grazed him. i could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to
read it. the plot was for snowball, at the critical moment, to give the
signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. and he very nearly
succeeded--i will even say, comrades, he would have succeeded if it had
not been for our heroic leader, comrade napoleon. do you not remember how,
just at the moment when jones and his men had got inside the yard,
snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? and do
you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was
spreading and all seemed lost, that comrade napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of 'death to humanity!' and sank his teeth in jones's leg? surely you
remember that, comrades?" exclaimed squealer, frisking from side to side.

now when squealer described the scene 
 
 ___________________________
 
so graphically, it seemed to the
animals that they did remember it. at any rate, they remembered that at
the critical moment of the battle snowball had turned to flee. but boxer
was still a little uneasy.

"i do not believe that snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said
finally. "what he has done since is different. but i believe that at the
battle of the cowshed he was a good comrade."

"our leader, comrade napoleon," announced squealer, speaking very slowly
and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that
snowball was jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long
before the rebellion was ever thought of."

"ah, that is different!" said boxer. "if comrade napoleon says it, it must
be right."

"that is the true spirit, comrade!" cried squealer, but it was noticed he
cast a very ugly look at boxer with his little twinkling eyes. he turned
to go, then paused and added impressive
 
 ___________________________
 
ly: "i warn every animal on this
farm to keep his eyes very wide open. for we have reason to think that
some of snowball's secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!"

four days later, in the late afternoon, napoleon ordered all the animals
to assemble in the yard. when they were all gathered together, napoleon
emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently
awarded himself "animal hero, first class", and "animal hero, second
class"), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls
that sent shivers down all the animals' spines. they all cowered silently
in their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was
about to happen.

napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a
high-pitched whimper. immediately the dogs bounded forw
 
 ___________________________
 
ard, seized four of
the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to
napoleon's feet. the pigs' ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood,
and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. to the amazement of
everybody, three of them flung themselves upon boxer. boxer saw them
coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned
him to the ground. the dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with
their tails between their legs. boxer looked at napoleon to know whether
he should crush the dog to death or let it go. napoleon appeared to change
 
 ___________________________
 

countenance, and sharply ordered boxer to let the dog go, whereat boxer
lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.

presently the tumult died down. the four pigs waited, trembling, with
guilt written on every line of their countenances. napoleon now called
upon them to confess their crimes. they were the same four pigs as had
protested when napoleon abolished the sunday meetings. without any further
prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in
destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with
him to hand over animal farm to mr. frederick. they added that snowball
had privately admitted to them that he had been jones's secret agent for
years past. when they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly
tore their throat
 
 ___________________________
 
s out, and in a terrible voice napoleon demanded whether
any other animal had anything to confess.

the three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion
over the eggs now came forward and stated that snowball had appeared to
them in a dream and incited them to disobey napoleon's orders. they, too,
were slaughtered. then a goose came forward and confessed to having
secreted six ears of corn during the last year's harvest and eaten them in
the night. then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking
pool--urged to do this, so she said, by snowball--and two other sheep
confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of
napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering
from a cough. they were all slain on the spot. a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd so the tale of
confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses
lying before napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell of
blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of jones.

when it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs,
crept away in a body. they were shaken and miserable. they did not know
which was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leagued
themselves with snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just
witnessed. in the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to 
 
 ___________________________
 
t it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. since jones had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. not even a rat had been
killed. they had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--clover, muriel, benjamin, the cows,
the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except
the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before napoleon ordered the
animals to assemble. for some time nobody spoke. only boxer remained on
his feet. he fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his
sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. finally he
said:

"i do not understand it. i would not have believed that such things could
happen on our farm. it must be due to some fault in ourselves. the
solution, as i see it, is to work harder. from now onwards i shall get up
a full hour earlier in the mornings."

and he 
 
 ___________________________
 
wling dogs roamed
everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after
confessing to shocking crimes. there was no thought of rebellion or
disobedience in her mind. she knew that, even as things were, they were
far better off than they had been in the days of jones, and that before
all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.
whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the
orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of napoleon. but
still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped
and toiled. it was not for this that they had built the windmill and faced
the bullets of jones's gun. such were her thoughts, though she lacked the
words to express them.

at last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was
unable to find, she began to sing 'beasts of england'. the other animals
sitting round her took it up, and they sang it three times over--very
tunefully, but slowly and mourn
 
 ___________________________
 
fully, in a way they had never sung it
before.

they had just finished singing it for the third time when squealer,
attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something
important to say. he announced that, by a special decree of comrade
napoleon, 'beasts of england' had been abolished. from now onwards it was
forbidden to sing it.

the animals were taken aback.

"why?" cried muriel.

"it's no longer needed, comrade," said squealer stiffly. "'beasts of
england' was the song of the rebellion. but the rebellion is now
completed. the execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act.
the enemy both external and internal has been defeated. in 'beasts of
england' we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come.
but tha
 
 ___________________________
 
es
proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by
two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent,
as the case might be. the animals saw no reason to disbelieve him,
especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions
had been like before the rebellion. all the same, there were days when
they felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food.

all orders were now issued through squealer or one of the other pigs.
napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight.
when he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by
a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of
trumpeter, letting out a loud "cock-a-doodle-doo" before napoleon spoke.
even in the farmhouse, it was said, napoleon inhabited separate apartments
from the others. he took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him,
and always ate from the crown derby dinner service which had been in t
 
 ___________________________
 
he
glass cupboard in the drawing-room. it was also announced that the gun
would be fired every year on napoleon's birthday, as well as on the other
two anniversaries.

napoleon was now never spoken of simply as "napoleon." he was always
referred to in formal style as "our leader, comrade napoleon," and this
pigs liked to invent for him such titles as father of all animals, terror
of mankind, protector of the sheep-fold, ducklings' friend, and the like.
in his speeches, squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his
cheeks of napoleon's wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love
he bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals
who still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms. it had become
usual to give napoleon the credit for every successf
 
 ___________________________
 
ul achievement and
every stroke of good fortune. you would often hear one hen remark to
another, "under the guidance of our leader, comrade napoleon, i have laid
five eggs in six days"; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would
exclaim, "thanks to the leadership of comrade napoleon, how excellent this
water tastes!" the general feeling on the farm was well expressed in a
poem entitled comrade napoleon, which was composed by minimus and which
ran as follows:


friend of fatherless!
fountain of happiness!
lord of the swill-bucket! oh, how my soul is on
fire when i gaze at thy
calm and commanding eye,
like the sun in the sky,
comrade napoleon!

thou are the giver of
all that thy creatures love,
full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon;
every beast great or small
sleeps at peace in his stall,
thou watchest over all,
comrade napoleon!

had i a sucking-pig,
ere he had grown as big
even as 
 
 ___________________________
 
a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,
he should have learned to be
faithful and true to thee,
yes, his first squeak should be
"comrade napoleon!"


napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall
of the big barn, at the opposite end from the seven commandments. it was
surmounted by a portrait of napoleon, in profile, executed by squealer in
white paint.

meanwhile, through the agency of whymper, napoleon was engaged in
complicated negotiations with frederick and pilkington. the pile of timber
was still unsold. of the two, frederick was the more anxious to get hold
of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. at the same time there
were renewed rumours that frederick and his men were plotting to attack
animal farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused
furious jealousy in him. snowball was known to be still skulking on
pinchfield farm. in the middle of the summer the
 
 ___________________________
 
 animals were alarmed to
hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by
snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder napoleon. they were
executed immediately, and fresh precautions for napoleon's safety were
taken. four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young
pig named pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate
it, lest it should be poisoned.

at about the same time it was given out that napoleon had arranged to sell
the pile of timber to mr. pilkington; he was also going to enter into a
regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between animal farm
and foxwood. the relations between napoleon and pilkington, though they
were only conducted through whymper, were now almost friendly. the animals
distrusted pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to
frederick, whom they both feared and hated. as the summer wore on, and the
windmill neared completion, the rumours
 
 ___________________________
 
to
death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the
furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with
splinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. the animals' blood boiled
with rage when they heard of these things being done to their comrades,
and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack
pinchfield farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. but
squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in comrade
napoleon's strategy.

nevertheless, feeling against frederick continued to run high. one sunday
morning napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at
any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to frederick; he
considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with
scoundrels of that description. the pigeons who were still sent out to
spread tidings of the rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on
foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "de
 
 ___________________________
 
ir eyes than when it
had been built the first time. moreover, the walls were twice as thick as
before. nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! and when
they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had
overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives
when the sails were turning and the dynamos running--when they thought of
all this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round
the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. napoleon himself, attended by his
dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he
personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced
that the mill would be named napoleon mill.

two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in
the barn. they were struck dumb with surprise when napoleon announced that
he had sold the pile of timber to frederick. tomorrow frederick's wagons
would arrive and begin carting it away. throughout the whole period 
 
 ___________________________
 
of his
seeming friendship with pilkington, napoleon had really been in secret
agreement with frederick.

all relations with foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had
been sent to pilkington. the pigeons had been told to avoid pinchfield
farm and to alter their slogan from "death to frederick" to "death to
pilkington." at the same time napoleon assured the animals that the
stories of an impending attack on animal farm were completely untrue, and
that the tales about frederick's cruelty to his own animals had been
greatly exaggerated. all these rumours had probably originated with
snowball and his agents. it now appeared that snowball was not, after all,
hiding on pinchfield farm, and in fact had never been there in his life:
he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at foxwood, and had
in reality been a pensioner of pilki
 
 ___________________________
 
ngton for years past.

the pigs were in ecstasies over napoleon's cunning. by seeming to be
friendly with pilkington he had forced frederick to raise his price by
twelve pounds. but the superior quality of napoleon's mind, said squealer,
was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even frederick.
frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque,
which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon
it. but napoleon was too clever for him. he had demanded payment in real
five-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber was
removed. already frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was just
enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.

meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. when it was all
gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to
inspect frederick's bank-notes. smiling beatifically, and wearing both his
decorations, napoleon reposed on a 
 
 ___________________________
 
 with the
money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. the animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. and boxer
put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things
stirred and rustled in his breath.

three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. whymper, his face deadly
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard
and rushed straight into the farmhouse. the next moment a choking roar of
rage sounded from napoleon's apartments. the news of what had happened
sped round the farm like wildfire. the banknotes were forgeries! frederick
had got the timber for nothing!

napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice
pronounced the death sentence upon frederick. when captured, he said,
frederick should be boiled alive. at the same time he warned them that
after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. frederick and
his men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. 
 
 ___________________________
 
look-outs came racing in with the news that frederick and his
followers had already come through the five-barred gate. boldly enough the
animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the
easy victory that they had had in the battle of the cowshed. there were
fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as
soon as they got within fifty yards. the animals could not face the
terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts
of napoleon and boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. a number
of them were already wounded. they took refuge in the farm buildings and
peeped cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. the whole of the big
pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. for the
moment even napoleon seemed at a loss. he paced up and down without a
word, his tail rigid and twitching. wistful glances were sent in the
direction of foxwood. if pilkington and his men would help them, the day
might yet
 
 ___________________________
 
 be won. but at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sent
out on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from
pilkington. on it was pencilled the words: "serves you right."

meanwhile frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. the animals
watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. two of the men had
produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. they were going to knock the
windmill down.

"impossible!" cried napoleon. "we have built the walls far too thick for
that. they could not knock it down in a week. courage, comrades!"

but benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. the two with
the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the
windmill. slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, benjamin nodded his
long muzzle.

"i thought so," he said. "do you not see what they are doing? in another
moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole."

terrified, the anim
 
 ___________________________
 
als waited. it was impossible now to venture out of the
shelter of the buildings. after a few minutes the men were seen to be
running in all directions. then there was a deafening roar. the pigeons
swirled into the air, and all the animals, except napoleon, flung
themselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces. when they got up
again, a huge cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill had
been. slowly the breeze drifted it away. the windmill had ceased to exist!

at this sight the animals' courage returned to them. the fear and despair
they had felt a moment earlier were drowned in their rage against this
vile, contemptible act. a mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without
waiting for further orders they charged forth in a body an
 
 ___________________________
 
d made straight
for the enemy. this time they did not heed the cruel pellets that swept
over them like hail. it was a savage, bitter battle. the men fired again
and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with
their sticks and their heavy boots. a cow, three sheep, and two geese were
killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. even napoleon, who was directing
operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. but
the men did not go unscathed either. three of them had their heads broken
by blows from boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's
horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by jessie and bluebell. and
when the nine dogs of napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to
make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's
flank, baying ferociously, panic overtoo
 
 ___________________________
 
ets had lodged themselves in his hind
leg.

"what victory, comrade? have we not driven the enemy off our soil--the
sacred soil of animal farm?"

"but they have destroyed the windmill. and we had worked on it for two
years!"

"what matter? we will build another windmill. we will build six windmills
if we feel like it. you do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing that
we have done. the enemy was in occupation of this very ground that we
stand upon. and now--thanks to the leadership of comrade napoleon--we have
won every inch of it back again!"

"then we have won back what we had before," said boxer.

"that is our victory," said squealer.

they limped into the yard. the pellets under the skin of boxer's leg
smarted painfully. he saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the
windmill from the foundations, and already in imagination he braced
himself for the task. but for the first time it occurred to him that he
was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite
what 
 
 ___________________________
 
they had once been.

but when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing
again--seven times it was fired in all--and heard the speech that napoleon
made, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all
that they had won a great victory. the animals slain in the battle were
given a solemn funeral. boxer and clover pulled the wagon which served as
a hearse, and napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. two
whole days were given over to celebrations. there were songs, speeches,
and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on
every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for
each dog. it was announced that the battle would be called the battle of
the windmill, and that napoleon had created a new decoration, the order
of the green banner, which he had conferred upon himself. in the general
rejoicing
 
 ___________________________
 
s the unfortunate affair of the banknotes was forgotten.

it was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky
in the cellars of the farmhouse. it had been overlooked at the time when
the house was first occupied. that night there came from the farmhouse the
sound of loud singing, in which, to everyone's surprise, the strains of
'beasts of england' were mixed up. at about half past nine napoleon,
wearing an old bowler hat of mr. jones's, was distinctly seen to emerge
from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors
again. but in the morning a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. not a
pig appeared to be stirring. it was nearly nine o'clock when squealer made
his appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail
hanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously
ill. he called the animals together and told them that he had a
 
 ___________________________
 
 terrible
piece of news to impart. comrade napoleon was dying!

a cry of lamentation went up. straw was laid down outside the doors of the
farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. with tears in their eyes they
asked one another what they should do if their leader were taken away from
them. a rumour went round that snowball had after all contrived to
introduce poison into napoleon's food. at eleven o'clock squealer came
out to make another announcement. as his last act upon earth, comrade
napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be
punished by death.

by the evening, however, napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the
following morning squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the
way to recovery. by the evening of that day napoleon was back at work, and
on the next day it was learned that he had instructed whymper to purchase
in willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. a week later
napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyon
 
 ___________________________
 
d the orchard, which it
had previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals
who were past work, was to be ploughed up. it was given out that the
pasture was exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known that
napoleon intended to sow it with barley.

about this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was
able to understand. one night at about twelve o'clock there was a loud
crash in the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls. it was a
moonlit night. at the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the
seven commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand
there lay a lantern, a paint-bru
 
 ___________________________
 
ten hungry and often cold, and that they were
usually working when they were not asleep. but doubtless it had been worse
in the old days. they were glad to believe so. besides, in those days they
had been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference,
as squealer did not fail to point out.

there were many more mouths to feed now. in the autumn the four sows had
all littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between
them. the young pigs were piebald, and as napoleon was the only boar on
the farm, it was possible to guess at their parentage. it was announced
that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would
be built in the farmhouse garden. for the time being, the young pigs were
given their instruction by napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. they
took their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with
the other young animals. about this time, too, it was laid down as a rule
that when a pig and any other anima
 
 ___________________________
 
l met on the path, the other animal
must stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to have
the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on sundays.

the farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money.
there were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased,
and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machinery
for the windmill. then there were lamp oil and candles for the house,
sugar for napoleon's own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the
ground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as
tools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. a stump of
hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggs
was increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely
hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. rations,
reduced in december, were reduced again in february, and lanterns in the
stalls wer
 
 ___________________________
 
ood beyond the
kitchen. someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. the animals
sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being
prepared for their supper. but no warm mash appeared, and on the following
sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved
for the pigs. the field beyond the orchard had already been sown with
barley. and the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a
ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for napoleon himself,
which was always served to him in the crown derby soup tureen.

but if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by the
fact that life nowadays had a greater dignity than it had had before.
there were more songs, more speeches, more processions. napoleon had
commanded that once a week there should be held something called a
spontaneous demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the
struggles and triumphs of animal farm. at the appointed time the animals
would l
 
 ___________________________
 
eave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in
military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows,
then the sheep, and then the poultry. the dogs flanked the procession and
at the head of all marched napoleon's black cockerel. boxer and clover
always carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the
horn and the caption, "long live comrade napoleon!" afterwards there were
recitations of poems composed in napoleon's honour, and a speech by
squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of
foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. the sheep were
the greatest devotees of the spontaneous demonstration, and if anyone
complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near)
that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, the
sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of "four legs
good, two legs bad!" but by and lar
 
 ___________________________
 
omforting to be reminded that, after all,
they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was for their
own benefit. so that, what with the songs, the processions, squealer's
lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,
and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their
bellies were empty, at least part of the time.

in april, animal farm was proclaimed a republic, and it became necessary
to elect a president. there was only one candidate, napoleon, who was
elected unanimously. on the same day it was given out that fresh documents
had been discovered which revealed further details about snowball's
complicity with jones. it now appeared that snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the battle of
the cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on
jones's side. in fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the
human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "long l
 
 ___________________________
 
ive
humanity!" on his lips. the wounds on snowball's back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by napoleon's
teeth.

in the middle of the summer moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the
farm, after an absence of several years. he was quite unchanged, still did
no work, and talked in the same strain as ever about sugarcandy mountain.
he would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour to
anyone who would listen. "up there, comrades," he would say solemnly,
pointing to the sky with his large beak--"up there, just on the other side
of that dark cloud that you can see--there it lies,
 
 ___________________________
 
g old too, they will let him retire at the
same time and be a companion to me."

"we must get help at once," said clover. "run, somebody, and tell squealer
what has happened."

all the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give
squealer the news. only clover remained, and benjamin who lay down at
boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. after about a quarter of an hour squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. he said that comrade napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on
the farm, and was already making arrangements to send boxer to be treated
in the hospital at willingdon. the animals felt a little uneasy at this.
except for mollie and snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. however, squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in willingdon could treat boxer
 
 ___________________________
 
 announce the news to the others. he had, he said, been
present during boxer's last hours.

"it was the most affecting sight i have ever seen!" said squealer, lifting
his trotter and wiping away a tear. "i was at his bedside at the very
last. and at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear
that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was
finished. 'forward, comrades!' he whispered. 'forward in the name of the
rebellion. long live animal farm! long live comrade napoleon! napoleon is
always right.' those were his very last words, comrades."

here squealer's demeanour suddenly changed. he fell silent for a moment,
and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he
proceeded.

it had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour
had been circulated at the time of boxer's removal. some of the animals
had noticed that the van which took boxer away was marked "horse
slaughterer," and had actually jumped to the conclusion tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t boxer was
being sent to the knacker's. it was almost unbelievable, said squealer,
that any animal could be so stupid. surely, he cried indignantly, whisking
his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved
leader, comrade napoleon, better than that? but the explanation was really
very simple. the van had previously been the property of the knacker, and
had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old
name out. that was how the mistake had arisen.

the animals were enormously relieved to hear this. and when squealer went
on to give further graphic details of boxer's death-bed, the admirable
care he had received, and the expensive medicines for which napoleon had
paid without a thought as to the c
 
 ___________________________
 
ost, their last doubts disappeared and
the sorrow that they felt for their comrade's death was tempered by the
thought that at least he had died happy.

napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following sunday morning
and pronounced a short oration in boxer's honour. it had not been
possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade's remains for
interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from
the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on boxer's
grave. and in a few days' time the pigs intended to hold a memorial
banquet in boxer's honour. napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of
boxer's two 
 
 ___________________________
 
favourite maxims, "i will work harder" and "comrade napoleon
is always right"--maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to
adopt as his own.

on the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer's van drove up from
willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. that night
there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. no one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that fro
 
 ___________________________
 
ead; bluebell, jessie, and pincher were dead. jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
snowball was forgotten. boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. she was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. the talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. squealer was
so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. only old
benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about
the muzzle, and, since boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.

there were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was
not so great as had been expected in earlier years. many animals had been
born to whom the rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of
mouth
 
 ___________________________
 
d bought himself a dogcart. the windmill,
however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. it
was used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. the
animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was
finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. but the luxuries
of which snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with
electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no
longer talked about. napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the
spirit of animalism. the truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard
and living frugally.

somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the
animals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the
dogs. perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many
dogs. it was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion.
there was, as squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in t
 
 ___________________________
 
position, but with perfect
balance, he was strolling across the yard. and a moment later, out from
the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on their
hind legs. some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle
unsteady and looked as though they would have liked the support of a
stick, but every one of them made his way right round the yard
successfully. and finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and a
shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came napoleon himself,
majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with
his dogs gambolling round him.

he carried a whip in his trotter.

there was a deadly silence. amazed, terrified, huddling together, the
animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. it was
as though the world had turned upside-down. then there came a moment when
the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of
their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed thr
 
 ___________________________
 
as nothing there now except a single
commandment. it ran:

all animals are equal
but some animals are more equal than others

after that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were
supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. it
did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a
wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out
subscriptions to 'john bull', 'tit-bits', and the 'daily mirror'. it did
not seem strange when napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden
with a pipe in his mouth--no, not even when the pigs took mr. jones's
clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, napoleon himself appearing
in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his
favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which mrs. jones had been
used to wearing on sundays.

a week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm.
a deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a
 
 ___________________________
 
h curiosity. what could be happening in there, now that for
the first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality?
with one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the
farmhouse garden.

at the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but clover led the way
in. they tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enough
peered in at the dining-room window. there, round the long table, sat half
a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, napoleon
himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table. the pigs
appeared completely at ease in their chairs. the company had been enjoying
a game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order to
drink a toast. a large jug was circulating, and the mugs were being
refilled with beer. no one noticed the wondering faces of the animals that
gazed in at the window.

mr. pilkington, of foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. in a
moment, he said, he would ask the present c
 
 ___________________________
 
asses!" this bon mot set the table in a roar; and mr. pilkington once
again congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours,
and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on animal farm.

and now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet
and make certain that their glasses were full. "gentlemen," concluded
mr. pilkington, "gentlemen, i give you a toast: to the prosperity of
animal farm!"

there was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. napoleon was so
gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his
mug against mr. pilkington's before emptying it. when the cheering had
died down, napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he too
had a few words to say.

like all of napoleon's speeches, it was short and to the point. he too,
he said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end. for
a long time there had been rumours--circulated, he had reason to think,
by some malignant enemy--that ther
 
 ___________________________
 
ssed, and the skull had already been
buried. his visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flew
from the masthead. if so, they would perhaps have noted that the white
hoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now been
removed. it would be a plain green flag from now onwards.

he had only one criticism, he said, to make of mr. pilkington's excellent
and neighbourly speech. mr. pilkington had referred throughout to
"animal farm." he could not of course know--for he, napoleon, was only
now for the first time announcing it--that the name "animal farm"
had been abolished. henceforward the farm was to be known as "the manor
farm"--which, he believed, was its correct and original name.

"gentlemen," concluded napoleon, "i will give you the same toast as
before, but in a different form. fill your glasses to the brim. gentlemen,
here is my toast: to the prosperity of the manor farm!"

there was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied to
the dregs. bu
 
 ___________________________
 
hen, the applause
having come to an end, the company took up their cards and continued the
game that had been interrupted, and the animals crept silently away.

but they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. an uproar of
voices was coming from the farmhouse. they rushed back and looked through
the window again. yes, a violent quarrel was in progress. there were
shoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious glances, furious
denials. the source of the trouble appeared to be that napoleon and
mr. pilkington had each played an ace of spades simultaneously.

twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. no question,
now, what had happened to the faces of the pigs. the creatures outside
looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again;
but already it was impossible to say which was which.


november 1943-february 1944



the end


