nts and in bigger letters. when
they had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this
maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating
"four legs good, two legs bad! four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep it
up for hours on end, never growing tired of it.

napoleon took no interest in snowball's committees. he said that the
education of the young was more important than anything that could be done
for those who were already grown up. it happened that jessie and bluebell
had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to
nine sturdy puppies. as soon as they were weaned, napoleon took them away
from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for
their education. he took them up into a loft which could only be reached
by a ladder from the harness-room, and there kept them in such seclusion
that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.

the mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. it was mixed
every d
 
 ___________________________
 
ed again
and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with
their sticks and their heavy boots. a cow, three sheep, and two geese were
killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. even napoleon, who was directing
operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. but
the men did not go unscathed either. three of them had their heads broken
by blows from boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's
horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by jessie and bluebell. and
when the nine dogs of napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to
make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's
flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. they saw that they were in
danger of being surrounded. frederick shouted to his men to get out while
the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for
dear life. the animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field,
and got in some last kicks at them as they forced t