r, in reality a
very slight one, forced upon the prisoner in coaches, inns, and packets?
no. sure he saw the prisoner with these lists? certain. knew no more
about the lists? no. had not procured them himself, for instance? no.
expect to get anything by this evidence? no. not in regular government
pay and employment, to lay traps? oh dear no. or to do anything? oh dear
no. swear that? over and over again. no motives but motives of sheer
patriotism? none whatever.

the virtuous servant, roger cly, swore his way through the case at a
great rate. he had taken service with the prisoner, in good faith and
simplicity, four years ago. he had asked the prisoner, aboard the calais
packet, if he wanted a handy fellow, and the prisoner had engaged him.
he had not asked the prisoner to take the handy fellow as an act of
charity--never thought of such a thing. he began to have suspicions of
the prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soon afterwards. in arranging
his clothes, while travelling
 
 ___________________________
 
r? what’s it about?”

“_i_ don’t know,” said the man. “spies! yaha! tst! spies!”

he asked another man. “who is it?”

“_i_ don’t know,” returned the man, clapping his hands to his mouth
nevertheless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with the
greatest ardour, “spies! yaha! tst, tst! spi--ies!”

at length, a person better informed on the merits of the case, tumbled
against him, and from this person he learned that the funeral was the
funeral of one roger cly.

“was he a spy?” asked mr. cruncher.

“old bailey spy,” returned his informant. “yaha! tst! yah! old bailey
spi--i--ies!”

“why, to be sure!” exclaimed jerry, recalling the trial at which he had
assisted. “i’ve seen him. dead, is he?”

“dead as mutton,” returned the other, “and can’t be too dead. have ‘em
out, there! spies! pull ‘em out, there! spies!”

the idea was so acceptable in the prevalent absence of any idea,
that the crowd caught it up
 
 ___________________________
 
ery mangy, gave quite an undertaking air to
that part of the procession in which he walked.

thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinite
caricaturing of woe, the disorderly procession went its way, recruiting
at every step, and all the shops shutting up before it. its destination
was the old church of saint pancras, far off in the fields. it got there
in course of time; insisted on pouring into the burial-ground; finally,
accomplished the interment of the deceased roger cly in its own way, and
highly to its own satisfaction.

the dead man disposed of, and the crowd being under the necessity of
providing some other entertainment for itself, another brighter
genius (or perhaps the same) conceived the humour of impeaching casual
passers-by, as old bailey spies, and wreaking vengeance on them. chase
was given to some scores of inoffensive persons who had never been near
the old bailey in their lives, in the realisation of this fancy, and
they were roughly hus
 
 ___________________________
 
ever since. there it is. oh, look at it, look at it! you may take
it in your hand; it’s no forgery.”

here, mr. lorry perceived the reflection on the wall to elongate, and
mr. cruncher rose and stepped forward. his hair could not have been more
violently on end, if it had been that moment dressed by the cow with the
crumpled horn in the house that jack built.

unseen by the spy, mr. cruncher stood at his side, and touched him on
the shoulder like a ghostly bailiff.

“that there roger cly, master,” said mr. cruncher, with a taciturn and
iron-bound visage. “so _you_ put him in his coffin?”

“i did.”

“who took him out of it?”

barsad leaned back in his chair, and stammered, “what do you mean?”

“i mean,” said mr. cruncher, “that he warn’t never in it. no! not he!
i’ll have my head took off, if he was ever in it.”

the spy looked round at the two gentlemen; they both looked in
unspeakable astonishment at jerry.

“i tell you,” said j