n of the town's life
was still rolling in through the great arteries with a sound as of a
mighty wind. but the room was gay with firelight. in the bottle the
acids were long ago resolved; the imperial dye had softened with
time, as the colour grows richer in stained windows; and the glow of
hot autumn afternoons on hillside vineyards was ready to be set free

40)

and to disperse the fogs of london. insensibly the lawyer melted.
there was no man from whom he kept fewer secrets than mr. guest;
and he was not always sure that he kept as many as he meant. guest
had often been on business to the doctor's; he knew poole; he could
scarce have failed to hear of mr. hyde's familiarity about the
house; he might draw conclusions: was it not as well, then, that he
should see a letter which put that mystery to rights? and above all
since guest, being a great student and critic of handwriting, would
consider the step natural and obliging? the clerk, besides, was a
man of counsel; he wou
 
 ___________________________
 
ld scarce read so strange a document without
dropping a remark; and by that remark mr. utterson might shape his
future course.

"this is a sad business about sir danvers," he said.

"yes, sir, indeed. it has elicited a great deal of public feeling,"
returned guest. "the man, of course, was mad."

"i should like to hear your views on that," replied utterson. "i
have a document here in his handwriting; it is between ourselves,
for i scarce know what to do about it; it is an ugly business at
the best. but there it is; quite in your way a murderer's
autograph."

guest's eyes brightened, and he sat down at once and studied it
with passion. "no, sir," he said: "not mad; but it is an odd hand."

41)

"and by all accounts a very odd writer," added t
 
 ___________________________
 

"is that from dr. jekyll, sir?" inquired the clerk. "i thought i
knew the writing. anything private, mr. utterson?"

"only an invitation to dinner. why? do you want to see it?"

"one moment. i thank you, sir"; and the clerk laid the two sheets
of paper alongside and sedulously compared their contents. "thank
you, sir," he said at last, returning both; "it's a very
interesting autograph."

there was a pause, during which mr. utterson struggled with
himself. "why did you compare them, guest?" he inquired suddenly.

"well, sir," returned the clerk, "there's a rather singular
resemblance; the two hands are in many points identical: only
differently sloped."

"rather quaint," said utterson.

"it is, as you say, rather quaint," returned guest.

"i wouldn't speak of this note, you know," said the master.

"no, sir," said the clerk. "i understand."

but no sooner was mr. utterson alone that night than he locked the
note into his safe, where it reposed from that time forwa
 
 ___________________________
 
e
house in soho on the morning of the murder, he was simply blotted
out; and gradually, as time drew on, mr. utterson began to recover
from the hotness of his alarm, and to grow more at quiet with
himself. the death of sir danvers was, to his way of thinking, more
than paid for by the disappearance of mr. hyde. now that that evil
influence had been withdrawn, a new life began for dr. jekyll. he
came out of his seclusion, renewed relations with his friends,
became once more their familiar guest

43)

and entertainer; and whilst he had always been known for
charities, he was now no less distinguished for religion. he was
busy, he was much in the open air, he did good; his face seemed to
open and brighten, as if with an inward consciousness of service;
and for more than two months, the doctor was at peace.

on the 8th of january utterson had dined at the doctor's with a
small party; lanyon had been there; and the face of the host had
looked from one to the other as in the ol
 
 ___________________________
 
d days when the trio were
inseparable friends. on the 12th, and again on the 14th, the door
was shut against the lawyer. "the doctor was confined to the
house," poole said, "and saw no one." on the 15th, he tried again,
and was again refused; and having now been used for the last two
months to see his friend almost daily, he found this return of
solitude to weigh upon his spirits. the fifth night he had in guest
to dine with him; and the sixth he betook himself to dr. lanyon's.

there at least he was not denied admittance; but when he came in,
he was shocked at the change which had taken place in the doctor's
appearance. he had his death-warrant written legibly upon his face.
the rosy man had grown pale; his flesh had fallen away; he was
visibly balder and older; and yet it was not so much, these tokens
of a swift physical decay that arrested the lawyer's notice, as a
look in the eye and quali