 safe, took from the most private
part of it a document endorsed on the envelope as dr. jekyll's will,
and sat down with a clouded brow to study its contents. the will was
holograph, for mr. utterson, though he took charge of it now that it
was made, had refused to lend the least assistance in the making of
it; it provided not only that, in case of the decease of henry
jekyll, m.d., d.c.l., l.l.d., f.r.s., etc., all his possessions were
to pass into the hands of his "friend and benefactor edward hyde,"
but that in case of

12)

dr. jekyll's "disappearance or unexplained absence for any period
exceeding three calendar months," the said edward hyde should step
into the said henry jekyll's shoes without further delay and free
from any burthen or obligation, beyond the payment of a few small
sums to the members of the doctor's household. this document had
long been the lawyer's eyesore. it offended him both as a lawyer and
as a lover of the sane and customary sides of life, to whom t
 
 ___________________________
 
d fire
glowing and chattering on the hearth, the kettle singing its thin
strain, a drawer or two open, papers neatly set forth on the
business-table, and nearer the fire, the things laid out for tea:
the quietest room, you would have said, and, but for the glazed
presses full of chemicals, the most commonplace that night in
london.

right in the midst there lay the body of a man sorely contorted
and still twitching. they drew near on tiptoe, turned it on its
back and beheld the face of edward hyde. he was dressed in
clothes far too large for him, clothes of the doctor's bigness;
the cords of his face still moved with a semblance of life, but
life was quite gone; and by the crushed phial in the hand and the
strong smell of kernels that hung upon the air, utterson knew
that he was looking on the body of a self-destroyer.

"we have come too late," he said sternly, "whether to save or
punish. hyde is gone to his account; and it only remains for us
to find the body of your master."

 
 ___________________________
 
 of my house
were locked in the most rigorous hours of slumber; and i
determined, flushed as i was with hope and triumph, to venture in
my new shape as far as to my bedroom. i crossed the yard, wherein
the constellations looked down upon me, i could have thought,
with wonder, the first creature of that sort that their
unsleeping vigilance had yet disclosed to them; i stole through
the corridors, a stranger in my own house; and coming to my room,
i saw for the first time the appearance of edward hyde.

i must here speak by theory alone, saying not that which i know,
but that which i suppose to be most probable. the evil side of my
nature, to which i had now transferred the stamping efficacy, was
less robust and less developed than the good which i had just
deposed. again, in the course of my life, which had been, after
all, nine-tenths a life of effort, virtue, and control, it had
been much less exercised and much less exhausted. and hence, as i
think, it came about that edward hyd
 
 ___________________________
 
an) had left on that body an
imprint of deformity and decay. and yet when i looked upon that
ugly idol in the glass, i was conscious of no repugnance, rather
of a leap of welcome. this, too, was myself. it seemed natural
and human. in my eyes it bore a livelier image of the spirit, it
seemed more express and single, than the imperfect and divided
countenance i had been hitherto accustomed to call mine. and in
so far i was doubtless right. i have observed that when i wore
the semblance of edward hyde, none could come near to me at first
without a visible misgiving of the flesh. this, as i take it, was
because all human beings, as we meet them, are commingled out of
good and evil: and edward hyde, alone in the ranks of mankind,
was pure evil.

i lingered but a moment at the mirror: the second and conclusive
experiment had yet to be attempted; it yet remained to be seen if
i had lost my identity beyond redemption and must flee before
daylight from a house that was no longer mine; and
 
 ___________________________
 
ious aspirations, all must
have been otherwise, and from these agonies of death and birth, i
had come forth an angel instead of a fiend. the drug had no
discriminating action; it was neither diabolical nor divine; it
but shook the doors of the prison-house of my disposition; and
like the captives of philippi, that which stood within ran forth.
at that time my virtue slumbered; my evil, kept awake by
ambition, was alert and swift to seize the occasion; and the
thing that was projected was edward hyde. hence, although i had
now two characters as well as two appearances, one was wholly
evil, and the other was still the old henry jekyll, that
incongruous compound of whose reformation and improvement i had
already learned to despair. the movement was thus wholly toward
the worse.

even at that time, i had not yet conquered my aversion to the
dryness of a life of study. i would still be merrily disposed at
times; and as my pleasures were (to say the least) undignified,
and i was not on
 
 ___________________________
 
ly well known and highly considered, but growing
toward the elderly man, this incoherency of my life was daily
growing more unwelcome. it was on this side that my new power
tempted me until i fell in slavery. i had but to drink the cup,
to doff at once the body

90)

of the noted professor, and to assume, like a thick cloak, that
of edward hyde. i smiled at the notion; it seemed to me at the
time to be humorous; and i made my preparations with the most
studious care. i took and furnished that house in soho, to which
hyde was tracked by the police; and engaged as housekeeper a
creature whom i well knew to be silent and unscrupulous. on the
other side, i announced to my servants that a mr. hyde (whom i
described) was to have full liberty and power about my house in
the square; and to parry mishaps, i even called and made myself a
 
 ___________________________
 

familiar object, in my second character. i next drew up that will
to which you so much objected; so that if anything befell me in
the person of dr. jekyll, i could enter on that of edward hyde
without pecuniary loss. and thus fortified, as i supposed, on
every side, i began to profit by the strange immunities of my
position.

men have before hired bravos to transact their crimes, while
their own person and reputation sat under shelter. i was the
first that ever did so for his pleasures. i was the first that
could thus plod in the public eye with a load of genial
respectability, and in a moment, like a schoolboy, strip off
these lendings and spring headlong into the sea of l
 
 ___________________________
 
iberty. but
for me, in my impenetrable mantle, the safety was complete. think
of it--i did not even exist! let me but escape into my
laboratory door, give me but a second or

91)

two to mix and swallow the draught that i had always standing
ready; and whatever he had done, edward hyde would pass away like
the stain of breath upon a mirror; and there in his stead,
quietly at home, trimming the midnight lamp in his study, a man
who could afford to laugh at suspicion, would be henry jekyll.

the pleasures which i made haste to seek in my disguise were, as
i have said, undignified; i would scarce use a harder term. but
in the hands of edward hyde, they soon began to turn toward the
monstrous. when i would come back from these excursions, i was
often plunged into a kind 
 
 ___________________________
 
of wonder at my vicarious depravity.
this familiar that i called out of my own soul, and sent forth
alone to do his good pleasure, was a being inherently malign and
villainous; his every act and thought centred on self; drinking
pleasure with bestial avidity from any degree of torture to
another; relentless like a man of stone. henry jekyll stood at
times aghast before the acts of edward hyde; but the situation
was apart from ordinary laws, and insidiously relaxed the grasp
of conscience. it was hyde, after all, and hyde alone, that was
guilty. jekyll was no worse; he woke again to his good qualities
seemingly unimpaired; he would even make haste, where it was
possible, to undo the evil done by hyde. and thus his conscience
slumbered.

into the details of the infamy at which i thus

92)

connived (for even now i can scarce grant that i committed it) i
have no design of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of cruelty to a child aroused
against me the anger of a passer-by, whom i recognised the other
day in the person of your kinsman; the doctor and the child's
family joined him; there were moments when i feared for my life;
and at last, in order to pacify their too just resentment, edward
hyde had to bring them to the door, and pay them in a cheque
drawn in the name of henry jekyll. but this danger was easily
eliminated from the future, by opening an account at another bank
in the name of edward hyde himself; and when, by sloping my own
hand backward, i had supplied my double with a signature, i
thought i sat beyond the reach of fate.

some two months before the murder of sir danvers, i had been out
for one of my adventures, had returned at a late hour, and woke
the next day in bed with somewhat odd sensations. it was in vain
i looked about me; in vain i saw the decent furniture and tall
proportions of my room in the square; in vain that i recognised
the pattern of the bed-curtains
 
 ___________________________
 
o a comfortable
morning doze. i was still so engaged when, in one of my more
wakeful moments, my eyes fell upon my hand. now the hand of henry
jekyll (as you have often remarked) was professional in shape and
size: it was large, firm, white, and comely. but the hand which i
now saw, clearly enough, in the yellow light of a mid-london
morning, lying half shut on the bed-clothes, was lean, corded,
knuckly, of a dusky pallor and thickly shaded with a swart growth
of hair. it was the hand of edward hyde.

i must have stared upon it for near half a minute, sunk as i was
in the mere stupidity of wonder, before terror woke up in my
breast as sudden and startling as the crash of cymbals; and
bounding from my bed, i rushed to the mirror. at the sight that
met my eyes, my blood was changed into something exquisitely thin
and icy. yes, i had gone to bed henry jekyll, i had awakened
edward hyde. how was this to be explained? i asked myself, and
then, with another bound of terror--how was it t
 
 ___________________________
 
ow, to make a feint of breakfasting.

small indeed was my appetite. this inexplicable incident, this
reversal of my previous experience, seemed, like the babylonian
finger on the wall, to be spelling out the letters of my
judgment; and i began to reflect more seriously than ever before
on the issues and possibilities of my double existence. that part
of me which i had the power of projecting, had lately been much
exercised and nourished; it had seemed to me of late as though
the body of edward hyde had grown in stature, as though (when i
wore that form) i were conscious of a more generous tide of
blood; and i began to spy a danger that,

95)

if this were much prolonged, the balance of my nature might be
permanently overthrown, the power of voluntary change be
forfeited, and the character of edward hyde become irrevocably
mine. the power of the drug had not been always equally
displayed. once, very early in my career, it had totally failed
me; since then i had been obliged on m
 
 ___________________________
 
ows, that i chose the better part
and was found wanting in the strength to keep to it.

yes, i preferred the elderly and discontented doctor, surrounded
by friends and cherishing honest hopes; and bade a resolute
farewell to the liberty, the comparative youth, the light step,
leaping impulses and secret pleasures, that i had enjoyed in the
disguise of hyde. i made this choice perhaps with some
unconscious reservation, for i neither gave up the house in soho,
nor destroyed the clothes of edward hyde, which still lay ready
in my cabinet. for two months, however, i was true to my
determination; for two months i led a life of such

97)

severity as i had never before attained to, and enjoyed the
compensations of an approving conscience. but time began at last
to obliterate the freshness of my alarm; the praises of
conscience began to grow into a thing of course; i began to be
tortured with throes and longings, as of hyde struggling after
freedom; and at last, in an hour of moral we
 
 ___________________________
 
neglect. and at the very moment of that
vain-glorious thought, a qualm came over me, a horrid nausea and
the most deadly shuddering. these passed away, and left me faint;
and then as in its turn the faintness subsided, i began to be
aware of a change in the temper of my thoughts, a greater
boldness, a contempt of danger, a solution of the bonds of
obligation. i looked down; my clothes hung formlessly on my
shrunken limbs; the hand that lay on my knee was corded and
hairy. i was once more edward hyde. a moment before i had been
safe of all men's respect, wealthy, beloved--the cloth laying
for me in the dining-room at home; and now i was the common
quarry of mankind, hunted, houseless, a known murderer, thrall to
the gallows.

my reason wavered, but it did not fail me utterly. i have more
than once observed that, in my second character, my faculties
seemed sharpened to a point and my spirits more tensely elastic;
thus it came about that, where jekyll perhaps might have
succumbed, h