d rather break my own."

"nay, if that be the case," answered the other, "e'en go thy ways,
goodman brown. i would not for twenty old women like the one hobbling
before us that faith should come to any harm."

as he spoke he pointed his staff at a female figure on the path, in
whom goodman brown recognized a very pious and exemplary dame, who had
taught him his catechism in youth, and was still his moral and
spiritual adviser, jointly with the minister and deacon gookin.

"a marvel, truly, that goody cloyse should be so far in the wilderness
at nightfall," said he. "but with your leave, friend, i shall take a
cut through the woods until we have left this christian woman behind.
being a stranger to you, she might ask whom i was consorting with and
whither i was going."

"be it so," said his fellow-traveller. "betake you to the woods, and
let me keep the path."

accordingly the young man turned aside, but took care to watch his
companion, who advanced softly along the road until he had come within
a
 
 ___________________________
 
 staff's length of the old dame. she, meanwhile, was making the best
of her way, with singular speed for so aged a woman, and mumbling some
indistinct words--a prayer, doubtless--as she went. the traveller put
forth his staff and touched her withered neck with what seemed the
serpent's tail.

"the devil!" screamed the pious old lady.

"then goody cloyse knows her old friend?" observed the traveller,
confronting her and leaning on his writhing stick.

"ah, forsooth, and is it your worship indeed?" cried the good dame.
"yea, truly is it, and in the very image of my old gossip, goodman
brown, the grandfather of the silly fellow that now is. but--would your
worship believe it?--my broomstick hath strangely disappeared, stolen,
as i suspect, by that unhanged witch, goody cory, and that, too, when i
was all anointed with the juice of smallage, and c
 
 ___________________________
 
heat and the fat of a new-born babe," said the
shape of old goodman brown.

"ah, your worship knows the recipe," cried the old lady, cackling
aloud. "so, as i was saying, being all ready for the meeting, and no
horse to ride on, i made up my mind to foot it; for they tell me there
is a nice young man to be taken into communion to-night. but now your
good worship will lend me your arm, and we shall be there in a
twinkling."

"that can hardly be," answered her friend. "i may not spare you my arm,
goody cloyse; but here is my staff, if you will."

so saying, he threw it down at her feet, where, perhaps, it assumed
life, being one of the rods which its owner had formerly lent to the
egyptian magi. of this fact, however, goodman brown could not take
cognizance. he had cast up his eyes in astonishment, and, looking down
again, beheld neither goody cloyse nor the serpentine staff, but his
fellow-traveller alone, who waited for him as calmly as if nothing had
happened.

"that old woman taught me my catech
 
 ___________________________
 
all that was wicked in his heart. he
could have well-nigh sworn that the shape of his own dead father
beckoned him to advance, looking downward from a smoke wreath, while a
woman, with dim features of despair, threw out her hand to warn him
back. was it his mother? but he had no power to retreat one step, nor
to resist, even in thought, when the minister and good old deacon
gookin seized his arms and led him to the blazing rock. thither came
also the slender form of a veiled female, led between goody cloyse,
that pious teacher of the catechism, and martha carrier, who had
received the devil's promise to be queen of hell. a rampant hag was
she. and there stood the proselytes beneath the canopy of fire.

"welcome, my children," said the dark figure, "to the communion of your
race. ye have found thus young your nature and your destiny. my
children, look behind you!"

they turned; and flashing forth, as it were, in a sheet of flame, the
fiend worshippers were seen; the smile of welcome gleamed darkly 
 
 ___________________________
 
rown came slowly into the street of
salem village, staring around him like a bewildered man. the good old
minister was taking a walk along the graveyard to get an appetite for
breakfast and meditate his sermon, and bestowed a blessing, as he
passed, on goodman brown. he shrank from the venerable saint as if to
avoid an anathema. old deacon gookin was at domestic worship, and the
holy words of his prayer were heard through the open window. "what god
doth the wizard pray to?" quoth goodman brown. goody cloyse, that
excellent old christian, stood in the early sunshine at her own
lattice, catechizing a little girl who had brought her a pint of
morning's milk. goodman brown snatched away the child as from the grasp
of the fiend himself. turning the corner by the meeting-house, he spied
the head of faith, with the pink ribbons, gazing anxiously forth, and
bursting into such joy at sight of him that she skipped along the
street and almost kissed her husband before the whole village. but
goodman brown loo