

young goodman brown

young goodman brown came forth at sunset into the street at salem
village; but put his head back, after crossing the threshold, to
exchange a parting kiss with his young wife. and faith, as the wife was
aptly named, thrust her own pretty head into the street, letting the
wind play with the pink ribbons of her cap while she called to goodman
brown.

"dearest heart," whispered she, softly and rather sadly, when her lips
were close to his ear, "prithee put off your journey until sunrise and
sleep in your own bed to-night. a lone woman is troubled with such
dreams and such thoughts that she's afeard of herself sometimes. pray
tarry with me this night, dear husband, of all nights i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the year."

"my love and my faith," replied young goodman brown, "of all nights in
the year, this one night must i tarry away from thee. my journey, as
thou callest it, forth and back again, must needs be done 'twixt now
and sunrise. what, my sweet, pretty wife, dost thou doubt me already,
and we but three months married?"

"then god bless you!" said faith, with the pink ribbons; "and may you
find all well when you come back."

"amen!" cried goodman brown. "say thy prayers, dear faith, and go to
bed at dusk, and no harm will come to thee."

so they parted; and the young man pursued his way until, being about to
turn the corner by the meeting-house, he looked back and saw the head
of faith still peeping after him with a melancholy air, in spite of her
pink ribbons.

"poor little faith!" thought he, for his heart smote him. "what a
wretch am i to leave her on such an errand! she talks of dreams, too.
methought as she spoke there was trouble in her face, as if a dream had
warne
 
 ___________________________
 
d fearfully behind him as he added, "what if
the devil himself should be at my very elbow!"

his head being turned back, he passed a crook of the road, and, looking
forward again, beheld the figure of a man, in grave and decent attire,
seated at the foot of an old tree. he arose at goodman brown's approach
and walked onward side by side with him.

"you are late, goodman brown," said he. "the clock of the old south was
striking as i came through boston, and that is full fifteen minutes
agone."

"faith kept me back a while," replied the young man, with a tremor in
his voice, caused by the sudden appearance of his companion, though not
wholly unexpected.

it was now deep dusk in the forest, and deepest in that part of it
where these two were journeying. as nearly as could be discerned, the
second traveller was about fifty years old, apparently in the same rank
of life as goodman brown, and bearing a considerable resemblance to
him, though perhaps more in expression than features. still they mi
 
 ___________________________
 
e tremble both sabbath day and lecture day."

thus far the elder traveller had listened with due gravity; but now
burst into a fit of irrepressible mirth, shaking himself so violently
that his snake-like staff actually seemed to wriggle in sympathy.

"ha! ha! ha!" shouted he again and again; then composing himself,
"well, go on, goodman brown, go on; but, prithee, don't kill me with
laughing."

"well, then, to end the matter at once," said goodman brown,
considerably nettled, "there is my wife, faith. it would break her dear
little heart; and i'd rather break my own."

"nay, if that be the case," answered the other, "e'en go thy ways,
goodman brown. i would not for twenty old women like the one hobbling
before us that faith should come to any harm."

as he spoke he pointed his staff at a female figure on the path, in
whom goodman brown recognized a very pious and exemplary dame, who had
taught him his catechism in youth, and was still his moral and
spiritual adviser, jointly with the minist
 
 ___________________________
 
ed them they became strangely withered and
dried up as with a week's sunshine. thus the pair proceeded, at a good
free pace, until suddenly, in a gloomy hollow of the road, goodman
brown sat himself down on the stump of a tree and refused to go any
farther.

"friend," said he, stubbornly, "my mind is made up. not another step
will i budge on this errand. what if a wretched old woman do choose to
go to the devil when i thought she was going to heaven: is that any
reason why i should quit my dear faith and go after her?"

"you will think better of this by and by," said his acquaintance,
composedly. "sit here and rest yourself a while; and when you feel like
moving again, there is my staff to help you along."

without more words, he threw his companion the maple stick, and was as
speedily out of sight as if he had vanished into the deepening gloom.
the young man sat a few moments by the roadside, applauding himself
greatly, and thinking with how clear a conscience he should meet the
minister i
 
 ___________________________
 
n his morning walk, nor shrink from the eye of good old
deacon gookin. and what calm sleep would be his that very night, which
was to have been spent so wickedly, but so purely and sweetly now, in
the arms of faith! amidst these pleasant and praiseworthy meditations,
goodman brown heard the tramp of horses along the road, and deemed it
advisable to conceal himself within the verge of the forest, conscious
of the guilty purpose that had brought him thither, though now so
happily turned from it.

on came the hoof tramps and the voices of the riders, two grave old
voices, conversing soberly as they drew near. these mingled sounds
appeared to pass along the road, within a few yards of the young man's
hiding-p
 
 ___________________________
 
on through the forest, where no church had ever been
gathered or solitary christian prayed. whither, then, could these holy
men be journeying so deep into the heathen wilderness? young goodman
brown caught hold of a tree for support, being ready to sink down on
the ground, faint and overburdened with the heavy sickness of his
heart. he looked up to the sky, doubting whether there really was a
heaven above him. yet there was the blue arch, and the stars
brightening in it.

"with heaven above and faith below, i will yet stand firm against the
devil!" cried goodman brown.

while he still gazed upward into the deep arch of the firmament and had
lifted his hands to pray, a cloud, though no wind was stirring, hurried
across the zenith and hid the brightening stars. the blue sky was still
visible, except directly overhead, where this black mass of cloud was
sweeping swiftly northward. aloft in the air, as if from the depths of
the cloud, came a confused and doubtful sound of voices. once the
liste
 
 ___________________________
 
s, he doubted whether he
had heard aught but the murmur of the old forest, whispering without a
wind. then came a stronger swell of those familiar tones, heard daily
in the sunshine at salem village, but never until now from a cloud of
night there was one voice of a young woman, uttering lamentations, yet
with an uncertain sorrow, and entreating for some favor, which,
perhaps, it would grieve her to obtain; and all the unseen multitude,
both saints and sinners, seemed to encourage her onward.

"faith!" shouted goodman brown, in a voice of agony and desperation;
and the echoes of the forest mocked him, crying, "faith! faith!" as if
bewildered wretches were seeking her all through the wilderness.

the cry of grief, rage, and terror was yet piercing the night, when the
unhappy husband held his breath for a response. there was a scream,
drowned immediately in a louder murmur of voices, fading into far-off
laughter, as the dark cloud swept away, leaving the clear and silent
sky above goodman bro
 
 ___________________________
 
wn. but something fluttered lightly down through
the air and caught on the branch of a tree. the young man seized it,
and beheld a pink ribbon.

"my faith is gone!" cried he, after one stupefied moment. "there is no
good on earth; and sin is but a name. come, devil; for to thee is this
world given."

and, maddened with despair, so that he laughed loud and long, did
goodman brown grasp his staff and set forth again, at such a rate that
he seemed to fly along the forest path rather than to walk or run. the
road grew wilder and drearier and more faintly traced, and vanished at
length, leaving him in the heart of the dark wilderness, still rushing
on
 
 ___________________________
 
these chaste dames and dewy virgins, there
were men of dissolute lives and women of spotted fame, wretches given
over to all mean and filthy vice, and suspected even of horrid crimes.
it was strange to see that the good shrank not from the wicked, nor
were the sinners abashed by the saints. scattered also among their
pale-faced enemies were the indian priests, or powwows, who had often
scared their native forest with more hideous incantations than any
known to english witchcraft.

"but where is faith?" thought goodman brown; and, as hope came into his
heart, he trembled.

another verse of the hymn arose, a slow and mournful strain, such as
the pious love, but joined to words which expressed all that our nature
can conceive of sin, and darkly hinted at far more. unfathomable to
mere mortals is the lore of fiends. verse after verse was sung; and
still the chorus of the desert swelled between like the deepest tone of
a mighty organ; and with the final peal of that dreadful anthem there
came a 
 
 ___________________________
 
e crime has been committed,
and shall exult to behold the whole earth one stain of guilt, one
mighty blood spot. far more than this. it shall be yours to penetrate,
in every bosom, the deep mystery of sin, the fountain of all wicked
arts, and which inexhaustibly supplies more evil impulses than human
power--than my power at its utmost--can make manifest in deeds. and
now, my children, look upon each other."

they did so; and, by the blaze of the hell-kindled torches, the
wretched man beheld his faith, and the wife her husband, trembling
before that unhallowed altar.

"lo, there ye stand, my children," said the figure, in a deep and
solemn tone, almost sad with its despairing awfulness, as if his once
angelic nature could yet mourn for our miserable race. "depending upon
one another's hearts, ye had still hoped that virtue were not all a
dream. now are ye undeceived. evil is the nature of mankind. evil must
be your only happiness. welcome again, my children, to the communion of
your race."


 
 ___________________________
 
he verge of wickedness in this dark world. a basin was
hollowed, naturally, in the rock. did it contain water, reddened by the
lurid light? or was it blood? or, perchance, a liquid flame? herein did
the shape of evil dip his hand and prepare to lay the mark of baptism
upon their foreheads, that they might be partakers of the mystery of
sin, more conscious of the secret guilt of others, both in deed and
thought, than they could now be of their own. the husband cast one look
at his pale wife, and faith at him. what polluted wretches would the
next glance show them to each other, shuddering alike at what they
disclosed and what they saw!

"faith! faith!" cried the husband, "look up to heaven, and resist the
wicked one."

whether faith obeyed he knew not. hardly had he spoken when he found
himself amid calm night and solitude, listening to a roar of the wind
which died heavily away through the forest. he staggered against the
rock, and felt it chill and damp; while a hanging twig, that had been
 
 ___________________________
 
s if to
avoid an anathema. old deacon gookin was at domestic worship, and the
holy words of his prayer were heard through the open window. "what god
doth the wizard pray to?" quoth goodman brown. goody cloyse, that
excellent old christian, stood in the early sunshine at her own
lattice, catechizing a little girl who had brought her a pint of
morning's milk. goodman brown snatched away the child as from the grasp
of the fiend himself. turning the corner by the meeting-house, he spied
the head of faith, with the pink ribbons, gazing anxiously forth, and
bursting into such joy at sight of him that she skipped along the
street and almost kissed her husband before the whole village. but
goodman brown looked sternly and sadly into her face, and passed on
without a greeting.

had goodman brown fallen asleep in the forest and only dreamed a wild
dream of a witch-meeting?

be it so if you will; but, alas! it was a dream of evil omen for young
goodman brown. a stern, a sad, a darkly meditative, a dis
 
 ___________________________
 
 anthem of sin rushed loudly upon his ear
and drowned all the blessed strain. when the minister spoke from the
pulpit with power and fervid eloquence, and, with his hand on the open
bible, of the sacred truths of our religion, and of saint-like lives
and triumphant deaths, and of future bliss or misery unutterable, then
did goodman brown turn pale, dreading lest the roof should thunder down
upon the gray blasphemer and his hearers. often, waking suddenly at
midnight, he shrank from the bosom of faith; and at morning or
eventide, when the family knelt down at prayer, he scowled and muttered
to himself, and gazed sternly at his wife, and turned away. and when he
had lived long, and was borne to his grave a hoary corpse, followed by
faith, an aged woman, and children and grandchildren, a goodly
procession, besides neighbors not a few, they carved no hopeful verse
upon his tombstone, for his dying hour was gloom.
