uld break her dear
little heart; and i'd rather break my own."

"nay, if that be the case," answered the other, "e'en go thy ways,
goodman brown. i would not for twenty old women like the one hobbling
before us that faith should come to any harm."

as he spoke he pointed his staff at a female figure on the path, in
whom goodman brown recognized a very pious and exemplary dame, who had
taught him his catechism in youth, and was still his moral and
spiritual adviser, jointly with the minister and deacon gookin.

"a marvel, truly, that goody cloyse should be so far in the wilderness
at nightfall," said he. "but with your leave, friend, i shall take a
cut through the woods until we have left this christian woman behind.
being a stranger to you, she might ask whom i was consorting with and
whither i was going."

"be it so," said his fellow-traveller. "betake you to the woods, and
let me keep the path."

accordingly the young man turned aside, but took care to watch his
companion, who advanced softly alo
 
 ___________________________
 
nd by," said his acquaintance,
composedly. "sit here and rest yourself a while; and when you feel like
moving again, there is my staff to help you along."

without more words, he threw his companion the maple stick, and was as
speedily out of sight as if he had vanished into the deepening gloom.
the young man sat a few moments by the roadside, applauding himself
greatly, and thinking with how clear a conscience he should meet the
minister in his morning walk, nor shrink from the eye of good old
deacon gookin. and what calm sleep would be his that very night, which
was to have been spent so wickedly, but so purely and sweetly now, in
the arms of faith! amidst these pleasant and praiseworthy meditations,
goodman brown heard the tramp of horses along the road, and deemed it
advisable to conceal himself within the verge of the forest, conscious
of the guilty purpose that had brought him thither, though now so
happily turned from it.

on came the hoof tramps and the voices of the riders, two grave old
v
 
 ___________________________
 
heir figures brushed the small boughs by the wayside, it could
not be seen that they intercepted, even for a moment, the faint gleam
from the strip of bright sky athwart which they must have passed.
goodman brown alternately crouched and stood on tiptoe, pulling aside
the branches and thrusting forth his head as far as he durst without
discerning so much as a shadow. it vexed him the more, because he could
have sworn, were such a thing possible, that he recognized the voices
of the minister and deacon gookin, jogging along quietly, as they were
wont to do, when bound to some ordination or ecclesiastical council.
while yet within hearing, one of the riders stopped to pluck a switch.

"of the two, reverend sir," said the voice like the deacon's, "i had
rather miss an ordination dinner than to-night's meeting. they tell me
that some of our community are to be here from falmouth and beyond, and
others from connecticut and rhode island, besides several of the indian
powwows, who, after their fashion, kn
 
 ___________________________
 
ow almost as much deviltry as the
best of us. moreover, there is a goodly young woman to be taken into
communion."

"mighty well, deacon gookin!" replied the solemn old tones of the
minister. "spur up, or we shall be late. nothing can be done, you know,
until i get on the ground."

the hoofs clattered again; and the voices, talking so strangely in the
empty air, passed on through the forest, where no church had ever been
gathered or solitary christian prayed. whither, then, could these holy
men be journeying so deep into the heathen wilderness? young goodman
brown caught hold of a tree for support, being ready to sink down on
the groun
 
 ___________________________
 
its in the land. some affirm that the lady of the governor
was there. at least there were high dames well known to her, and wives
of honored husbands, and widows, a great multitude, and ancient
maidens, all of excellent repute, and fair young girls, who trembled
lest their mothers should espy them. either the sudden gleams of light
flashing over the obscure field bedazzled goodman brown, or he
recognized a score of the church members of salem village famous for
their especial sanctity. good old deacon gookin had arrived, and waited
at the skirts of that venerable saint, his revered pastor. but,
irreverently consorting with these grave, reputable, and pious people,
these elders of the church, these chaste dames and dewy virgins, there
were men of dissolute lives and women of spotted fame, wretches given
over to all mean and filthy vice, and suspected even of horrid crimes.
it was strange to see that the good shrank not from the wicked, nor
were the sinners abashed by the saints. scattered also among
 
 ___________________________
 
 the
rock, and felt it chill and damp; while a hanging twig, that had been
all on fire, besprinkled his cheek with the coldest dew.

the next morning young goodman brown came slowly into the street of
salem village, staring around him like a bewildered man. the good old
minister was taking a walk along the graveyard to get an appetite for
breakfast and meditate his sermon, and bestowed a blessing, as he
passed, on goodman brown. he shrank from the venerable saint as if to
avoid an anathema. old deacon gookin was at domestic worship, and the
holy words of his prayer were heard through the open window. "what god
doth the wizard pray to?" quoth goodman brown. goody cloyse, that
excellent old christian, stood in the early sunshine at her own
lattice, catechizing a little girl who had brought her a pint of
morning's milk. goodman brown snatched away the child as from the grasp
of the fiend himself. turning the corner by the meeting-house, he spied
the head of faith, with the pink ribbons, gazing anxious