ctmen of divers
towns make me their chairman; and a majority of the great and general
court are firm supporters of my interest. the governor and i, too--but
these are state secrets."

"can this be so?" cried goodman brown, with a stare of amazement at his
undisturbed companion. "howbeit, i have nothing to do with the governor
and council; they have their own ways, and are no rule for a simple
husbandman like me. but, were i to go on with thee, how should i meet
the eye of that good old man, our minister, at salem village? oh, his
voice would make me tremble both sabbath day and lecture day."

thus far the elder traveller had listened with due gravity; but now
burst into a fit of irrepressible mirth, shaking himself so violently
that his snake-like staff actually seemed to wriggle in sympathy.

"ha! ha! ha!" shouted he again and again; then composing himself,
"well, go on, goodman brown, go on; but, prithee, don't kill me with
laughing."

"well, then, to end the matter at once," said goodman br
 
 ___________________________
 
 faith. it would break her dear
little heart; and i'd rather break my own."

"nay, if that be the case," answered the other, "e'en go thy ways,
goodman brown. i would not for twenty old women like the one hobbling
before us that faith should come to any harm."

as he spoke he pointed his staff at a female figure on the path, in
whom goodman brown recognized a very pious and exemplary dame, who had
taught him his catechism in youth, and was still his moral and
spiritual adviser, jointly with the minister and deacon gookin.

"a marvel, truly, that goody cloyse should be so far in the wilderness
at nightfall," said he. "but with your leave, friend, i shall take a
cut through the woods until we have left this christian woman behind.
being a stranger to you, she might ask whom i was consorting with and
whither i was going."

"be it so," said his fellow-traveller. "betake you to the woods, and
let me keep the path."

accordingly the young man turned aside, but took care to watch his
companion, who a
 
 ___________________________
 
dear faith and go after her?"

"you will think better of this by and by," said his acquaintance,
composedly. "sit here and rest yourself a while; and when you feel like
moving again, there is my staff to help you along."

without more words, he threw his companion the maple stick, and was as
speedily out of sight as if he had vanished into the deepening gloom.
the young man sat a few moments by the roadside, applauding himself
greatly, and thinking with how clear a conscience he should meet the
minister in his morning walk, nor shrink from the eye of good old
deacon gookin. and what calm sleep would be his that very night, which
was to have been spent so wickedly, but so purely and sweetly now, in
the arms of faith! amidst these pleasant and praiseworthy meditations,
goodman brown heard the tramp of horses along the road, and deemed it
advisable to conceal himself within the verge of the forest, conscious
of the guilty purpose that had brought him thither, though now so
happily turned from it.
 
 ___________________________
 
ble.
though their figures brushed the small boughs by the wayside, it could
not be seen that they intercepted, even for a moment, the faint gleam
from the strip of bright sky athwart which they must have passed.
goodman brown alternately crouched and stood on tiptoe, pulling aside
the branches and thrusting forth his head as far as he durst without
discerning so much as a shadow. it vexed him the more, because he could
have sworn, were such a thing possible, that he recognized the voices
of the minister and deacon gookin, jogging along quietly, as they were
wont to do, when bound to some ordination or ecclesiastical council.
while yet within hearing, one of the riders stopped to pluck a switch.

"of the two, reverend sir," said the voice like the deacon's, "i had
rather miss an ordination dinner than to-night's meeting. they tell me
that some of our community are to be here from falmouth and beyond, and
others from connecticut and rhode island, besides several of the indian
powwows, who, after
 
 ___________________________
 
 their fashion, know almost as much deviltry as the
best of us. moreover, there is a goodly young woman to be taken into
communion."

"mighty well, deacon gookin!" replied the solemn old tones of the
minister. "spur up, or we shall be late. nothing can be done, you know,
until i get on the ground."

the hoofs clattered again; and the voices, talking so strangely in the
empty air, passed on through the forest, where no church had ever been
gathered or solitary christian prayed. whither, then, could these holy
men be journeying so deep into the heathen wilderness? young goodman
brown caught hold of a tree for support, being ready to sink down on
the ground, faint and overburdened with the heavy sickne
 
 ___________________________
 
, goodman brown stepped forth from the shadow of the trees
and approached the congregation, with whom he felt a loathful
brotherhood by the sympathy of all that was wicked in his heart. he
could have well-nigh sworn that the shape of his own dead father
beckoned him to advance, looking downward from a smoke wreath, while a
woman, with dim features of despair, threw out her hand to warn him
back. was it his mother? but he had no power to retreat one step, nor
to resist, even in thought, when the minister and good old deacon
gookin seized his arms and led him to the blazing rock. thither came
also the slender form of a veiled female, led between goody cloyse,
that pious teacher of the catechism, and martha carrier, who had
received the devil's promise to be queen of hell. a rampant hag was
she. and there stood the proselytes beneath the canopy of fire.

"welcome, my children," said the dark figure, "to the communion of your
race. ye have found thus young your nature and your destiny. my
children
 
 ___________________________
 
 resist the
wicked one."

whether faith obeyed he knew not. hardly had he spoken when he found
himself amid calm night and solitude, listening to a roar of the wind
which died heavily away through the forest. he staggered against the
rock, and felt it chill and damp; while a hanging twig, that had been
all on fire, besprinkled his cheek with the coldest dew.

the next morning young goodman brown came slowly into the street of
salem village, staring around him like a bewildered man. the good old
minister was taking a walk along the graveyard to get an appetite for
breakfast and meditate his sermon, and bestowed a blessing, as he
passed, on goodman brown. he shrank from the venerable saint as if to
avoid an anathema. old deacon gookin was at domestic worship, and the
holy words of his prayer were heard through the open window. "what god
doth the wizard pray to?" quoth goodman brown. goody cloyse, that
excellent old christian, stood in the early sunshine at her own
lattice, catechizing a little g
 
 ___________________________
 
g.

had goodman brown fallen asleep in the forest and only dreamed a wild
dream of a witch-meeting?

be it so if you will; but, alas! it was a dream of evil omen for young
goodman brown. a stern, a sad, a darkly meditative, a distrustful, if
not a desperate man did he become from the night of that fearful dream.
on the sabbath day, when the congregation were singing a holy psalm, he
could not listen because an anthem of sin rushed loudly upon his ear
and drowned all the blessed strain. when the minister spoke from the
pulpit with power and fervid eloquence, and, with his hand on the open
bible, of the sacred truths of our religion, and of saint-like lives
and triumphant deaths, and of future bliss or misery unutterable, then
did goodman brown turn pale, dreading lest the roof should thunder down
upon the gray blasphemer and his hearers. often, waking suddenly at
midnight, he shrank from the bosom of faith; and at morning or
eventide, when the family knelt down at prayer, he scowled and muttere