's party.--18_24.

~half-danes~.--branch of the danes to which hnæf belonged.--17_19.

[xv]

~halga~.--surnamed the good. younger brother of hrothgar.--2_9.

~hama~.--takes the brosinga mene from eormenric.--19_7.

~hæreth~.--father of higelac's queen, hygd.--28_39; 29_18.

~hæthcyn~.--son of hrethel and brother of higelac. kills his brother
herebeald accidentally. is slain at ravenswood, fighting against
ongentheow.--34_43; 35_23; 40_32.

~helmings~.--the race to which queen wealhtheow belonged.--10_63.

~heming~.--a kinsman of garmund, perhaps nephew.--28_54; 28_70.

~hengest~.--a danish leader. takes command on the fall of hnæf.--17_33;
17_41.

~herebeald~.--eldest son of hrethel, the geatish king, and brother of
higelac. killed by his younger brother hæthcyn.--34_43; 34_47.

~heremod~.--a danish king of a dynasty before the scylding line. was a
source of great sorrow to his people.--14_64; 25_59.

~hereric~.--referred to as uncle of heardred, but otherwise

 
 ___________________________
 
--17_26.

~hrethel~.--king of the geats, father of higelac, and grandfather of
beowulf.--7_4; 34_39.

~hrethla~.--once used for hrethel.--7_82.

~hrethmen~.--another name for the danes.--7_73.

~hrethric~.--son of hrothgar.--18_65; 27_19.

[xvi]

~hreosna-beorh~.--a promontory in geat-land, near which ohthere's sons
made plundering raids.--35_18.

~hrothgar~.--the danish king who built the hall heort, but was long unable
to enjoy it on account of grendel's persecutions. marries wealhtheow, a
helming lady. has two sons and a daughter. is a typical teutonic king,
lavish of gifts. a devoted liegelord, as his lamentations over slain
liegemen prove. also very appreciative of kindness, as is shown by his
loving gratitude to beowulf.--2_9; 2_12; 4_1; 8_10; 15_1; etc., etc.

~hrothmund~.--son of hrothgar.--18_65.

~hrothulf~.--probably a son of halga, younger brother of hrothgar.
certainly on terms of close intimacy in hrothgar's palace.--16_26; 18_57.

~hrunting~.--unferth's
 
 ___________________________
 
other. in the
ms. sometimes written _hunferth_. 9_1; 18_41.

~wæls~.--father of sigemund.--14_60.

~wægmunding~.--a name occasionally applied to wiglaf and beowulf, and
perhaps derived from a common ancestor, wægmund.--36_6; 38_61.

~weders~.--another name for geats or wedergeats.

~wayland~.--a fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old
teutonic literature.--7_83.

~wendels~.--the people of wulfgar, hrothgar's messenger and retainer.
(perhaps = vandals.)--6_30.

~wealhtheow~.--wife of hrothgar. her queenly courtesy is well shown in the
poem.--10_55.

~weohstan~, or ~wihstan~.--a wægmunding, and father of wiglaf.--36_1.

~whale's ness~.--a prominent promontory, on which beowulf's mound was
built.--38_52; 42_76.

~wiglaf~.--son of wihstan, and related to beowulf. he remains faithful to
beowulf in the fatal struggle with the fire-drake. would rather die than
leave his lord in his dire emergency.--36_1; 36_3; 36_28.

~wonred~.--father of wulf and eofor.--
 
 ___________________________
 
s ether-robes,
          o'er children of men shines from the southward!"
       50 then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasure

{hrothgar's spirits are revived.}

          was blithesome and joyous, the bright-danish ruler
          expected assistance; the people's protector

{the old king trusts beowulf. the heroes are joyful.}

          heard from beowulf his bold resolution.
          there was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,
       55 the words were winsome. wealhtheow advanced then,

{queen wealhtheow plays the hostess.}

          consort of hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,
          gold-decked saluted the men in the building,
          and the freeborn woman the beaker presented

{she offers the cup to her husband first.}

          to the lord of the kingdom, first of the east-danes,
       60 bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,
          lief to his liegemen; he lustily tasted
          of banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.

 
 ___________________________
 
cups tendered, till time was afforded
          that the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queen

{then she offers the cup to beowulf, thanking god that aid has come.}

          might bear to beowulf the bumper o'errunning;
          she greeted the geat-prince, god she did thank,
          most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,
       70 that in any of earlmen she ever should look for
          solace in sorrow. he accepted the beaker,
          battle-bold warrior, at wealhtheow's giving,

{beowulf states to the queen the object of his visit.}

          then equipped for combat quoth he in measures,
          beowulf spake, offspring of ecgtheow:
       75 "i purposed in spirit when i mounted the ocean,

{i determined to do or die.}

          when i boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,
          i would work to the fullest the will of your people
          or in foe's-clutches fastened fall in the battle.
          deeds i shall do of daring and p
 
 ___________________________
 
c._

    [2] kl. suggests a period after 'determined.' this would give the
    passage as follows: _since they no longer could see the light of the
    sun, and lowering darkness was down over all, dire under the heavens
    shadowy beings came going around them_.




xi.

all sleep save one.


{hrothgar retires.}

          then hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,
          folk-lord of scyldings, forth from the building;
          the war-chieftain wished then wealhtheow to look for,
          the queen for a bedmate. to keep away grendel

{god has provided a watch for the hall.}

        5 the glory of kings had given a hall-watch,
          as men heard recounted: for the king of the danemen
          he did special service, gave the giant a watcher:
          and the prince of the geatmen implicitly trusted

{beowulf is self-confident}

          his warlike strength and the wielder's protection.

{he prepares for rest.}

       10 his armor 
 
 ___________________________
 
ind. they ferried to daneland
          the excellent woman on oversea journey,

{the lay is concluded, and the main story is resumed.}

       35 led her to their land-folk." the lay was concluded,
          the gleeman's recital. shouts again rose then,
          bench-glee resounded, bearers then offered

{skinkers carry round the beaker.}

          wine from wonder-vats. wealhtheo advanced then
          going 'neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated

[41]

{queen wealhtheow greets hrothgar, as he sits beside hrothulf, his
nephew.}

       40 uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual,
          true each to the other. and unferth the spokesman
          sat at the feet of the lord of the scyldings:
          each trusted his spirit that his mood was courageous,
          though at fight he had failed in faith to his kinsmen.
       45 said the queen of the scyldings: "my lord and protector,
          treasure-bestower, take thou this beaker;
          
 
 ___________________________
 
m-treasures,
          mighty folk-leader, he fell 'neath his target;
          the[2] corpse of the king then came into charge of
          the race of the frankmen, the mail-shirt and collar:
       20 warmen less noble plundered the fallen,
          when the fight was finished; the folk of the geatmen
          the field of the dead held in possession.
          the choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.
          wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she:

{queen wealhtheow magnifies beowulf's achievements.}

       25 "this collar enjoy thou, beowulf worthy,
          young man, in safety, and use thou this armor,
          gems of the people, and prosper thou fully,
          show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemen
          mild with instruction! i'll mind thy requital.
       30 thou hast brought it to pass that far and near
          forever and ever earthmen shall honor thee,
          even so widely as ocean surroundeth
          the blusteri
 
 ___________________________
 
king resemblance,
       20 dappled and yellow; he granted him usance
          of horses and treasures. so a kinsman should bear him,
          no web of treachery weave for another,
          nor by cunning craftiness cause the destruction

{higelac loves his nephew beowulf.}

          of trusty companion. most precious to higelac,
       25 the bold one in battle, was the bairn of his sister,
          and each unto other mindful of favors.

{beowulf gives hygd the necklace that wealhtheow had given him.}

          i am told that to hygd he proffered the necklace,
          wonder-gem rare that wealhtheow gave him,
          the troop-leader's daughter, a trio of horses
       30 slender and saddle-bright; soon did the jewel
          embellish her bosom, when the beer-feast was over.
          so ecgtheow's bairn brave did prove him,

{beowulf is famous.}

          war-famous man, by deeds that were valiant,
          he lived in honor, belovèd companions
       