s of his wound. his hand and arm are hung up in hrothgar's hall
heorot. his head is cut off by beowulf when he goes down to fight with
grendel's mother.--2_50; 3_1; 3_13; 8_19; 11_17; 12_2; 13_27; 15_3.

~guthlaf~.--a dane of hnæf's party.--18_24.

~half-danes~.--branch of the danes to which hnæf belonged.--17_19.

[xv]

~halga~.--surnamed the good. younger brother of hrothgar.--2_9.

~hama~.--takes the brosinga mene from eormenric.--19_7.

~hæreth~.--father of higelac's queen, hygd.--28_39; 29_18.

~hæthcyn~.--son of hrethel and brother of higelac. kills his brother
herebeald accidentally. is slain at ravenswood, fighting against
ongentheow.--34_43; 35_23; 40_32.

~helmings~.--the race to which queen wealhtheow belonged.--10_63.

~heming~.--a kinsman of garmund, perhaps nephew.--28_54; 28_70.

~hengest~.--a danish leader. takes command on the fall of hnæf.--17_33;
17_41.

~herebeald~.--eldest son of hrethel, the geatish king, and brother of
higelac. killed
 
 ___________________________
 
 by his younger brother hæthcyn.--34_43; 34_47.

~heremod~.--a danish king of a dynasty before the scylding line. was a
source of great sorrow to his people.--14_64; 25_59.

~hereric~.--referred to as uncle of heardred, but otherwise
unknown.--31_60.

~hetwars~.--another name for the franks.--33_51.

~healfdene~.--grandson of scyld and father of hrothgar. ruled the danes
long and well.--2_5; 4_1; 8_14.

~heardred~.--son of higelac and hygd, king and queen of the geats.
succeeds his father, with beowulf as regent. is slain by the sons of
ohthere.--31_56; 33_63; 33_75.

~heathobards~.--race of lombards, of which froda is king. after froda
falls in battle with the danes, ingeld, his son, marries hrothgar's
daughter, freaware, in order to heal the feud.--30_1; 30_6.

~heatholaf~.--a wylfing warrior slain by beowulf's father.--8_5.

~heathoremes~.--the people on whose shores breca is cast by the waves
during his contest wit
 
 ___________________________
 
 of close intimacy in hrothgar's palace.--16_26; 18_57.

~hrunting~.--unferth's sword, lent to beowulf.--22_71; 25_9.

~hugs~.--a race in alliance with the franks and frisians at the time of
higelac's fall.--35_41.

~hun~.--a frisian warrior, probably general of the hetwars. gives hengest
a beautiful sword.--18_19.

~hunferth~.--sometimes used for unferth.

~hygelac~, ~higelac~.--king of the geats, uncle and liegelord of beowulf,
the hero of the poem.--his second wife is the lovely hygd, daughter of
hæreth. the son of their union is heardred. is slain in a war with the
hugs, franks, and frisians combined. beowulf is regent, and afterwards
king of the geats.--4_6; 5_4; 28_34; 29_9; 29_21; 31_56.

~hygd~.--wife of higelac, and daughter of hæreth. there are some
indications that she married beowulf after she became a widow.--28_37.

~ingeld~.--son of the heathobard king, froda. marries hrothgar's daughter,
freaware, in order to reconcile the two peoples.--29_62; 30_32.
 
 ___________________________
 


~ingwins~.--another name for the danes.--16_52; 20_69.

~jutes~.--name sometimes applied to finn's people.--17_22; 17_38; 18_17.

~lafing~.--name of a famous sword presented to hengest by hun.--18_19.

~merewing~.--a frankish king, probably engaged in the war in which higelac
was slain.--40_29.

~nægling~.--beowulf's sword.--36_76.

~offa~.--king of the angles, and son of garmund. marries the terrible
thrytho who is so strongly contrasted with hygd.--28_59; 28_66.

~ohthere~.--son of ongentheow, king of the swedes. he is father of eanmund
and eadgils.--40_35; 40_39.

~onela~.--brother of ohthere.--36_15; 40_39.

~ongentheow~.--king of sweden, of the scylfing dynasty. married, perhaps,
elan, daughter of healfdene.--35_26; 41_16.

~oslaf~.--a dane of hnæf's party.--18_24.

~ravenswood~.--the forest near which hæthcyn was slain.--40_31; 40_41.

~scefing~.--applied (1_4) to scyld, and meaning 'son of scef.'

[xvii]

~scyld
 
 ___________________________
 
.--a swedish royal line to which wiglaf belonged.--36_2.

~sigemund~.--son of wæls, and uncle and father of fitela. his struggle
with a dragon is related in connection with beowulf's deeds of
prowess.--14_38; 14_47.

~swerting~.--grandfather of higelac, and father of hrethel.--19_11.

~swedes~.--people of sweden, ruled by the scylfings.--35_13.

~thrytho~.--wife of offa, king of the angles. known for her fierce and
unwomanly disposition. she is introduced as a contrast to the gentle hygd,
queen of higelac.--28_42; 28_56.

~unferth~.--son of ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of
hrothgar. taunts beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match.
lends beowulf his sword when he goes to look for grendel's mother. in the
ms. sometimes written _hunferth_. 9_1; 18_41.

~wæls~.--father of sigemund.--14_60.

~wægmunding~.--a name occasionally applied to wiglaf and beowulf, and
perhaps derived from a common ancestor, wægmund.--36_6; 38_61.

~weders~.--anothe
 
 ___________________________
 
l
          fast in its fetters, lest the force of the waters
       30 should be able to injure the ocean-wood winsome.
          bade he up then take the treasure of princes,
          plate-gold and fretwork; not far was it thence
          to go off in search of the giver of jewels:
[66]      hrethel's son higelac at home there remaineth,[4]
       35 himself with his comrades close to the sea-coast.
          the building was splendid, the king heroic,
          great in his hall, hygd very young was,

{hygd, the noble queen of higelac, lavish of gifts.}

          fine-mooded, clever, though few were the winters
          that the daughter of hæreth had dwelt in the borough;
       40 but she nowise was cringing nor niggard of presents,
          of ornaments rare, to the race of the geatmen.

{offa's consort, thrytho, is contrasted with hygd.}

          thrytho nursed anger, excellent[5] folk-queen,
          hot-burning hatred: no hero whatever
          'mo
 
 ___________________________
 
 folk-troop's defender forth to the palace
          the linden-companion alive was advancing,
          secure from the combat courtward a-going.
          the building was early inward made ready
          for the foot-going guests as the good one had ordered.

{beowulf sits by his liegelord.}

       15 he sat by the man then who had lived through the struggle,
          kinsman by kinsman, when the king of the people
          had in lordly language saluted the dear one,

{queen hygd receives the heroes.}

          in words that were formal. the daughter of hæreth
          coursed through the building, carrying mead-cups:[1]
[68]   20 she loved the retainers, tendered the beakers
          to the high-minded geatmen. higelac 'gan then

{higelac is greatly interested in beowulf's adventures.}

          pleasantly plying his companion with questions
          in the high-towering palace. a curious interest
          tormented his spirit, what meaning to see in
 
 ___________________________
 
es of stallions of striking resemblance,
       20 dappled and yellow; he granted him usance
          of horses and treasures. so a kinsman should bear him,
          no web of treachery weave for another,
          nor by cunning craftiness cause the destruction

{higelac loves his nephew beowulf.}

          of trusty companion. most precious to higelac,
       25 the bold one in battle, was the bairn of his sister,
          and each unto other mindful of favors.

{beowulf gives hygd the necklace that wealhtheow had given him.}

          i am told that to hygd he proffered the necklace,
          wonder-gem rare that wealhtheow gave him,
          the troop-leader's daughter, a trio of horses
       30 slender and saddle-bright; soon did the jewel
          embellish her bosom, when the beer-feast was over.
          so ecgtheow's bairn brave did prove him,

{beowulf is famous.}

          war-famous man, by deeds that were valiant,
          he lived in honor,
 
 ___________________________
 
 the waters;
          he bare on his arm, lone-going, thirty
       50 outfits of armor, when the ocean he mounted.
          the hetwars by no means had need to be boastful
          of their fighting afoot, who forward to meet him
          carried their war-shields: not many returned from
          the brave-mooded battle-knight back to their homesteads.
       55 ecgtheow's bairn o'er the bight-courses swam then,
          lone-goer lorn to his land-folk returning,
          where hygd to him tendered treasure and kingdom,

{heardred's lack of capacity to rule.}

          rings and dominion: her son she not trusted,
          to be able to keep the kingdom devised him
       60 'gainst alien races, on the death of king higelac.

{beowulf's tact and delicacy recalled.}

          yet the sad ones succeeded not in persuading the atheling
          in any way ever, to act as a suzerain
          to heardred, or promise to govern the kingdom;
          yet with frie