amous brosinga
mene.--19_9.

~eomær~.--son of offa and thrytho, king and queen of the angles.--28_69.

~finn~.--king of the north-frisians and the jutes. marries hildeburg. at
his court takes place the horrible slaughter in which the danish general,
hnæf, fell. later on, finn himself is slain by danish warriors.--17_18;
17_30; 17_44; 18_4; 18_23.

~fin-land~.--the country to which beowulf was driven by the currents in
his swimming-match.--10_22.

~fitela~.--son and nephew of king sigemund, whose praises are sung in
xiv.--14_42; 14_53.

~folcwalda~.--father of finn.--17_38.

~franks~.--introduced occasionally in referring to the death of
higelac.--19_19; 40_21; 40_24.

~frisians~.--a part of them are ruled by finn. some of them were engaged
in the struggle in which higelac was slain.--17_20; 17_42; 17_52; 40_21.

~freaware~.--daughter of king hrothgar. married to ingeld, a heathobard
prince.--29_60; 30_32.

~froda~.--king of the heathobards, and father of ingeld.--2
 
 ___________________________
 
meaning 'son of scef.'

[xvii]

~scyld~.--founder of the dynasty to which hrothgar, his father, and
grandfather belonged. he dies, and his body is put on a vessel, and set
adrift. he goes from daneland just as he had come to it--in a bark.--1_4;
1_19; 1_27.

~scyldings~.--the descendants of scyld. they are also called
honor-scyldings, victory-scyldings, war-scyldings, etc. (see 'danes,'
above.)--2_1; 7_1; 8_1.

~scylfings~.--a swedish royal line to which wiglaf belonged.--36_2.

~sigemund~.--son of wæls, and uncle and father of fitela. his struggle
with a dragon is related in connection with beowulf's deeds of
prowess.--14_38; 14_47.

~swerting~.--grandfather of higelac, and father of hrethel.--19_11.

~swedes~.--people of sweden, ruled by the scylfings.--35_13.

~thrytho~.--wife of offa, king of the angles. known for her fierce and
unwomanly disposition. she is introduced as a contrast to the gentle hygd,
queen of higelac.--28_42; 28_56.

~unferth~.--son of ecglaf,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and seemingly a confidential courtier of
hrothgar. taunts beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match.
lends beowulf his sword when he goes to look for grendel's mother. in the
ms. sometimes written _hunferth_. 9_1; 18_41.

~wæls~.--father of sigemund.--14_60.

~wægmunding~.--a name occasionally applied to wiglaf and beowulf, and
perhaps derived from a common ancestor, wægmund.--36_6; 38_61.

~weders~.--another name for geats or wedergeats.

~wayland~.--a fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old
teutonic literature.--7_83.

~wendels~.--the people of wulfgar, hrothgar's messenger and retainer.
(perhaps = vandals.)--6_30.

~wealhtheow~.--wife of hrothgar. her queenly courtesy is well shown in the
poem.--10_55.


 
 ___________________________
 

{the gleeman sings the deeds of heroes.}

          [3]a man of celebrity, mindful of rhythms,
          who ancient traditions treasured in memory,
          new word-groups found properly bound:
       35 the bard after 'gan then beowulf's venture

{he sings in alliterative measures of beowulf's prowess.}

          wisely to tell of, and words that were clever
          to utter skilfully, earnestly speaking,
          everything told he that he heard as to sigmund's

{also of sigemund, who has slain a great fire-dragon.}

          mighty achievements, many things hidden,
       40 the strife of the wælsing, the wide-going ventures
          the children of men knew of but little,
          the feud and the fury, but fitela with him,
          when suchlike matters he minded to speak of,
          uncle to nephew, as in every contention
       45 each to other was ever devoted:
          a numerous host of the race of the scathers
          they had slain with the
 
 ___________________________
 
 fitela,
          yet the fortune befell him of forcing his weapon
          through the marvellous dragon, that it stood in the wall,
       55 well-honored weapon; the worm was slaughtered.
          the great one had gained then by his glorious achievement
          to reap from the ring-hoard richest enjoyment,
[32]      as best it did please him: his vessel he loaded,
          shining ornaments on the ship's bosom carried,
       60 kinsman of wæls: the drake in heat melted.

{sigemund was widely famed.}

          he was farthest famed of fugitive pilgrims,
          mid wide-scattered world-folk, for works of great prowess,
          war-troopers' shelter: hence waxed he in honor.[4]

{heremod, an unfortunate danish king, is introduced by way of contrast.}

          afterward heremod's hero-strength failed him,
       65 his vigor and valor. 'mid venomous haters
          to the hands of foemen he was foully delivered,
          offdriven early. agony-billows

 
 ___________________________
 

{unlike sigemund and beowulf, heremod was a burden to his people.}

          oppressed him too long, to his people he became then,
          to all the athelings, an ever-great burden;
       70 and the daring one's journey in days of yore
          many wise men were wont to deplore,
          such as hoped he would bring them help in their sorrow,
          that the son of their ruler should rise into power,
          holding the headship held by his fathers,
       75 should govern the people, the 