nga mene~.--a famous collar once owned by the brosings.--19_7.

~cain~.--progenitor of grendel and other monsters.--2_56; 20_11.

~dæghrefn~.--a warrior of the hugs, killed by beowulf.--35_40.

~danes~.--subjects of scyld and his descendants, and hence often called
scyldings. other names for them are victory-scyldings, honor-scyldings,
armor-danes, bright-danes, east-danes, west-danes, north-danes,
south-danes, ingwins, hrethmen.--1_1; 2_1; 3_2; 5_14; 7_1, etc.

~ecglaf~.--father of unferth, who taunts beowulf.--9_1.

~ecgtheow~.--father of beowulf, the hero of the poem. a widely-known
wægmunding warrior. marries hrethel's daughter. after slaying heatholaf, a
wylfing, he flees his country.--7_3; 5_6; 8_4.

~ecgwela~.--a king of the danes before scyld.--25_60.

[xiv]

~elan~.--sister of hrothgar, and probably wife of ongentheow, king of the
swedes.--2_10.

~eagle cape~.--a promontory in geat-land, under which took place beowulf's
last encounter.--41_87.

~eadgils~.
 
 ___________________________
 
ealhtheow, a
helming lady. has two sons and a daughter. is a typical teutonic king,
lavish of gifts. a devoted liegelord, as his lamentations over slain
liegemen prove. also very appreciative of kindness, as is shown by his
loving gratitude to beowulf.--2_9; 2_12; 4_1; 8_10; 15_1; etc., etc.

~hrothmund~.--son of hrothgar.--18_65.

~hrothulf~.--probably a son of halga, younger brother of hrothgar.
certainly on terms of close intimacy in hrothgar's palace.--16_26; 18_57.

~hrunting~.--unferth's sword, lent to beowulf.--22_71; 25_9.

~hugs~.--a race in alliance with the franks and frisians at the time of
higelac's fall.--35_41.

~hun~.--a frisian warrior, probably general of the hetwars. gives hengest
a beautiful sword.--18_19.

~hunferth~.--sometimes used for unferth.

~hygelac~, ~higelac~.--king of the geats, uncle and liegelord of beowulf,
the hero of the poem.--his second wife is the lovely hygd, daughter of
hæreth. the son of their union is heardred. is slain in a w
 
 ___________________________
 
nged.--36_2.

~sigemund~.--son of wæls, and uncle and father of fitela. his struggle
with a dragon is related in connection with beowulf's deeds of
prowess.--14_38; 14_47.

~swerting~.--grandfather of higelac, and father of hrethel.--19_11.

~swedes~.--people of sweden, ruled by the scylfings.--35_13.

~thrytho~.--wife of offa, king of the angles. known for her fierce and
unwomanly disposition. she is introduced as a contrast to the gentle hygd,
queen of higelac.--28_42; 28_56.

~unferth~.--son of ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of
hrothgar. taunts beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match.
lends beowulf his sword when he goes to look for grendel's mother. in the
ms. sometimes written _hunferth_. 9_1; 18_41.

~wæls~.--father of sigemund.--14_60.

~wægmunding~.--a name occasionally applied to wiglaf and beowulf, and
perhaps derived from a common ancestor, wægmund.--36_6; 38_61.

~weders~.--another name for geats or wedergeats.

~wayland~.--
 
 ___________________________
 
 at the feast, and disclose thy purposes to the victorious
    heroes, as thy spirit urges_.--kl. reaches the above translation by
    erasing the comma after 'meoto' and reading 'sige-hrèðsecgum.'--there
    are other and bolder emendations and suggestions. of these the boldest
    is to regard 'meoto' as a verb (imperative), and read 'on sæl': _think
    upon gayety, etc_.--all the renderings are unsatisfactory, the one
    given in our translation involving a zeugma.




ix.

unferth taunts beowulf.


{unferth, a thane of hrothgar, is jealous of beowulf, and undertakes to
twit him.}

          unferth spoke up, ecglaf his son,
          who sat at the feet of the lord of the scyldings,
          opened the jousting (the journey[1] of beowulf,
          sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to unferth
        5 and greatest chagrin, too, for granted he never
          that any man else on earth should attain to,
          gain under heaven, more glory than he):

{did 
 
 ___________________________
 


{breca outdid you entirely.}

          the son of beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
          then i ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,

{much more will grendel outdo you, if you vie with him in prowess.}

          though ever triumphant in onset of battle,
          a grim grappling, if grendel thou darest
       30 for the space of a night near-by to wait for!"

{beowulf retaliates.}

          beowulf answered, offspring of ecgtheow:
          "my good friend unferth, sure freely and wildly,

{o friend unferth, you are fuddled with beer, and cannot talk coherently.}

          thou fuddled with beer of breca hast spoken,
          hast told of his journey! a fact i allege it,
       35 that greater strength in the waters i had then,
          ills in the ocean, than any man else had.
          we made agreement as the merest of striplings
          promised each other (both of us then were

{we simply kept an engagement made in early life.}

  
 
 ___________________________
 
        a hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,
          grim in his grapple: 'twas granted me, nathless,
          to pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,
          my obedient blade; battle offcarried
       60 the mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.

    [1] it has been plausibly suggested that 'síð' (in 501 and in 353)
    means 'arrival.' if so, translate the bracket: _(the arrival of
    beowulf, the brave seafarer, was a source of great chagrin to unferth,
    etc.)_.

[21]




x.

beowulf silences unferth.--glee is high.


          "so ill-meaning enemies often did cause me
          sorrow the sorest. i served them, in quittance,

{my dear sword always served me faithfully.}

          with my dear-lovèd sword, as in sooth it was fitting;
          they missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,
        5 ill-doers evil, of eating my body,
          of surrounding the banquet deep in the ocean;
          but wounded wi
 
 ___________________________
 
th dome of the heaven heard i but rarely,
          nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean;
       20 yet i 'scaped with my life the grip of the monsters,

{after that escape i drifted to finland.}

          weary from travel. then the waters bare me
          to the land of the finns, the flood with the current,

{i have never heard of your doing any such bold deeds.}

          the weltering waves. not a word hath been told me
          of deeds so daring done by thee, unferth,
       25 and of sword-terror none; never hath breca
          at the play of the battle, nor either of you two,
          feat so fearless performèd with weapons
          glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .
[22]      . . . . . . . . . . . . i utter no boasting;

{you are a slayer of brothers, and will suffer damnation, wise as you may
be.}

       30 though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,
          thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get
 
 
 ___________________________
 

          found him there nathless: the hated destroyer
          liveth no longer, lashed for his evils,
       50 but sorrow hath seized him, in snare-meshes hath him
          close in its clutches, keepeth him writhing
          in baleful bonds: there banished for evil
          the man shall wait for the mighty tribunal,

{god will give him his deserts.}

          how the god of glory shall give him his earnings."
       55 then the soldier kept silent, son of old ecglaf,

{unferth has nothing more to say, for beowulf's actions speak louder than
words.}

          from boasting and bragging of battle-achievements,
          since the princes beheld there the hand that depended
          'neath the lofty hall-timbers by the might of the nobleman,
          each one before him, the enemy's fingers;
       60 each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,
          the heathen one's hand-spur, the hero-in-battle's
          claw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,


 
 ___________________________
 
 land-folk." the lay was concluded,
          the gleeman's recital. shouts again rose then,
          bench-glee resounded, bearers then offered

{skinkers carry round the beaker.}

          wine from wonder-vats. wealhtheo advanced then
          going 'neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated

[41]

{queen wealhtheow greets hrothgar, as he sits beside hrothulf, his
nephew.}

       40 uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual,
          true each to the other. and unferth the spokesman
          sat at the feet of the lord of the scyldings:
          each trusted his spirit that his mood was courageous,
          though at fight he had failed in faith to his kinsmen.
       45 said the queen of the scyldings: "my lord and protector,
          treasure-bestower, take thou this beaker;
          joyance attend thee, gold-friend of heroes,

{be generous to the geats.}

          and greet thou the geatmen with gracious responses!
          so ought one t
 
 ___________________________
 
ight
          not peril his safety; his head was protected
          by the light-flashing helmet that should mix with the bottoms,
          trying the eddies, treasure-emblazoned,
       65 encircled with jewels, as in seasons long past
          the weapon-smith worked it, wondrously made it,
          with swine-bodies fashioned it, that thenceforward no longer
          brand might bite it, and battle-sword hurt it.
          and that was not least of helpers in prowess

{he has unferth's sword in his hand.}

       70 that hrothgar's spokesman had lent him when straitened;
          and the hilted hand-sword was hrunting entitled,
          old and most excellent 'mong all of the treasures;
          its blade was of iron, blotted with poison,
          hardened with gore; it failed not in battle
       75 any hero under heaven in hand who it brandished,
          who ventured to take the terrible journeys,
          the battle-field sought; not the earliest occasion
 
 ___________________________
 

          that deeds of daring 'twas destined to 'complish.

{unferth has little use for swords.}

          ecglaf's kinsman minded not soothly,
       80 exulting in strength, what erst he had spoken
          drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent to
          a sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture
          'neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,
[51]      to fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,
       85 repute for his strength. not so with the other
          when he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle
 
 ___________________________
 
i in battle: and, hrothgar belovèd,

{and send higelac the jewels thou hast given me}

       10 send unto higelac the high-valued jewels
          thou to me hast allotted. the lord of the geatmen
          may perceive from the gold, the hrethling may see it

{i should like my king to know how generous a lord i found thee to be.}

          when he looks on the jewels, that a gem-giver found i
          good over-measure, enjoyed him while able.
       15 and the ancient heirloom unferth permit thou,
          the famed one to have, the heavy-sword splendid[1]
          the hard-edgèd weapon; with hrunting to aid me,
          i shall gain me glory, or grim-death shall take me."

{beowulf is eager for the fray.}

          the atheling of geatmen uttered these words and
       20 heroic did hasten, not any rejoinder
          was willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowed

{he is a whole day reaching the bottom of the sea.}

          the doughty-in-battle. t
 
 ___________________________
 
d, spacious and gilded,
       55 the guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad raven
          blithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.
          then the bright-shining sun o'er the bottoms came going;[2]
          the warriors hastened, the heads of the peoples
          were ready to go again to their peoples,

{the geats prepare to leave dane-land.}

       60 the high-mooded farer would faraway thenceward
          look for his vessel. the valiant one bade then,[3]

[62]

{unferth asks beowulf to accept his sword as a gift. beowulf thanks him.}

          offspring of ecglaf, off to bear hrunting,
          to take his weapon, his well-beloved iron;
          he him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted
       65 the war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words then
          the blade of the brand: 'twas a brave-mooded hero.
          when the warriors were ready, arrayed in their trappings,
          the atheling dear to the danemen advanced then
   
 
 ___________________________
 
s, where the other was sitting,
       70 grim-mooded hero, greeted king hrothgar.

    [1] k. says '_proudly giveth_.'--gr. says, '_and gives no gold-plated
    rings, in order to incite the recipient to boastfulness_.'--b.
    suggests 'gyld' for 'gylp,' and renders: _and gives no beaten rings
    for reward_.

    [2] if s.'s emendation be accepted, v. 57 will read: _then came the
    light, going bright after darkness: the warriors, etc_.

    [3] as the passage stands in h.-so., unferth presents beowulf with the
    sword hrunting, and b. thanks him for the gift. if, however, the
    suggestions of grdtvg. and m. be accepted, the passage will read:
    _then the brave one (_i.e._ beowulf) commanded that hrunting be borne
    to the son of ecglaf (unferth), bade him take his sword, his dear
    weapon; he (b.) thanked him (u.) for the loan, etc_.




xxvii.

sorrow at parting.


{beowulf's farewell.}

          beowulf spake, ecgtheow's offspring:
          "w