_the story._

_hrothgar, king of the danes, or scyldings, builds a great mead-hall, or
palace, in which he hopes to feast his liegemen and to give them presents.
the joy of king and retainers is, however, of short duration. grendel, the
monster, is seized with hateful jealousy. he cannot brook the sounds of
joyance that reach him down in his fen-dwelling near the hall. oft and
anon he goes to the joyous building, bent on direful mischief. thane after
thane is ruthlessly carried off and devoured, while no one is found strong
enough and bold enough to cope with the monster. for twelve years he
persecutes hrothgar and his vassals._

_over sea, a day's voyage off, beowulf, of the geats, nephew of higelac,
king of the
 
 ___________________________
 
 geats, hears of grendel's doings and of hrothgar's misery. he
resolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king. with
fourteen chosen companions, he sets sail for dane-land. reaching that
country, he soon persuades hrothgar of his ability to help him. the hours
that elapse before night are spent in beer-drinking and conversation. when
hrothgar's bedtime comes he leaves the hall in charge of beowulf, telling
him that never before has he given to another the absolute wardship of his
palace. all retire 
 
 ___________________________
 
to rest, beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms._

_grendel comes, the great march-stepper, bearing god's anger. he seizes
and kills one of the sleeping warriors. then he advances towards beowulf.
a fierce and desperate hand-to-hand struggle ensues. no arms are used,
both combatants trusting to strength and hand-grip. beowulf tears
grendel's shoulder from its socket, and the monster retreats to his den,
howling and yelling with agony and fury. the wound is fatal._

_the next morning, at early dawn, warriors in numbers flock to the hall
heorot, to hear the news. joy is boundless. glee runs high. hrothgar and
his retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts._

_grendel's mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death. she
is furious and raging. while beowulf is sleeping in a room somewhat apart
[x] from the qu
 
 ___________________________
 
arters of the other warriors, she seizes one of hrothgar's
favorite counsellors, and carries him off and devours him. beowulf is
called. determined to leave heorot entirely purified, he arms himself, and
goes down to look for the female monster. after traveling through the
waters many hours, he meets her near the sea-bottom. she drags him to her
den. there he sees grendel lying dead. after a desperate and almost fatal
struggle with the woman, he slays her, and swims upward in triumph, taking
with him grendel's head._

_joy is renewed at heorot. congratulations crowd upon the victor. hrothgar
literally pours treasures into the lap of beowulf; and it is agreed among
the vassals of the king that beowulf will be their next liegelord._

_beowulf leaves dane-land. hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure._

_when the hero arrives in his own land, higelac 
 
 ___________________________
 
 translation.

~thorpe, b.~--the anglo-saxon poems of beowulf, the scôp or gleeman's
tale, and the fight at finnsburg. oxford, 1855. english translation in
short lines, generally containing two stresses.

~wackerbarth, a.d.~--beowulf, translated into english verse. london, 1849.

~wickberg, r.~--beowulf, en fornengelsk hjeltedikt, öfersatt. westervik.
first swedish translation.

~von wolzogen, h.~--beowulf, in alliterative measures. leipzig.

~zinsser, g.~--der kampf beowulfs mit grendel. jahresbericht of the
realschule at forbach, 1881.

[xiii]




glossary of proper names.

       *       *       *       *       *

[the figures refer to the divisions of the poem in which the respective
names occur. the large figures refer to fitts, the small, to lines in the
fitts.]

       *       *       *       *       *

~ælfhere~.--a kinsman of wiglaf.--36_3.

~æschere~.--confidential friend of king hrothgar. elder brother of
yrmenlaf. killed by grendel.--21_3; 30_
 
 ___________________________
 
of breca.--9_26.

~beowulf~.--son of scyld, the founder of the dynasty of scyldings. father
of healfdene, and grandfather of hrothgar.--1_18; 2_1.

~beowulf~.--the hero of the poem. sprung from the stock of geats, son of
ecgtheow. brought up by his maternal grandfather hrethel, and figuring in
manhood as a devoted liegeman of his uncle higelac. a hero from his youth.
has the strength of thirty men. engages in a swimming-match with breca.
goes to the help of hrothgar against the monster grendel. vanquishes
grendel and his mother. afterwards becomes king of the geats. late in life
attempts to kill a fire-spewing dragon, and is slain. is buried with great
honors. his memorial mound.--6_26; 7_2; 7_9; 9_3; 9_8; 12_28; 12_43; 23_1,
etc.

~breca~.--beowulf's opponent in the famous swimming-match.--9_8; 9_19;
9_21; 9_22.

~brondings~.--a people ruled by breca.--9_23.

~brosinga mene~.--a famous collar once owned by the brosings.--19_7.

~cain~.--progenitor of grendel and other m
 
 ___________________________
 
eaware~.--daughter of king hrothgar. married to ingeld, a heathobard
prince.--29_60; 30_32.

~froda~.--king of the heathobards, and father of ingeld.--29_62.

~garmund~.--father of offa.--28_71.

~geats, geatmen~.--the race to which the hero of the poem belongs. also
called weder-geats, or weders, war-geats, sea-geats. they are ruled by
hrethel, hæthcyn, higelac, and beowulf.--4_7; 7_4; 10_45; 11_8; 27_14;
28_8.

~gepids~.--named in connection with the danes and swedes.--35_34.

~grendel~.--a monster of the race of cain. dwells in the fens and moors.
is furiously envious when he hears sounds of joy in hrothgar's palace.
causes the king untold agony for years. is finally conquered by beowulf,
and dies of his wound. his hand and arm are hung up in hrothgar's hall
heorot. his head is cut off by beowulf when he goes down to fight with
grendel's mother.--2_50; 3_1; 3_13; 8_19; 11_17; 12_2; 13_27; 15_3.

~guthlaf~.--a dane of hnæf's party.--18_24.

~half-danes~.--branch of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ies hrothgar's
daughter, freaware, in order to heal the feud.--30_1; 30_6.

~heatholaf~.--a wylfing warrior slain by beowulf's father.--8_5.

~heathoremes~.--the people on whose shores breca is cast by the waves
during his contest with beowulf.--9_21.

~heorogar~.--elder brother of hrothgar, and surnamed 'weoroda ræswa,'
prince of the troopers.--2_9; 8_12.

~hereward~.--son of the above.--31_17.

~heort~, ~heorot~.--the great mead-hall which king hrothgar builds. it is
invaded by grendel for twelve years. finally cleansed by beowulf, the
geat. it is called heort on account of the hart-antlers which decorate
it.--2_25; 3_32; 3_52.

~hildeburg~.--wife of finn, daughter of hoce, and related to
hnæf,--probably his sister.--17_21; 18_34.

~hnæf~.--leader of a branch of the danes called half-danes. killed in the
struggle at finn's castle.--17_19; 17_61.

~hondscio~.--one of beowulf's companions. killed by grendel just before
beowulf grappled with that monster.--30_43.

 
 ___________________________
 
hildeburg and probably of hnæf.--17_26.

~hrethel~.--king of the geats, father of higelac, and grandfather of
beowulf.--7_4; 34_39.

~hrethla~.--once used for hrethel.--7_82.

~hrethmen~.--another name for the danes.--7_73.

~hrethric~.--son of hrothgar.--18_65; 27_19.

[xvi]

~hreosna-beorh~.--a promontory in geat-land, near which ohthere's sons
made plundering raids.--35_18.

~hrothgar~.--the danish king who built the hall heort, but was long unable
to enjoy it on account of grendel's persecutions. marries wealhtheow, a
helming lady. has two sons and a daughter. is a typical teutonic king,
lavish of gifts. a devoted liegelord, as his lamentations over slain
liegemen prove. also very appreciative of kindness, as is shown by his
loving gratitude to beowulf.--2_9; 2_12; 4_1; 8_10; 15_1; etc., etc.

~hrothmund~.--son of hrothgar.--18_65.

~hrothulf~.--probably a son of halga, younger brother of hrothgar.
certainly on terms of close intimacy in hrothgar's palace.--16_2
 
 ___________________________
 
g~.--grandfather of higelac, and father of hrethel.--19_11.

~swedes~.--people of sweden, ruled by the scylfings.--35_13.

~thrytho~.--wife of offa, king of the angles. known for her fierce and
unwomanly disposition. she is introduced as a contrast to the gentle hygd,
queen of higelac.--28_42; 28_56.

~unferth~.--son of ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of
hrothgar. taunts beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match.
lends beowulf his sword when he goes to look for grendel's mother. in the
ms. sometimes written _hunferth_. 9_1; 18_41.

~wæls~.--father of sigemund.--14_60.

~wægmunding~.--a name occasionally applied to wiglaf and beowulf, and
perhaps derived from a common ancestor, wægmund.--36_6; 38_61.

~weders~.--another name for geats or wedergeats.

~wayland~.--a fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old
teutonic literature.--7_83.

~wendels~.--the people of wulfgar, hrothgar's messenger and retainer.
(perhaps = vandals.)--6_30.
 
 ___________________________
 
d heort, or heorot.}

          who wide-reaching word-sway wielded 'mong earlmen.
          his promise he brake not, rings he lavished,
          treasure at banquet. towered the hall up
          high and horn-crested, huge between antlers:
       30 it battle-waves bided, the blasting fire-demon;
          ere long then from hottest hatred must sword-wrath
          arise for a woman's husband and father.
          then the mighty war-spirit[1] endured for a season,

{the monster grendel is madly envious of the danemen's joy.}

          bore it bitterly, he who bided in darkness,
       35 that light-hearted laughter loud in the building
          greeted him daily; there was dulcet harp-music,
          clear song of the singer. he said that was able

{[the course of the story is interrupted by a short reference to some old
account of the creation.]}

          to tell from of old earthmen's beginnings,
          that father almighty earth had created,
       40 t
 
 ___________________________
 
-folk and races,
          and earth he embellished in all her regions
          with limbs and leaves; life he bestowed too
       45 on all the kindreds that live under heaven.

{the glee of the warriors is overcast by a horrible dread.}

          so blessed with abundance, brimming with joyance,
          the warriors abided, till a certain one gan to
          dog them with deeds of direfullest malice,
          a foe in the hall-building: this horrible stranger[2]
       50 was grendel entitled, the march-stepper famous
          who[3] dwelt in the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness;
          the wan-mooded being abode for a season
[5]       in the land of the giants, when the lord and creator
          had banned him and branded. for that bitter murder,
       55 the killing of abel, all-ruling father

{cain is referred to as a progenitor of grendel, and of monsters in
general.}

          the kindred of cain crushed with his vengeance;
          in the feud 
 
 ___________________________
 
ters of ocean,
          came into being, and the giants that longtime
          grappled with god; he gave them requital.

    [1] r. and t. b. prefer 'ellor-gæst' to 'ellen-gæst' (86): _then the
    stranger from afar endured, etc._

    [2] some authorities would translate '_demon_' instead of
    '_stranger_.'

    [3] some authorities arrange differently, and render: _who dwelt in
    the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness, the land of the
    giant-race._




iii.

grendel the murderer.


{grendel attacks the sleeping heroes}

          when the sun was sunken, he set out to visit
          the lofty hall-building, how the ring-danes had used it
          for beds and benches when the banquet was over.
          then he found there reposing many a noble
        5 asleep after supper; sorrow the heroes,[1]
          misery knew not. the monster of evil
          greedy and cruel tarried but little,

{he drags off thirty of them, and devours them}

 
 
 ___________________________
 
         fell and frantic, and forced from their slumbers
          thirty of thanemen; thence he departed
       10 leaping and laughing, his lair to return to,
          with surfeit of slaughter sallying homeward.
          in the dusk of the dawning, as the day was just breaking,
          was grendel's prowess revealed to the warriors:

{a cry of agony goes up, when grendel's horrible deed is fully realized.}

          then, his meal-taking finished, a moan was uplifted,
       15 morning-cry mighty. the man-ruler famous,
          the long-worthy atheling, sat very woful,
          suffered great sorrow, sighed for his liegemen,
[6]       when they had seen the track of the hateful pursuer,
          the spirit accursèd: too crushing that sorrow,

{the monster returns the next night.}

       20 too loathsome and lasting. not longer he tarried,
    
 
 ___________________________
 
0 [2]so ruled he and strongly strove against justice
          lone against all men, till empty uptowered

{king hrothgar's agony and suspense last twelve years.}

          the choicest of houses. long was the season:
          twelve-winters' time torture suffered
          the friend of the scyldings, every affliction,
       35 endless agony; hence it after[3] became
          certainly known to the children of men
          sadly in measures, that long against hrothgar
          grendel struggled:--his grudges he cherished,
          murderous malice, many a winter,
       40 strife unremitting, and peacefully wished he
          [4]life-woe to lift from no liegeman at all of
          the men of the dane-folk, for money to settle,
          no counsellor needed count for a moment
[7]       on handsome amends at the hands of the murderer;

{grendel is unremitting in his persecutions.}

       45 the monster of evil fiercely did harass,
          the ill-planning dea
 
 ___________________________
 
ginning with 's' have
    been conjectured.

    [4] the h.-so. glossary is very inconsistent in referring to this
    passage.--'sibbe' (154), which h.-so. regards as an instr., b. takes
    as accus., obj. of 'wolde.' putting a comma after deniga, he renders:
    _he did not desire peace with any of the danes, nor did he wish to
    remove their life-woe, nor to settle for money_.

    [5] of this difficult passage the following interpretations among
    others are given: (1) though grendel has frequented heorot as a demon,
    he could not become ruler of the danes, on account of his hostility to
    god. (2) hrothgar was much grieved that grendel had not appeared
    before his throne to receive presents. (3) he was not permitted to
    devastate the hall, on account of the creator; _i.e._ god wished to
    make his visit fatal to him.--ne ... wisse (169) w. renders: _nor had
    he any desire to do so_; 'his' being obj. gen. = danach.

[8]




iv.

beowulf goes t
 
 ___________________________
 
o hrothgar's assistance.


{hrothgar sees no way of escape from the persecutions of grendel.}

          so healfdene's kinsman constantly mused on
          his long-lasting sorrow; the battle-thane clever
          was not anywise able evils to 'scape from:
          too crushing the sorrow that came to the people,
        5 loathsome and lasting the life-grinding torture,

{beowulf, the geat, hero of the poem, hears of hrothgar's sorrow, and
resolves to go to his assistance.}

          greatest of night-woes. so higelac's liegeman,
          good amid geatmen, of grend
 
 ___________________________
 
         is come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.
          seafaring sailors asserted it then,

{beowulf is reported to have the strength of thirty men.}

          who valuable gift-gems of the geatmen[1] carried
          as peace-offering thither, that he thirty men's grapple
       10 has in his hand, the hero-in-battle.

{god hath sent him to our rescue.}

          the holy creator usward sent him,
          to west-dane warriors, i ween, for to render
          'gainst grendel's grimness gracious assistance:
          i shall give to the good one gift-gems for courage.
       15 hasten to bid them hither to speed them,[2]
          to see assembled this circle of kinsmen;
          tell them expressly they're welcome in sooth to
          the men of the danes." to the door of the building

[15]

{wulfgar invites the strangers in.}

          wulfgar went then, this word-message shouted:
       20 "my victorious liegelord bade me to tell you,
          th
 
 ___________________________
 
e hero did guide them,
          'neath heorot's roof; the high-minded went then
          sturdy 'neath helmet till he stood in the building.
          beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten,
          his armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman):

{beowulf salutes hrothgar, and then proceeds to boast of his youthful
achievements.}

       35 "hail thou, hrothgar! i am higelac's kinsman
          and vassal forsooth; many a wonder
          i dared as a stripling. the doings of grendel,
          in far-off fatherland i fully did know of:
          sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth,
       40 excellent edifice, empty and useless
          to all the earlmen after evenlight's glimmer
          'neath heaven's bright hues hath hidden its glory.
          this my earls then urged me, the most excellent of them,
          carles very clever, to come and assist thee,
       45 folk-leader hrothgar; fully they knew of

{his fight with the nickers.}

      
 
 ___________________________
 
    the strength of my body. themselves they beheld me
          when i came from the contest, when covered with gore
          foes i escaped from, where five[3] i had bound,
[16]      the giant-race wasted, in the waters destroying
       50 the nickers by night, bore numberless sorrows,
          the weders avenged (woes had they suffered)
          enemies ravaged; alone now with grendel

{he intends to fight grendel unaided.}

          i shall manage the matter, with the monster of evil,
          the giant, decide it. thee i would therefore
       55 beg of thy bounty, bright-danish chieftain,
          lord of the scyldings, this single petition:
          not to refuse me, defender of warriors,
          friend-lord of folks, so far have i sought thee,
          that _i_ may unaided, my earlmen assisting me,
       60 this brave-mooded war-band, purify heorot.
          i have heard on inquir
 
 ___________________________
 
this
    advantage, viz. that it gives a parallel to 'geátena leóde': but to
    take it as an adv. is more natural. furthermore, to call the geats
    'brave' might, at this point, seem like an implied thrust at the
    danes, so long helpless; while to call his own men 'timid' would be
    befouling his own nest.

    [5] for 'head-watch,' cf. h.-so. notes and cf. v. 2910.--th.
    translates: _thou wilt not need my head to hide_ (i.e., thou wilt have
    no occasion to bury me, as grendel will devour me whole).--simrock
    imagines a kind of dead-watch.--dr. h. wood suggests: _thou wilt not
    have to bury so much as my head_ (for grendel will be a thorough
    undertaker),--grim humor.

    [6] s. proposes a colon after 'nimeð' (l. 447). this would make no
    essential change in the translation.

    [7] owing to the vagueness of 'feorme' (451), this passage is
    variously translated. in our translation, h.-so.'s glossary has been
    quite closely followed. thi
 
 ___________________________
 
the waters;
       10 i had lately begun then to govern the danemen,
          the hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth,
          rich in its jewels: dead was heregar,
          my kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken,
          healfdene his bairn. he was better than i am!
       15 that feud thereafter for a fee i compounded;
          o'er the weltering waters to the wilfings i sent
          ornaments old; oaths did he swear me.

{hrothgar recounts to beowulf the horrors of grendel's persecutions.}

          it pains me in spirit to any to tell it,
          what grief in heorot grendel hath caused me,
       20 what horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.
          waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop;
          weird hath offcast them to the clutches of grendel.
          god can easily hinder the scather
          from deeds so direful. oft drunken with beer

{my thanes have made many boasts, but have not executed them.}

       25 o'er the ale-ves
 
 ___________________________
 
sel promised warriors in armor
          they would willingly wait on the wassailing-benches
          a grapple with grendel, with grimmest of edges.
          then this mead-hall at morning with murder was reeking,
          the building was bloody at breaking of daylight,
       30 the bench-deals all flooded, dripping and bloodied,
          the folk-hall was gory: i had fewer retainers,
          dear-beloved warriors, whom death had laid hold of.

{sit down to the feast, and give us comfort.}

          sit at the feast now, thy intents unto heroes,[2]
          thy victor-fame show, as thy spirit doth
 
 ___________________________
 
morning
          on the heathoremes' shore the holm-currents tossed him,
          sought he thenceward the home of his fathers,
          beloved of his liegemen, the land of the brondings,
          the peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded,
[20]   25 had borough and jewels. the pledge that he made thee

{breca outdid you entirely.}

          the son of beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
          then i ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,

{much more will grendel outdo you, if you vie with him in prowess.}

          though ever triumphant in onset of battle,
          a grim grappling, if grendel thou darest
       30 for the space of a night near-by to wait for!"

{beowulf retaliates.}

          beowulf answered, offspring of ecgtheow:
          "my good friend unferth, sure freely and wildly,

{o friend unferth, you are fuddled with beer, and cannot talk coherently.}

          thou fuddled with beer of breca hast spoken,
          has
 
 ___________________________
 
 so fearless performèd with weapons
          glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .
[22]      . . . . . . . . . . . . i utter no boasting;

{you are a slayer of brothers, and will suffer damnation, wise as you may
be.}

       30 though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,
          thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get
          direful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.
          i tell thee in earnest, offspring of ecglaf,
          never had grendel such numberless horrors,
       35 the direful demon, done to thy liegelord,
          harrying in heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy,

{had your acts been as brave as your words, grendel had not ravaged your
land so long.}

          thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.
          he hath found out fully that the fierce-burning hatred,
          the edge-battle eager, of all of your kindred,
       40 of the victory-scyldings, need little dismay him:
          oaths he 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
    passage as follows: _since they no longer could see the light of the
    sun, and lowering darkness was down over all, dire under the heavens
    shadowy beings came going around them_.




xi.

all sleep save one.


{hrothgar retires.}

          then hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,
          folk-lord of scyldings, forth from the building;
          the war-chieftain wished then wealhtheow to look for,
          the queen for a bedmate. to keep away grendel

{god has provided a watch for the hall.}

        5 the glory of kings had given a hall-watch,
          as men heard recounted: for the king of the danemen
          he did special service, gave the giant a watcher:
          and the prince of the geatmen implicitly trusted

{beowulf is self-confident}

          his warlike strength and the wielder's protection.

{he prepares for rest.}

       10 his armor of iron off him he did then,
          his helmet from his head, to h
 
 ___________________________
 
is henchman committed
          his chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,
          and bade him bide with his battle-equipments.
          the good one then uttered words of defiance,
       15 beowulf geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:

{beowulf boasts of his ability to cope with grendel.}

          "i hold me no meaner in matters of prowess,
          in warlike achievements, than grendel does himself;
          hence i seek not with sword-edge to sooth him to slumber,
          of life to bereave him, though well i am able.

{we will fight with nature's weapons only.}

       20 no battle-skill[1] has he, that blows he should strike me,
          to shatter my shield, though sure he is mighty
[25]      in strife and destruction; but struggling by night we
          shall do without edges, dare he to look for
          weaponless warfare, and wise-mooded father
      
 
 ___________________________
 
y ravished, of the race of the scyldings

{but god raised up a deliverer.}

          too many by far. but the lord to them granted
          the weaving of war-speed, to wederish heroes
          aid and comfort, that every opponent
          by one man's war-might they worsted and vanquished,

{god rules the world.}

       40 by the might of himself; the truth is established
          that god almighty hath governed for ages
          kindreds and nations. a night very lurid

{grendel comes to heorot.}

          the trav'ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.
          the warriors were sleeping who should watch the horned-building,

{only one warrior is awake.}

       45 one only excepted. 'mid earthmen 'twas 'stablished,
          th' implacable foeman was powerless to hurl them
          to the land of shadows, if the lord were unwilling;
          but serving as warder, in terror to foemen,
          he angrily bided the issue of battle.[2]

    [1] g
 
 ___________________________
 
r. understood 'gódra' as meaning 'advantages in battle.' this
    rendering h.-so. rejects. the latter takes the passage as meaning that
    grendel, though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war.

    [2] b. in his masterly articles on beowulf (p. and b. xii.) rejects
    the division usually made at this point, 'þá.' (711), usually rendered
    'then,' he translates 'when,' and connects its clause with the
    foregoing sentence. these changes he makes to reduce the number of
    'cóm's' as principal verbs. (cf. 703, 711, 721.) with all deference to
    this acute scholar, i must say that it seems to me that the p
 
 ___________________________
 
oet is
    exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme event on
    which the whole subsequent action turns. first, he (grendel) came _in
    the wan night_; second, he came _from the moor_; third, he came _to
    the hall_. time, place from which, place to which, are all given.

[26]




xii.

grendel and beowulf.


{grendel comes from the fens.}

          'neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then
          grendel going, god's anger bare he.
          the monster intended some one of earthmen
          in the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:

{he goes towards the joyous building.}

        5 he went under welkin where well he knew of
          the wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,
          gold-hall of earthmen. not the earliest occasion

{this was not his first visit there.}

          he the home and manor of hrothgar had sought:
          ne'er found he in lif
 
 ___________________________
 
       ere morning came, since fate had allowed him

{fate has decreed that he shall devour no more heroes. beowulf suffers
from suspense.}

       25 the prospect of plenty. providence willed not
          to permit him any more of men under heaven
          to eat in the night-time. higelac's kinsman
          great sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature
[27]      in unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.
       30 no thought had the monster of deferring the matter,

{grendel immediately seizes a sleeping warrior, and devours him.}

          but on earliest occasion he quickly laid hold of
          a soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,
          bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,
          swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man's
       35 feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.
          nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior

{beowulf and grendel grapple.}

          snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 fulfil it.}

          of higelac minded his speech of the evening,
       50 stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.
          his fingers crackled; the giant was outward,
          the earl stepped farther. the famous one minded
          to flee away farther, if he found an occasion,
          and off and away, avoiding delay,
       55 to fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware of
          the strength of his grapple in the grip of the foeman.

{'twas a luckless day for grendel.}

          'twas an ill-taken journey that the injury-bringing,
          harrying harmer to heorot wandered:

{the hall groans.}

          the palace re-echoed; to all of the danemen,
       60 dwellers in castles, to each of the bold ones,
          earlmen, was terror. angry they both were,
          archwarders raging.[2] rattled the building;
[28]      'twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood then
          the bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward,
       65 
 
 ___________________________
 
ron,
          by the art of the armorer. off from the sill there
          bent mead-benches many, as men have informed me,
          adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle.
       70 the scylding wise men weened ne'er before
          that by might and main-strength a man under heaven
          might break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent,
          crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fire
          in smoke should consume it. the sound mounted upward

{grendel's cries terrify the danes.}

       75 novel enough; on the north danes fastened
          a terror of anguish, on all of the men there
          who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,
          the song of defeat from the foeman of heaven,
          heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow
       80 hell-bound bewailing. he held him too firmly
          who was strongest of main-strength of men of that era.

    [1] b. and t.b. emend so as to make lines 9 and 10 read
 
 ___________________________
 
: _never in his
    life, earlier or later, had he, the hell-thane, found a braver
    hero_.--they argue that beowulf's companions had done nothing to merit
    such encomiums as the usual readings allow them.

    [2] for 'réðe rén-weardas' (771), t.b. suggests 'réðe, rénhearde.'
    translate: _they were both angry, raging and mighty_.




xiii.

grendel is vanquished.


{beowulf has no idea of letting grendel live.}

          for no cause whatever would the earlmen's defender
          leave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer,
          he deemed his existence utterly useless
          to men under heaven. many a noble
        5 of beowulf brandished his battle-sword old,
          would guard the life of his lord and protector,
          the far-famous chieftain, if able to do so;
          while waging the warfare, this wist they but little,
          brave battle-thanes, while his bod
 
 ___________________________
 
y intending

{no weapon would harm grendel; he bore a charmed life.}

       10 to slit into slivers, and seeking his spirit:
          that the relentless foeman nor finest of weapons
          of all on the earth, nor any of war-bills
[29]      was willing to injure; but weapons of victory
          swords and suchlike he had sworn to dispense with.
       15 his death at that time must prove to be wretched,
          and the far-away spirit widely should journey
          into enemies' power. this plainly he saw then
      
 
 ___________________________
 
    who with mirth[1] of mood malice no little
          had wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen
       20 (to god he was hostile), that his body would fail him,
          but higelac's hardy henchman and kinsman
          held him by the hand; hateful to other

{grendel is sorely wounded.}

          was each one if living. a body-wound suffered
          the direful demon, damage incurable

{his body bursts.}

       25 was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered,
          his body did burst. to beowulf was given
          glory in battle; grendel from thenceward
          must flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes,
          sick unto death, his dwelling must look for
       30 unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fully

{the
 
 ___________________________
 
     35 wise and valiant, the war-hall of hrothgar,
          saved it from violence. he joyed in the night-work,
          in repute for prowess; the prince of the geatmen
          for the east-danish people his boast had accomplished,
          bettered their burdensome bale-sorrows fully,
       40 the craft-begot evil they erstwhile had suffered
          and were forced to endure from crushing oppression,
          their manifold misery. 'twas a manifest token,

{beowulf suspends grendel's hand and arm in heorot.}

          when the hero-in-battle the hand suspended,
          the arm and the shoulder (there was all of the claw
       45 of grendel together) 'neath great-stretching hall-roof.

    [1] it has been proposed to translate 'myrðe' by _with sorrow_; but
    there seems no authority for such a rendering. to the present
    translator, the phrase 'módes myrðe' seems a mere padding for
    _gladly_; i.e., _he who gladly harassed mankind_.

[30]




x
 
 ___________________________
 
iv.

rejoicing of the danes.


{at early dawn, warriors from far and near come together to hear of the
night's adventures.}

          in the mist of the morning many a warrior
          stood round the gift-hall, as the story is told me:
          folk-princes fared then from far and from near
          through long-stretching journeys to look at the wonder,
        5 the footprints of the foeman. few of the warriors

{few warriors lamented grendel's destruction.}

          who gazed on the foot-tracks of the inglorious creature
          his parting from life pained very deeply,
          how, weary in spirit, off from those regions
          in combats conquered he carried his traces,
       10 fated and flying, to the flood of the nickers.

{grendel's blood dyes the waters.}

          there in bloody billows bubbled the currents,
          the angry eddy was everywhere mingled
          and seething with gore, welling wit
 
 ___________________________
 
 boasts of the
    deeds of others'?

    [4] t.b. accepts b.'s 'hé þæs áron þáh' as given by h.-so., but puts a
    comma after 'þáh,' and takes 'siððan' as introducing a dependent
    clause: _he throve in honor since heremod's strength ... had
    decreased_.

[33]




xv.

hrothgar's gratitude.


          hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he,
          he stood by the pillar,[1] saw the steep-rising hall-roof
          gleaming with gold-gems, and grendel his hand there):

{hrothgar gives thanks for the overthrow of the monster.}

          "for the sight we behold now, thanks to the wielder
        5 early be offered! much evil i bided,
          snaring from grendel:[2] god can e'er 'complish
          wonder on wonder, wielder of glory!

{i had given up all hope, when this brave liegeman came to our aid.}

          but lately i reckoned ne'er under heaven
          comfort to gain me for any of sorrows,
       10 while the hands
 
 ___________________________
 
s fingers;
       60 each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,
          the heathen one's hand-spur, the hero-in-battle's
          claw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,

[35]

{no sword will harm the monster.}

          that not any excellent edges of brave ones
          was willing to touch him, the terrible creature's
       65 battle-hand bloody to bear away from him.

    [1] b. and t.b. read 'staþole,' and translate _stood on the floor_.

    [2] for 'snaring from grendel,' 'sorrows at grendel's hands' has been
    suggested. this gives a parallel to 'láðes.' 'grynna' may well be gen.
    pl. of 'gyrn,' by a scribal slip.

    [3] the h.-so punctuation has been followed; but b. has been followed
    in understanding 'gehwylcne' as object of 'wíd-scofen (hæfde).' gr.
    construes 'wéa' as nom abs.




xvi.

hrothgar lavishes gifts upon his deliverer.


{heorot is adorned with hands.}

          then straight was ordered that heorot inside[
 
 ___________________________
 
f
    affording a parallel to 'gefrætwod': both have the disadvantage of
    altering the text.

    [2] the passage 1005-1009 seems to be hopeless. one difficult point is
    to find a subject for 'gesacan.' some say 'he'; others supply 'each,'
    _i.e., every soul-bearer ... must gain the inevitable place_. the
    genitives in this case are partitive.--if 'he' be subj., the genitives
    are dependent on 'gearwe' (= prepared).--the 'he' itself is disputed,
    some referring it to grendel; but b. takes it as involved in the
    parenthesis.




xvii.

banquet (_continued_).--the scop's song of finn and hnæf.


{each of beowulf's companions receives a costly gift.}

          and the atheling of earlmen to each of the heroes
          who the ways of the waters went with beowulf,
          a costly gift-token gave on the mead-bench,
          offered an heirloom, and ordered that that man

{the warrior killed by grendel is to be paid for in gold.}

        5 
 
 ___________________________
 
with gold should be paid for, whom grendel had erstwhile
          wickedly slaughtered, as he more of them had done
          had far-seeing god and the mood of the hero
          the fate not averted: the father then governed
          all of the earth-dwellers, as he ever is doing;
       10 hence insight for all men is everywhere fittest,
          forethought of spirit! much he shall suffer
          of lief and of loathsome who long in this present
          useth the world in this woful existence.
          there was mus
 
 ___________________________
 
= ready for single
    combat), i cannot see. 'gearwe' occurs quite frequently with 'on'; cf.
    b. 1110 (_ready for the pyre_), el. 222 (_ready for the glad
    journey_). moreover, what has the idea of single combat to do with b.
    1247 ff.? the poet is giving an inventory of the arms and armor which
    they lay aside on retiring, and he closes his narration by saying that
    they were _always prepared for battle both at home and on the march_.

[44]




xx.

the mother of grendel.


          they sank then to slumber. with sorrow one paid for
          his evening repose, as often betid them
          while grendel was holding[1] the gold-bedecked palace,
          ill-deeds performing, till his end overtook him,
        5 death for his sins. 'twas seen very clearly,

{grendel's mother is known to be thirsting for revenge.}

          known unto earth-folk, that still an avenger
          outlived the loathed one, long since the sorrow
          caused by 
 
 ___________________________
 
the struggle; the mother of grendel,
          devil-shaped woman, her woe ever minded,
       10 who was held to inhabit the horrible waters,

{[grendel's progenitor, cain, is again referred to.]}

          the cold-flowing currents, after cain had become a
          slayer-with-edges to his one only brother,
          the son of his sire; he set out then banished,
          marked as a murderer, man-joys avoiding,
       15 lived in the desert. thence demons unnumbered

{the poet again magnifies beowulf's valor.}

          fate-sent awoke; one of them grendel,
          sword-cursèd, hateful, who at heorot met with
          a m
 
 ___________________________
 
hat was watching, waiting the struggle,
          where a horrid one held him with hand-grapple sturdy;
       20 nathless he minded the might of his body,
          the glorious gift god had allowed him,
          and folk-ruling father's favor relied on,
          his help and his comfort: so he conquered the foeman,
          the hell-spirit humbled: he unhappy departed then,
       25 reaved of his joyance, journeying to death-haunts,
          foeman of man. his mother moreover

{grendel's mother comes to avenge her son.}

          eager and gloomy was anxious to go on
          her mournful mission, mindful of vengeance
          for the death of her son. she came then to heorot
[45]   30 where the armor-dane earlmen all through the building
          were lying in slumber. soon there became then
          return[2] to the nobles, when the mother of grendel
          entered the folk-hall; the fear was less grievous
          by even so much as the vigor of maidens,
 
 ___________________________
 
a respite
          after the woe he had suffered. the war-worthy hero
          with a troop of retainers trod then the pavement
          (the hall-building groaned), till he greeted the wise one,

{beowulf inquires how hrothgar had enjoyed his night's rest.}

          the earl of the ingwins;[5] asked if the night had
       70 fully refreshed him, as fain he would have it.

    [1] several eminent authorities either read or emend the ms. so as to
    make this verse read, _while grendel was wasting the gold-bedecked
    palace_. so 20_15 below: _ravaged the desert_.

    [2] for 'sóna' (1281), t.b. suggests 'sára,' limiting 'edhwyrft.' read
    then: _return of sorrows to the nobles, etc_. this emendation supplies
    the syntactical gap after 'edhwyrft.'

    [3] some authorities follow grein's lexicon in treating 'heard ecg' as
    an adj. limiting 'sweord': h.-so. renders it as a subst. (so v. 1491.)
    the sense of the translation would be the same.

    [4] 
 
 ___________________________
 
r,
          shoulder-companion, when fighting in battle
          our heads we protected, when troopers were clashing,

{he was my ideal hero.}

          and heroes were dashing; such an earl should be ever,
          an erst-worthy atheling, as æschere proved him.
       10 the flickering death-spirit became in heorot
          his hand-to-hand murderer; i can not tell whither
          the cruel one turned in the carcass exulting,

[47]

{this horrible creature came to avenge grendel's death.}

          by cramming discovered.[1] the quarrel she wreaked then,
          that last night igone grendel thou killedst
       15 in grewsomest manner, with grim-holding clutches,
          since too long he had lessened my liege-troop and wasted
          my folk-men so foully. he fell in the battle
          with forfeit of life, and another has followed,
          a mighty crime-worker, her kinsman avenging,
       20 and henceforth hath 'stablished her hatred unyielding
 
 ___________________________
 
in
the moors.}

       25 land-people heard i, liegemen, this saying,
          dwellers in halls, they had seen very often
          a pair of such mighty march-striding creatures,
          far-dwelling spirits, holding the moorlands:
          one of them wore, as well they might notice,
       30 the image of woman, the other one wretched
          in guise of a man wandered in exile,
          except he was huger than any of earthmen;
          earth-dwelling people entitled him grendel
          in days of yore: they know not their father,
       35 whe'r ill-going spirits any were borne him

{the inhabit the most desolate and horrible places.}

          ever before. they guard the wolf-coverts,
          lands inaccessible, wind-beaten nesses,
          fearfullest fen-deeps, where a flood from the mountains
          'neath mists of the nesses netherward rattles,
       40 the stream under earth: not far is it henceward
          measured by mile-lengths that th
 
 ___________________________
 
.' this gives a parallel to 'æse wlanc'
    (1333).

    [2] the line 'and ... yielding,' b. renders: _and she has performed a
    deed of blood-vengeance whose effect is far-reaching_.

    [3] 'sé þe' (1345) is an instance of masc. rel. with fem. antecedent.
    so v. 1888, where 'sé þe' refers to 'yldo.'

    [4] for 'hrímge' in the h.-so. edition, gr. and others read 'hrínde'
    (=hrínende), and translate: _which rustling forests overhang_.




xxii.

beowulf seeks grendel's mother.


          beowulf answered, ecgtheow's son:

{beowulf exhorts the old king to arouse himself for action.}

          "grieve not, o wise one! for each it is better,
          his friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him;
          each of us must the end-day abide of
        5 his earthly existence; who is able accomplish
          glory ere death! to battle-thane noble
          lifeless lying, 'tis at last most fitting.
          arise, o king, quick let us haste
 
 ___________________________
 
n
          to look at the footprint of the kinsman of grendel!
       10 i promise thee this now: to his place he'll escape not,
          to embrace of the earth, nor to mountainous forest,
          nor to depths of the ocean, wherever he wanders.
[49]      practice thou now patient endurance
          of each of thy sorrows, as i hope for thee soothly!"

{hrothgar rouses himself. his horse is brought.}

       15 then up sprang the old one, the all-wielder thanked he,
          ruler almighty, that the man had outspoken.
          then for h
 
 ___________________________
 
ecglaf's kinsman minded not soothly,
       80 exulting in strength, what erst he had spoken
          drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent to
          a sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture
          'neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,
[51]      to fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,
       85 repute for his strength. not so with the other
          when he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.




xxiii.

beowulf's fight with grendel's mother.


{beowulf makes a parting speech to hrothgar.}

          beowulf spake, ecgtheow's son:
          "recall now, oh, famous kinsman of healfdene,
          prince very prudent, now to part i am ready,
          gold-friend of earlmen, what erst we agreed on,

{if i fail, act as a kind liegelord to my thanes,}

        5 should i lay down my life in lending thee assistance,
          when my earth-joys were over, thou wouldst evermore serve me
          in stead of a fath
 
 ___________________________
 
 geatmen uttered these words and
       20 heroic did hasten, not any rejoinder
          was willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowed

{he is a whole day reaching the bottom of the sea.}

          the doughty-in-battle. then a day's-length elapsed ere
          he was able to see the sea at its bottom.
          early she found then who fifty of winters
       25 the course of the currents kept in her fury,
          grisly and greedy, that the grim one's dominion

[52]

{grendel's mother knows that some one has reached her domains.}

          some one of men from above was exploring.
          forth did she grab them, grappled the warrior
          with horrible clutches; yet no sooner she injured
       30 his body unscathèd: the burnie out-guarded,
          that she proved but powerless to pierce through the armor,
          the limb-mail locked, with loath-grabbing fingers.
          the sea-wolf bare then, when bottomward came she,

{she grabs him, and
 
 ___________________________
 
ts no few with fierce-biting tusks did
          break through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.
          the earl then discovered he was down in some cavern
       40 where no water whatever anywise harmed him,
          and the clutch of the current could come not anear him,
          since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleaming
          fire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.
          the good one saw then the sea-bottom's monster,

{beowulf attacks the mother of grendel.}

       45 the mighty mere-woman; he made a great onset
          with weapon-of-battle, his hand not desisted
          from striking, that war-blade struck on her head then
          a battle-song greedy. the stranger perceived then

{the sword will not bite.}

          the sword would not bite, her life would not injure,
       50 but the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened:
          erst had it often onsets encountered,
          oft cloven the helmet, the fated 
 
 ___________________________
 
   cast then his carved-sword covered with jewels
          that it lay on the earth, hard and steel-pointed;

{the hero throws down all weapons, and again trusts to his hand-grip.}

          he hoped in his strength, his hand-grapple sturdy.
       60 so any must act whenever he thinketh
          to gain him in battle glory unending,
          and is reckless of living. the lord of the war-geats
[53]      (he shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder[2]
          the mother of grendel; then mighty in struggle
       65 swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled,
          that she fell to the floor. with furious grapple

{beowulf falls.}

          she gave him requital[3] early thereafter,
          and stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriors
          faint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces,

{the monster sits on him with drawn sword.}

       70 foot-going champion. then she sat on the hall-guest
          and wielded her war-knife
 
 ___________________________
 
l to the ground then:
          the hand-sword was bloody, the hero exulted.
          the brand was brilliant, brightly it glimmered,
       15 just as from heaven gemlike shineth
          the torch of the firmament. he glanced 'long the building,
          and turned by the wall then, higelac's vassal
          raging and wrathful raised his battle-sword
          strong by the handle. the edge was not useless
       20 to the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished to
          give grendel requital for the many assaults he
          had worked on the west-danes not once, but often,
          when he slew in slumber the subjects of hrothgar,
          swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers
       25 of the folk of the danemen, and fully as many
          carried away, a horrible prey.
          he gave him requital, grim-raging champion,

{beowulf sees the body of grendel, and cuts off his head.}

          when he saw on his rest-place weary of conflict
          gr
 
 ___________________________
 
anted them.
       70 from the high-minded hero, then, helmet and burnie
          were speedily loosened: the ocean was putrid,
          the water 'neath welkin weltered with gore.
          forth did they fare, then, their footsteps retracing,
          merry and mirthful, measured the earth-way,
       75 the highway familiar: men very daring[3]
          bare then the head from the sea-cliff, burdening
          each of the earlmen, excellent-valiant.

{it takes four men to carry grendel's head on a spear.}

          four of them had to carry with labor
          the head of grendel to the high towering gold-hall
       80 upstuck on the spear, till fourteen most-valiant
          and battle-brave geatmen came there going
          straight to the palace: the prince of the people
          measured the mead-ways, their mood-brave companion.
          the atheling of earlmen entered the building,
       85 deed-valiant man, adorned with distinction,
          doughty 
 
 ___________________________
 
shield-warrior, to address king hrothgar:
[57]      then hung by the hair, the head of grendel
          was borne to the building, where beer-thanes were drinking,
          loth before earlmen and eke 'fore the lady:
       90 the warriors beheld then a wonderful sight.

    [1] 'þæs monige gewearð' (1599) and 'hafað þæs geworden' (2027).--in a
    paper published some years ago in one of the johns hopkins university
    circulars, i tried to throw upon these two long-doubtful passages some
    light derived from a study of like passages in alfred's prose.--the
    imper
 
 ___________________________
 


    the second passage (v. 2025 (b)-2027): _she is promised ...; to this
    the friend of the scyldings has agreed, etc_. by emending 'is' instead
    of 'wæs' (2025), the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.

    in v. 1997 ff. this same idiom occurs, and was noticed in b.'s great
    article on beowulf, which appeared about the time i published my
    reading of 1599 and 2027. translate 1997 then: _wouldst let the
    south-danes themselves decide about their struggle with grendel_. here
    'súð-dene' is accus. of person, and 'gúðe' is gen. of thing agreed on.

    with such collateral support as that afforded by b. (p. and b. xii.
    97), i have no hesitation in departing from h.-so., my usual guide.

    the idiom above treated runs through a.-s., old saxon, and other
    teutonic languages, and should be noticed in the lexicons.

    [2] 'bróden-mæl' is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeened
    sword. translate: _the damaskeened sword bu
 
 ___________________________
 
:
          'twill happen full early, excellent hero,

{hrothgar gives an account of his reign.}

       25 that death shall subdue thee. so the danes a half-century
          i held under heaven, helped them in struggles
          'gainst many a race in middle-earth's regions,
          with ash-wood and edges, that enemies none
          on earth molested me. lo! offsetting change, now,

[61]

{sorrow after joy.}

       30 came to my manor, grief after joyance,
          when grendel became my constant visitor,
          inveterate hater: i from that malice
          continually travailed with trouble no little.
          thanks be to god that i gained in my lifetime,
       35 to the lord everlasting, to look on the gory
          head with mine eyes, after long-lasting sorrow!
          go to the bench now, battle-adornèd
          joy in the feasting: of jewels in common
          we'll meet with many when morning appeareth."
       40 the geatman was gladsome,
 
 ___________________________
 
the salt-streams to seek an encounter,
          a battle at heorot? hast bettered for hrothgar,
          the famous folk-leader, his far-published sorrows
       30 any at all? in agony-billows

{my suspense has been great.}

          i mused upon torture, distrusted the journey
          of the belovèd liegeman; i long time did pray thee
          by no means to seek out the murderous spirit,
          to suffer the south-danes themselves to decide on[2]
       35 grappling with grendel. to god i am thankful
          to be suffered to see thee safe from thy journey."

{beowulf narrates his adventures.}

          beowulf answered, bairn of old ecgtheow:
          "'tis hidden by no means, higelac chieftain,
          from many of men, the meeting so famous,
       40 what mournful moments of me and of grendel
          were passed in the place where he pressing affliction
          on the victory-scyldings scathefully brought,
          anguish forever; that all i 
 
 ___________________________
 
avengèd,
          so that any under heaven of the kinsmen of grendel

{grendel's kindred have no cause to boast.}

       45 needeth not boast of that cry-in-the-morning,
          who longest liveth of the loth-going kindred,[3]
          encompassed by moorland. i came in my journey
          to the royal ring-hall, hrothgar to greet there:

{hrothgar received me very cordially.}

          soon did the famous scion of healfdene,
       50 when he understood fully the spirit that led me,
          assign me a seat with the son of his bosom.
[69]      the tro
 
 ___________________________
 
    30 'scapeth alive, the land knoweth thoroughly.[1]
          then the oaths of the earlmen on each side are broken,
          when rancors unresting are raging in ingeld
          and his wife-love waxeth less warm after sorrow.
          so the heathobards' favor not faithful i reckon,
       35 their part in the treaty not true to the danemen,
          their friendship not fast. i further shall tell thee

[71]

{having made these preliminary statements, i will now tell thee of
grendel, the monster.}

          more about grendel, that thou fully mayst hear,
          ornament-giver, what afterward came from
          the hand-rush of heroes. when heaven's bright jewel
       40 o'er earthfields had glided, the stranger came raging,
          the horrible night-fiend, us for to visit,
          where wholly unharmed the hall we were guarding.

{hondscio fell first}

          to hondscio happened a hopeless contention,
          death to the doomed one, dead he fe
 
 ___________________________
 
ll foremost,
       45 girded war-champion; to him grendel became then,
          to the vassal distinguished, a tooth-weaponed murderer,
          the well-beloved henchman's body all swallowed.
          not the earlier off empty of hand did
          the bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of evils,
       50 wish to escape from the gold-giver's palace,
          but sturdy of strength he strove to outdo me,
          hand-ready grappled. a glove was suspended
          spacious and wondrous, in art-fetters fastened,
          which was fashio
 
 ___________________________
 
 told us. now troubled with years

{the old king is sad over the loss of his youthful vigor.}

          the age-hoary warrior afterward began to
          mourn for the might that marked him in youth-days;
       80 his breast within boiled, when burdened with winters
          much he remembered. from morning till night then
          we joyed us therein as etiquette suffered,
          till the second night season came unto earth-folk.
          then early thereafter, the mother of grendel

{grendel's mother.}

       85 was ready for vengeance, wretched she journeyed;
          her son had death ravished, the wrath of the geatmen.
          the horrible woman avengèd her offspring,
          and with mighty mainstrength murdered a hero.

{æschere falls a prey to her vengeance.}

          there the spirit of æschere, agèd adviser,
       90 was ready to vanish; nor when morn had lightened
          were they anywise suffered to consume him with fire,
          
 
 ___________________________
 
yed on the chieftain;
          by the life of thee the land-prince then me[3]
          besought very sadly, in sea-currents' eddies
          to display my prowess, to peril my safety,
      100 might-deeds accomplish; much did he promise.

{i sought the creature in her den,}

          i found then the famous flood-current's cruel,
          horrible depth-warder. a while unto us two
[73]      hand was in common; the currents were seething
          with gore that was clotted, and grendel's fierce mother's

{and hewed her head off.}

      105 head i offhacked in the hall at the bottom
          with huge-reaching sword-edge, hardly i wrested
          my life from her clutches; not doomed was i then,

{jewels were freely bestowed upon me.}

          but the warden of earlmen afterward gave me
          jewels in quantity, kinsman of healfdene.

    [1] for 'lifigende' (2063), a mere conjecture, 'wígende' has been
    suggested. the line would then read: _escapet
 
 ___________________________
 
nce disdained to seek with a war-band,
       35 with army extensive, the air-going ranger;
          he felt no fear of the foeman's assaults and
          he counted for little the might of the dragon,
[80]      his power and prowess: for previously dared he

{beowulf's early triumphs referred to}

          a heap of hostility, hazarded dangers,
       40 war-thane, when hrothgar's palace he cleansèd,
          conquering combatant, clutched in the battle
          the kinsmen of grendel, of kindred detested.[2]

{higelac's death recalled.}

          'twas of hand-fights not least where higelac was slaughtered,
          when the king of the geatmen with clashings of battle,
       45 friend-lord of folks in frisian dominions,
          offspring of hrethrel perished through sword-drink,
          with battle-swords beaten; thence beowulf came then
          on self-help relying, swam through the waters;
          he bare on his arm, lone-going, thirty
       50 out
 
 ___________________________
 
     still am i willing the struggle to look for,
          fame-deeds perform, folk-warden prudent,
          if the hateful despoiler forth from his cavern
          seeketh me out!" each of the heroes,
       55 helm-bearers sturdy, he thereupon greeted

{his last salutations.}

          belovèd co-liegemen--his last salutation:
          "no brand would i bear, no blade for the dragon,
          wist i a way my word-boast to 'complish[1]
          else with the monster, as with grendel i did it;
       60 but fire in the battle hot i expect there,
          furious flame-burning: so i fixed on my body
          target and war-mail. the ward of the barrow[2]
          i'll not flee from a foot-length, the foeman uncanny.
          at the wall 'twill befall us as fate decreeth,

{let fate decide between us.}

       65 each one's creator. i am eager in spirit,
          with the wingèd war-hero to away with all boasting.
          bide on the barrow with burnies pro