 and retainers is, however, of short duration. grendel, the
monster, is seized with hateful jealousy. he cannot brook the sounds of
joyance that reach him down in his fen-dwelling near the hall. oft and
anon he goes to the joyous building, bent on direful mischief. thane after
thane is ruthlessly carried off and devoured, while no one is found strong
enough and bold enough to cope with the monster. for twelve years he
persecutes hrothgar and his vassals._

_over sea, a day's voyage off, beowulf, of the geats, nephew of higelac,
king of the geats, hears of grendel's doings and of hrothgar's misery. he
resolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king. with
fourteen chosen companions, he sets sail for dane-land. reaching that
country, he soon persuades hrothgar of his ability to help him. the hours
that elapse before night are spent in beer-drinking and conversation. when
hrothgar's bedtime comes he leaves the hall in charge of beowulf, telling
him that never before
 
 ___________________________
 
 has he given to another the absolute wardship of his
palace. all retire to rest, beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms._

_grendel comes, the great march-stepper, bearing god's anger. he seizes
and kills one of the sleeping warriors. then he advances towards beowulf.
a fierce and desperate hand-to-hand struggle ensues. no arms are used,
both combatants trusting to strength and hand-grip. beowulf tears
grendel's shoulder from its socket, and the monster retreats to his den,
howling and yelling with agony and fury. the wound is fatal._

_the next morning, at early dawn, warriors in numbers flock to the hall
heorot, to hear the news. joy is boundless. glee runs high. hrothgar and
his retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts._

_grendel's mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death. she
is furious and raging. while beowulf is sleeping in a room somewhat apar
 
 ___________________________
 
t
[x] from the quarters of the other warriors, she seizes one of hrothgar's
favorite counsellors, and carries him off and devours him. beowulf is
called. determined to leave heorot entirely purified, he arms himself, and
goes down to look for the female monster. after traveling through the
waters many hours, he meets her near the sea-bottom. she drags him to her
den. there he sees grendel lying dead. after a desperate and almost fatal
struggle with the woman, he slays her, and swims upward in triumph, taking
with him grendel's head._

_joy is renewed at heorot. congratulations crowd upon the victor. hrothgar
literally pour
 
 ___________________________
 
s treasures into the lap of beowulf; and it is agreed among
the vassals of the king that beowulf will be their next liegelord._

_beowulf leaves dane-land. hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure._

_when the hero arrives in his own land, higelac treats him as a
distinguished guest. he is the hero of the hour._

_beowulf subsequently becomes king of his own people, the geats. after he
has been ruling for fifty years, his own neighborhood is wofully harried
by a fire-spewing dragon. beowulf determines to kill him. in the ensuing
struggle both beowulf and the dragon are slain. the grief of the geats is
inexpressible. they determine, however, to leave nothing undone to honor
the memory of their lord. a great funeral-pyre is built, and his body is
burnt. then a memorial-barrow is made, visible from a great
 
 ___________________________
 
 distance, that
sailors afar may be constantly reminded of the prowess of the national
hero of geatland._

_the poem closes with a glowing tribute to his bravery, his gentleness,
his goodness of heart, and his generosity._

       *       *       *       *       *

it is the devout desire of this translator to hasten the day when the
story of beowulf shall be as familiar to english-speaking peoples as that
of the iliad. beowulf is our first great epic. it is an epitomized history
of the life of the teutonic races. it brings vividly before us our
forefathers of pre-alfredian eras, in their love of war, of sea, and of
adventure.

my special thanks are due to professors francis a. march and james a.
harrison, for advice, sympathy, and assistance.

                                                        j.l. hall.

[xi]




abbreviations used in the notes.


b. = bugge. c. = cosijn. gr. = grein. grdvt
 
 ___________________________
 
g. = grundtvig. h. = heyne. h.
and s. = harrison and sharp. h.-so. = heyne-socin. k.= kemble. kl. =
kluge. m.= müllenhoff. r. = rieger. s. = sievers. sw. = sweet. t.b. = ten
brink. th. = thorpe. w. = wülcker.

       *       *       *       *       *




bibliography of translations.


~arnold, thomas.~--beowulf. a heroic poem of the eighth century. london,
1876. with english translation. prose.

~botkine, l.~--beowulf. epopée anglo-saxonne. havre, 1877. first french
translation. passages occasionally omitted.

~conybeare, j.j.~--illustrations of anglo-saxon poetry. london, 1826. full
latin translation, and some passages translated into english blank-verse.

~ettmuller, l.~--beowulf, stabreimend übersetzt. zürich, 1840.

~garnett, j.m.~--beowulf: an anglo-saxon poem, and the fight at finnsburg.
boston, 1882. an accurate line-for-line translation, using alliteration
occasionally, and sometimes 
 
 ___________________________
 
assuming a metrical cadence.

~grein, c.w.m.~--dichtungen der angelsachsen, stabreimend übersetzt. 2
bde. göttingen, 1857-59.

~grion, giusto.~--beovulf, poema epico anglo-sassone del vii. secolo,
tradotto e illustrato. lucca, 1883. first italian translation.

~grundtvig, n.f.s.~--bjowulfs drape. copenhagen, 1820.

~heyne, m.~--a translation in iambic measures. paderborn, 1863.

~kemble, j.m.~--the anglo-saxon poems of beowulf, the traveller's song,
and the battle of finnsburg. london, 1833. the second edition contains a
prose translation of beowulf.

~leo, h.~--ueber beowulf. halle, 1839. translations of extracts.

[xii]

~lumsden, h.w.~--beowulf, translated into modern rhymes. london, 1881.
ballad measures. passages occasionally omitted.

~sandras, g.s.~--de carminibus cædmoni adjudicatis. paris, 1859. an
extract from beowulf, with latin translation.

~schaldmose, f.~--beowulf og scopes widsith, t
 
 ___________________________
 
o angelsaxiske digte.
copenhagen, 1847.

~simrock, k.~--beowulf. uebersetzt und erläutert. stuttgart und augsburg,
1859. alliterative measures.

~thorkelin, g.j.~--de danorum rebus gestis secul. iii. et iv. poema
danicum dialecto anglosaxonica. havniæ, 1815. latin translation.

~thorpe, b.~--the anglo-saxon poems of beowulf, the scôp or gleeman's
tale, and the fight at finnsburg. oxford, 1855. english translation in
short lines, generally containing two stresses.

~wackerbarth, a.d.~--beowulf, translated into english verse. london, 1849.

~wickberg, r.~--beowulf, en fornengelsk hjeltedikt, öfersatt. westervik.
first swedish translation.

~von wolzogen, h.~--beowulf, in alliterative measures. leipzig.

~zinsser, g.~--der kampf beowulfs mit grendel. jahresbericht of the
realschule at forbach, 1881.
 
 ___________________________
 


[xiii]




glossary of proper names.

       *       *       *       *       *

[the figures refer to the divisions of the poem in which the respective
names occur. the large figures refer to fitts, the small, to lines in the
fitts.]

       *       *       *       *       *

~ælfhere~.--a kinsman of wiglaf.--36_3.

~æschere~.--confidential friend of king hrothgar. elder brother of
yrmenlaf. killed by grendel.--21_3; 30_89.

~beanstan~.--father of breca.--9_26.

~beowulf~.--son of scyld, the founder of the dynasty of scyldings. father
of healfdene, and grandfather of hrothgar.--1_18; 2_1.

~beowulf~.--the hero of the poem. sprung from the stock of geats, son of
ecgtheow. brought up by his maternal grandfather hrethel, and figuring in
manhood as a devoted liegeman of his uncle higelac. a hero from his youth.
has the strength of thirty men. engages in a swimming-match with breca.
goes to the help of hrothgar against the monster grendel. vanquishes
gren
 
 ___________________________
 
del and his mother. afterwards becomes king of the geats. late in life
attempts to kill a fire-spewing dragon, and is slain. is buried with great
honors. his memorial mound.--6_26; 7_2; 7_9; 9_3; 9_8; 12_28; 12_43; 23_1,
etc.

~breca~.--beowulf's opponent in the famous swimming-match.--9_8; 9_19;
9_21; 9_22.

~brondings~.--a people ruled by breca.--9_23.

~brosinga mene~.--a famous collar once owned by the brosings.--19_7.

~cain~.--progenitor of grendel and other monsters.--2_56; 20_11.

~dæghrefn~.--a warrior of the hugs, killed by beowulf.--35_40.

~danes~.--subjects of scyld and his descendants, and hence often called
scyldings. other names for them are victory-scyldings, honor-scyldings,
armor-danes, bright-danes
 
 ___________________________
 
, east-danes, west-danes, north-danes,
south-danes, ingwins, hrethmen.--1_1; 2_1; 3_2; 5_14; 7_1, etc.

~ecglaf~.--father of unferth, who taunts beowulf.--9_1.

~ecgtheow~.--father of beowulf, the hero of the poem. a widely-known
wægmunding warrior. marries hrethel's daughter. after slaying heatholaf, a
wylfing, he flees his country.--7_3; 5_6; 8_4.

~ecgwela~.--a king of the danes before scyld.--25_60.

[xiv]

~elan~.--sister of hrothgar, and probably wife of ongentheow, king of the
swedes.--2_10.

~eagle cape~.--a promontory in geat-land, under which took place beowulf's
last encounter.--41_87.

~eadgils~.--son of ohthere and brother of eanmund.--34_2.

~eanmun
 
 ___________________________
 
hand of his only daughter.--41_18; 41_48.

~eormenric~.--a gothic king, from whom hama took away the famous brosinga
mene.--19_9.

~eomær~.--son of offa and thrytho, king and queen of the angles.--28_69.

~finn~.--king of the north-frisians and the jutes. marries hildeburg. at
his court takes place the horrible slaughter in which the danish general,
hnæf, fell. later on, finn himself is slain by danish warriors.--17_18;
17_30; 17_44; 18_4; 18_23.

~fin-land~.--the country to which beowulf was driven by the currents in
his swimming-match.--10_22.

~fitela~.--son and nephew of king sigemund, whose praises are sung in
xiv.--14_42; 14_53.

~folcwalda~.--father of finn.--17_38.

~franks~.--introduced occasionally in referring to the death of
higelac.--19_19; 40_21; 40_24.

~frisians~.--a part of them are ruled by finn. some of them were engaged
in the struggle in which higelac was slain.--17_20; 17_42; 17_52; 40_21.

~freaware~.--daughter of king hrothgar. married to
 
 ___________________________
 
 ingeld, a heathobard
prince.--29_60; 30_32.

~froda~.--king of the heathobards, and father of ingeld.--29_62.

~garmund~.--father of offa.--28_71.

~geats, geatmen~.--the race to which the hero of the poem belongs. also
called weder-geats, or weders, war-geats, sea-geats. they are ruled by
hrethel, hæthcyn, higelac, and beowulf.--4_7; 7_4; 10_45; 11_8; 27_14;
28_8.

~gepids~.--named in connection with the danes and swedes.--35_34.

~grendel~.--a monster of the race of cain. dwells in the fens and moors.
is furiously envious when he hears sounds of joy in hrothgar's palace.
causes the king untold agony for years. is finally conquered by beowulf,
and dies of his wound. his hand and arm are hung up in hrothgar's hall
heorot. his head is cut off by beowulf when he goes down to fight with
grendel's mother.--2_
 
 ___________________________
 
 brother hæthcyn.--34_43; 34_47.

~heremod~.--a danish king of a dynasty before the scylding line. was a
source of great sorrow to his people.--14_64; 25_59.

~hereric~.--referred to as uncle of heardred, but otherwise
unknown.--31_60.

~hetwars~.--another name for the franks.--33_51.

~healfdene~.--grandson of scyld and father of hrothgar. ruled the danes
long and well.--2_5; 4_1; 8_14.

~heardred~.--son of higelac and hygd, king and queen of the geats.
succeeds his father, with beowulf as regent. is slain by the sons of
ohthere.--31_56; 33_63; 33_75.

~heathobards~.--race of lombards, of which froda is king. after froda
falls in battle with the danes, ingeld, his son, marries hrothgar's
daughter, freaware, in order to heal the feud.--30_1; 30_6.

~heatholaf~.--a wylfing warrior slain by beowulf's father.--8_5.

~heathoremes~.--the people on whose shores breca is cast by the waves
during his contest with beowulf.--9_21.

~heorogar~.--elder brother of hrothgar, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd surnamed 'weoroda ræswa,'
prince of the troopers.--2_9; 8_12.

~hereward~.--son of the above.--31_17.

~heort~, ~heorot~.--the great mead-hall which king hrothgar builds. it is
invaded by grendel for twelve years. finally cleansed by beowulf, the
geat. it is called heort on account of the hart-antlers which decorate
it.--2_25; 3_32; 3_52.

~hildeburg~.--wife of finn, daughter of hoce, and related to
hnæf,--probably his sister.--17_21; 18_34.

~hnæf~.--leader of a branch of the danes called half-danes. killed in the
struggle at finn's castle.--17_19; 17_61.

~hondscio~.--one of beowulf's companions. killed by grendel just before
beowulf grappled with that monster.--30_43.

~hoce~.--father of hildeburg and probably 
 
 ___________________________
 
of hnæf.--17_26.

~hrethel~.--king of the geats, father of higelac, and grandfather of
beowulf.--7_4; 34_39.

~hrethla~.--once used for hrethel.--7_82.

~hrethmen~.--another name for the danes.--7_73.

~hrethric~.--son of hrothgar.--18_65; 27_19.

[xvi]

~hreosna-beorh~.--a promontory in geat-land, near which ohthere's sons
made plundering raids.--35_18.

~hrothgar~.--the danish king who built the hall heort, but was long unable
to enjoy it on account of grendel's persecutions. marries wealhtheow, a
helming lady. has two sons and a daughter. is a typical teutonic king,
 
 ___________________________
 

lavish of gifts. a devoted liegelord, as his lamentations over slain
liegemen prove. also very appreciative of kindness, as is shown by his
loving gratitude to beowulf.--2_9; 2_12; 4_1; 8_10; 15_1; etc., etc.

~hrothmund~.--son of hrothgar.--18_65.

~hrothulf~.--probably a son of halga, younger brother of hrothgar.
certainly on terms of close intimacy in hrothgar's palace.--16_26; 18_57.

~hrunting~.--unferth's sword, lent to beowulf.--22_71; 25_9.

~hugs~.--a race in alliance with the franks and frisians at the time of
higelac's fall.--35_41.

~hun~.--a frisian warrior, probably general of the hetwars. gives hengest
a beautiful sword.--18_19.

~hunferth~.--sometimes used for unferth.

~hygelac~, ~higelac~.--king of the geats, uncle and liegelord of beowulf,
the hero of the poem.--his second wife is the lovely hygd, daughter of
hæreth. the son of their union is heardred. is slain in a war with the
hugs, fra
 
 ___________________________
 
nks, and frisians combined. beowulf is regent, and afterwards
king of the geats.--4_6; 5_4; 28_34; 29_9; 29_21; 31_56.

~hygd~.--wife of higelac, and daughter of hæreth. there are some
indications that she married beowulf after she became a widow.--28_37.

~ingeld~.--son of the heathobard king, froda. marries hrothgar's daughter,
freaware, in order to reconcile the two peoples.--29_62; 30_32.

~ingwins~.--another name for the danes.--16_52; 20_69.

~jutes~.--name sometimes applied to finn's people.--17_22; 17_38; 18_17.

~lafing~.--name of a famous sword presented to hengest by hun.--18_19.

~merewing~.--a frankish king, probably engaged in the war in which higelac
was slain.--40_29.

~nægling~
 
 ___________________________
 
.--beowulf's sword.--36_76.

~offa~.--king of the angles, and son of garmund. marries the terrible
thrytho who is so strongly contrasted with hygd.--28_59; 28_66.

~ohthere~.--son of ongentheow, king of the swedes. he is father of eanmund
and eadgils.--40_35; 40_39.

~onela~.--brother of ohthere.--36_15; 40_39.

~ongentheow~.--king of sweden, of the scylfing dynasty. married, perhaps,
elan, daughter of healfdene.--35_26; 41_16.

~oslaf~.--a dane of hnæf's party.--18_24.

~ravenswood~.--
 
 ___________________________
 
 belonged. he dies, and his body is put on a vessel, and set
adrift. he goes from daneland just as he had come to it--in a bark.--1_4;
1_19; 1_27.

~scyldings~.--the descendants of scyld. they are also called
honor-scyldings, victory-scyldings, war-scyldings, etc. (see 'danes,'
above.)--2_1; 7_1; 8_1.

~scylfings~.--a swedish royal line to which wiglaf belonged.--36_2.

~sigemund~.--son of wæls, and uncle and father of fitela. his struggle
with a dragon is related in connection with beowulf's deeds of
prowess.--14_38; 14_47.

~swerting~.--grandfather of higelac, and father of hrethel.--19_11.

~swedes~.--people of sweden, ruled by the scylfings.--35_13.

~thrytho~.--wife of offa, king of the angles. known for her fierce and
unwomanly disposition. she is introduced as a contrast to the gentle hygd,
queen of higelac.--28_42; 28_56.

~unferth~.--son of ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of
hrothgar. taunts beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match.
 
 ___________________________
 

lends beowulf his sword when he goes to look for grendel's mother. in the
ms. sometimes written _hunferth_. 9_1; 18_41.

~wæls~.--father of sigemund.--14_60.

~wægmunding~.--a name occasionally applied to wiglaf and beowulf, and
perhaps derived from a common ancestor, wægmund.--36_6; 38_61.

~weders~.--another name for geats or wedergeats.

~wayland~.--a fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old
teutonic literature.--7_83.

~wendels~.--the people of wulfgar, hrothgar's messenger and retainer.
(perhaps = vandals.)--6_30.

~wealhtheow~.--wife of hrothgar. her queenly courtesy is well shown in the
poem.--10_55.

~weohstan~, or ~wihstan~.--a wægmunding, and father of wiglaf.--36_1.

~
 
 ___________________________
 
whale's ness~.--a prominent promontory, on which beowulf's mound was
built.--38_52; 42_76.

~wiglaf~.--son of wihstan, and related to beowulf. he remains faithful to
beowulf in the fatal struggle with the fire-drake. would rather die than
leave his lord in his dire emergency.--36_1; 36_3; 36_28.

~wonred~.--father of wulf and eofor.--41_20; 41_26.

~wulf~.--son of wonred. engaged in the battle between higelac's and
ongentheow's forces, and had a hand-to-hand fight with ongentheow himself.
ongentheow disables him, and is thereupon slain by eofor.--41_19; 41_29.

~wulfgar~.--lord of the wendels, and retainer of hrothgar.--6_18; 6_30.

~wylfings~.--a peo
 
 ___________________________
 


told.--counted.

uncanny.--ill-featured, grizzly.

unnethe.--difficult.

war-speed.--success in war.

web.--tapestry (that which is 'woven').

weeded.--clad (cf. widow's weeds).

ween.--suppose, imagine.

weird.--fate, providence.

whilom.--at times, formerly, often.

wielder.--ruler. often used of god; also in compounds, as 'wielder of
glory,' 'wielder of worship.'

wight.--creature.

wold.--plane, extended surface.

wot.--knows.

younker.--youth.

[1]




beowulf.




i.

the life and death of scyld.


{the famous race of spear-danes.}

          lo! the spear-danes' glory through splendid achievements
          the folk-kings' former fame we have heard of,
          how princes displayed then their prowess-in-battle.

{scyld, their mighty king, in honor of whom they are often called
scyldings. he is the great-grandfather of hrothgar, so prominent in the
poem.}

          oft scyld the scefing from scathers in numbers
        5 f
 
 ___________________________
 
rom many a people their mead-benches tore.
          since first he found him friendless and wretched,
          the earl had had terror: comfort he got for it,
          waxed 'neath the welkin, world-honor gained,
          till all his neighbors o'er sea were compelled to
       10 bow to his bidding and bring him their tribute:
          an excellent atheling! after was borne him

{a son is born to him, who receives the name of beowulf--a name afterwards
made so famous by the hero of the poem.}

          a son and heir, young in his dwelling,
          whom god-father sent to solace the people.
          he had marked the misery malice had caused them,
       15 [1]that reaved of their rulers they wretched had erstwhile[2]
          long been afflicted. the lord, in requital,
          wielder of glory, with world-honor blessed him.
          famed was beowulf, far spread the glory
          of scyld's great son
 
 ___________________________
 
 dangerous doctrine, pushed rather far by that eminent scholar.

    [4] the reading of the h.-so. text has been quite closely followed;
    but some eminent scholars read 'séle-rædenne' for 'sele-rædende.' if
    that be adopted, the passage will read: _men cannot tell us, indeed,
    the order of fate, etc._ 'sele-rædende' has two things to support it:
    (1) v. 1347; (2) it affords a parallel to 'men' in v. 50.




ii.

scyld's successors.--hrothgar's great mead-hall.


{beowulf succeeds his father scyld}

          in the boroughs then beowulf, bairn of the scyldings,
          belovèd land-prince, for long-lasting season
          was famed mid the folk (his father departed,
          the prince from his dwelling), till afterward sprang
        5 great-minded healfdene; the danes in his lifetime
          he graciously governed, grim-mooded, agèd.

{healfdene's birth.}

          four bairns of his body born in succession
          woke in the world,
 
 ___________________________
 
though grendel has frequented heorot as a demon,
    he could not become ruler of the danes, on account of his hostility to
    god. (2) hrothgar was much grieved that grendel had not appeared
    before his throne to receive presents. (3) he was not permitted to
    devastate the hall, on account of the creator; _i.e._ god wished to
    make his visit fatal to him.--ne ... wisse (169) w. renders: _nor had
    he any desire to do so_; 'his' being obj. gen. = danach.

[8]




iv.

beowulf goes to hrothgar's assistance.


{hrothgar sees no way of escape from the persecutions of grendel.}

          so healfdene's kinsman constantly mused on
          his long-lasting sorrow; the battle-thane clever
          was not anywise able evils to 'scape from:
          too crushing the sorrow that came to the people,
        5 loathsome and lasting the life-grinding torture,

{beowulf, the geat, hero of the poem, hears of hrothgar's sorrow, and
resolves to go to his assista
 
 ___________________________
 
ad in your corslets, come thus a-driving
       50 a high riding ship o'er the shoals of the waters,
          [3]and hither 'neath helmets have hied o'er the ocean?
[10]      i have been strand-guard, standing as warden,
          lest enemies ever anywise ravage
          danish dominions with army of war-ships.
       55 more boldly never have warriors ventured
          hither to come; of kinsmen's approval,
          word-leave of warriors, i ween that ye surely

{he is struck by beowulf's appearance.}

          nothing have known. never a greater one
          of earls o'er the earth have _i_ had a sight of
       60 than is one of your number, a hero in armor;
          no low-ranking fellow[4] adorned with his weapons,
          but launching them little, unless looks are deceiving,
          and striking appearance. ere ye pass on your journey
          as treacherous spies to the land of the scyldings
       65 and farther fare, i fully must know now
        
 
 ___________________________
 
  what race ye belong to. ye far-away dwellers,
          sea-faring sailors, my simple opinion
          hear ye and hearken: haste is most fitting
          plainly to tell me what place ye are come from."

    [1] 'from hám' (194) is much disputed. one rendering is: _beowulf,
    being away from home, heard of hrothgar's troubles, etc_. another,
    that adopted by s. and endorsed in the h.-so. notes, is: _b. heard
    from his neighborhood (neighbors),_ i.e. _in his home, etc_. a third
    is: _b., being at home, heard this as occurring away from home_. the
    h.-so. glossary and notes conflict.

    [2] 'eoletes' (224) is marked with a (?) by h.-so.; our rendering
    simply follows his conjecture.--other conjectures as to 'eolet' are:
    (1) _voyag
 
 ___________________________
 
over the seas? for some time on the wall i have been
    coast guard, etc_. s. endorses most of what b. says, but leaves out
    'on the wall' in the last sentence. if w.'s 'hringed stefnan' be
    accepted, change line 51 above to, _a ring-stemmed vessel hither
    o'ersea_.

    [4] 'seld-guma' (249) is variously rendered: (1) _housecarle_; (2)
    _home-stayer_; (3) _common man_. dr. h. wood suggests _a man-at-arms
    in another's house_.




v.

the geats reach heorot.


{beowulf courteously replies.}

          the chief of the strangers rendered him answer,
          war-troopers' leader, and word-treasure opened:

{we are geats.}

          "we are sprung from the lineage of the people of geatland,
          and higelac's hearth-friends. to heroes unnumbered

{my father ecgtheow was well-known in his day.}

        5 my father was known, a noble head-warrior
          ecgtheow titled; many a winter
          he lived with the people, ere he passed on
 
 ___________________________
 
sh

{i can help your king to free himself from this horrible creature.}

          i am able to render counsel to hrothgar,
          how he, wise and worthy, may worst the destroyer,
          if the anguish of sorrow should ever be lessened,[1]
          comfort come to him, and care-waves grow cooler,
       25 or ever hereafter he agony suffer
          and troublous distress, while towereth upward
          the handsomest of houses high on the summit."

{the coast-guard reminds beowulf that it is easier to say than to do.}

          bestriding his stallion, the strand-watchman answered,
          the doughty retainer: "the difference surely
       30 'twixt words and works, the warlike shield-bearer
          who judgeth wisely well shall determine.
          this band, i hear, beareth no malice

{i am satisfied of your good intentions, and shall lead you to the
palace.}

          to the prince of the scyldings. pass ye then onward
          with weapons and 
 
 ___________________________
 
armor. i shall lead you in person;
       35 to my war-trusty vassals command i shall issue
          to keep from all injury your excellent vessel,

{your boat shall be well cared for during your stay here.}

          your fresh-tarred craft, 'gainst every opposer
          close by the sea-shore, till the curved-neckèd bark shall
          waft back again the well-beloved hero
       40 o'er the way of the water to weder dominions.

{he again compliments beowulf.}

          to warrior so great 'twill be granted sure
          in the storm of strife to stand secure."
          onward they fared then (the vessel lay quiet,
          the broad-bosomed bark was bound by its cable,
[12]   45 firmly at anchor); the boar-signs glistened[2]
          bright on the visors vivid with gilding,
          blaze-hardened, brilliant; the boar acted warden.
          the heroes hastened, hurried the liegemen,

{the land is perhaps rolling.}

         
 
 ___________________________
 
inst hostile warriors as warden to stand."

    [1] 'edwendan' (280) b. takes to be the subs. 'edwenden' (cf. 1775);
    and 'bisigu' he takes as gen. sing., limiting 'edwenden': _if
    reparation for sorrows is ever to come_. this is supported by t.b.

    [2] combining the emendations of b. and t.b., we may read: _the
    boar-images glistened ... brilliant, protected the life of the
    war-mooded man_. they read 'ferh-wearde' (305) and 'gúðmódgum men'
    (306).




vi.

beowulf introduces himself at the palace.


          the highway glistened with many-hued pebble,
          a by-path led the liegemen together.
          [1]firm and hand-locked the war-burnie glistened,
          the ring-sword radiant rang 'mid the armor
        5 as the party was approaching the palace together

{they set their arms and armor against the wall.}

          in warlike equipments. 'gainst the wall of the building
          their wide-fashioned war-shields they weary di
 
 ___________________________
 
ear ye your battle-shields plated,
          gilded and gleaming, your gray-colored burnies,
          helmets with visors and heap of war-lances?--
          to hrothgar the king i am servant and liegeman.
          'mong folk from far-lands found i have never

{he expresses no little admiration for the strangers.}

       20 men so many of mien more courageous.
          i ween that from valor, nowise as outlaws,
          but from greatness of soul ye sought for king hrothgar."

{beowulf replies.}

          then the strength-famous earlman answer rendered,
          the proud-mooded wederchief replied to his question,

{we are higelac's table-companions, and bear an important commission to
your prince.}

       25 hardy 'neath helmet: "higelac's mates are we;
          beowulf hight i. to the bairn of healfdene,
          the famous folk-leader, i freely will tell
          to thy prince my commission, if pleasantly hearing
          he'll grant we may greet him
 
 ___________________________
 
ary, his earlmen attending him;
          the strength-famous went till he stood at the shoulder
       40 of the lord of the danemen, of courteous thanemen
          the custom he minded. wulfgar addressed then
          his friendly liegelord: "folk of the geatmen

[14]

{he thereupon urges his liegelord to receive the visitors courteously.}

          o'er the way of the waters are wafted hither,
          faring from far-lands: the foremost in rank
       45 the battle-champions beowulf title.
          they make this petition: with thee, o my chieftain,
          to be granted a conference; o gracious king hrothgar,
          friendly answer refuse not to give them!

{hrothgar, too, is struck with beowulf's appearance.}

          in war-trappings weeded worthy they seem
       50 of earls to be honored; sure the atheling is doughty
          who headed the heroes hitherward coming."

    [1] instead of the punctuation given by h.-so, s. proposed to insert a
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  comma after 'scír' (322), and to take 'hring-íren' as meaning
    'ring-mail' and as parallel with 'gúð-byrne.' the passage would then
    read: _the firm and hand-locked war-burnie shone, bright ring-mail,
    rang 'mid the armor, etc_.

    [2] gr. and others translate 'unhár' by 'bald'; _old and bald_.




vii.

hrothgar and beowulf.


{hrothgar remembers beowulf as a youth, and also remembers his father.}

          hrothgar answered, helm of the scyldings:
          "i remember this man as the merest of striplings.
          his father long dead now was ecgtheow titled,
          him hrethel the geatman granted at home his
        5 one only daughter; his battle-brave son
          is come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.
          seafaring sailors asserted it then,

{beowulf is reported to have the strength of thirty men.}

     
 
 ___________________________
 
o see king hrothgar. here let your battle-boards,
          wood-spears and war-shafts, await your conferring."
          the mighty one rose then, with many a liegeman,
          an excellent thane-group; some there did await them,
          and as bid of the brave one the battle-gear guarded.
       30 together they hied them, while the hero did guide them,
          'neath heorot's roof; the high-minded went then
          sturdy 'neath helmet till he stood in the building.
          beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten,
          his armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman):

{beowulf salutes hrothgar, and then proceeds to boast of his youthful
achievements.}

       35 "hail thou, hrothgar! i am higelac's kinsman
          and vassal forsooth; many a wonder
          i dared as a stripling. the doings of grendel,
          in far-off fatherland i fully did know of:
          sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth,
       40 excellent edifice, empty a
 
 ___________________________
 
ould make no
    essential change in the translation.

    [7] owing to the vagueness of 'feorme' (451), this passage is
    variously translated. in our translation, h.-so.'s glossary has been
    quite closely followed. this agrees substantially with b.'s
    translation (p. and b. xii. 87). r. translates: _thou needst not take
    care longer as to the consumption of my dead body._ 'líc' is also a
    crux here, as it may mean living body or dead body.




viii.

hrothgar and beowulf.--_continued_.


{hrothgar responds.}

          hrothgar discoursed, helm of the scyldings:
          "to defend our folk and to furnish assistance,[1]
          thou soughtest us hither, good friend beowulf.

{reminiscences of beowulf's father, ecgtheow.}

          the fiercest of feuds thy father engaged in,
        5 heatholaf killed he in hand-to-hand conflict
          'mid wilfingish warriors; then the wederish people
          for fear of a feud were forced to disown h
 
 ___________________________
 
ings, o'er the roll of the waters;
       10 i had lately begun then to govern the danemen,
          the hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth,
          rich in its jewels: dead was heregar,
          my kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken,
          healfdene his bairn. he was better than i am!
       15 that feud thereafter for a fee i compounded;
          o'er the weltering waters to the wilfings i sent
          ornaments old; oaths did he swear me.

{hrothgar recounts to beowulf the horrors of grendel's persecutions.}

          it pains me in spirit to any to tell it,
          what grief in heorot grendel hath caused me,
       20 what horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.
          waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop;
          weird hath offcast them to the clutches of grendel.
          god can easily hinder the scather
          from deeds so direful. oft drunken with beer

{my thanes have made many boasts, but have not executed them.}


 
 ___________________________
 
his mead-hall at morning with murder was reeking,
          the building was bloody at breaking of daylight,
       30 the bench-deals all flooded, dripping and bloodied,
          the folk-hall was gory: i had fewer retainers,
          dear-beloved warriors, whom death had laid hold of.

{sit down to the feast, and give us comfort.}

          sit at the feast now, thy intents unto heroes,[2]
          thy victor-fame show, as thy spirit doth urge thee!"

{a bench is made ready for beowulf and his party.}

       35 for the men of the geats then together assembled,
          in the beer-hall blithesome a bench was made ready;
          there warlike in spirit they went to be seated,
          proud and exultant. a liegeman did service,
[19]      who a beaker embellished bore with decorum,

{the gleeman sings}

       40 and gleaming-drink poured. the gleeman sang whilom

{the heroes all rejoice together.}

          hearty in heorot; there was heroes' rejoicing,
 
 ___________________________
 

          a numerous war-band of weders and danemen.

    [1] b. and s. reject the reading given in h.-so., and suggested by
    grtvg. b. suggests for 457-458:

               wáere-ryhtum þú, wine mín béowulf,
               and for ár-stafum úsic sóhtest.

    this means: _from the obligations of clientage, my friend beowulf, and
    for assistance thou hast sought us_.--this gives coherence to
    hrothgar's opening remarks in viii., and also introduces a new motive
    for beowulf's coming to hrothgar's aid.

    [2] _sit now at the feast, and disclose thy purposes to the victorious
    heroes, as thy spirit urges_.--kl. reaches the above translation by
    erasing the comma after 'meoto' and reading 'sige-hrèðsecgum.'--there
    are other and bolder emendations and suggestions. of these the boldest
 
 ___________________________
 

    is to regard 'meoto' as a verb (imperative), and read 'on sæl': _think
    upon gayety, etc_.--all the renderings are unsatisfactory, the one
    given in our translation involving a zeugma.




ix.

unferth taunts beowulf.


{unferth, a thane of hrothgar, is jealous of beowulf, and undertakes to
twit him.}

          unferth spoke up, ecglaf his son,
          who sat at the feet of the lord of the scyldings,
          opened the jousting (the journey[1] of beowulf,
          sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to unferth
        5 and greatest chagrin, too, for granted he never
          that any man else on earth should attain to,
          gain under heaven, more glory than he):

{did you take part in a swimming-match with breca?}

          "art thou that beowulf with breca did struggle,
          on the wide sea-currents at swimming contended,
       10 where to humor your pride the ocean ye tried,

{'twas mere folly that actuated you both 
 
 ___________________________
 
 pleasant, where a people he wielded,
[20]   25 had borough and jewels. the pledge that he made thee

{breca outdid you entirely.}

          the son of beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
          then i ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,

{much more will grendel outdo you, if you vie with him in prowess.}

          though ever triumphant in onset of battle,
          a grim grappling, if grendel thou darest
       30 for the space of a night near-by to wait for!"

{beowulf retaliates.}

          beowulf answered, offspring of ecgtheow:
          "my good friend unferth, sure freely and wildly,

{o friend unferth, you are fuddled with beer, and cannot talk coherently.}

          thou fuddled with beer of breca hast spoken,
          hast told of his journey! a fact i allege it,
       35 that greater strength in the waters i had then,
          ills in the ocean, than any man else had.
          we made agreement as the merest of striplings
      
 
 ___________________________
 

       55 lay on my bosom. to the bottom then dragged me,
          a hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,
          grim in his grapple: 'twas granted me, nathless,
          to pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,
          my obedient blade; battle offcarried
       60 the mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.

    [1] it has been plausibly suggested that 'síð' (in 501 and in 353)
    means 'arrival.' if so, translate the bracket: _(the arrival of
    beowulf, the brave seafarer, was a source of great chagrin to unferth,
    etc.)_.

[21]




x.

beowulf silences unferth.--glee is high.


          "so ill-meaning enemies often did cause me
          sorrow the sorest. i served them, in quittance,

{my dear sword always served me faithfully.}

          with my dear-lovèd sword, as in sooth it was fitting;
          they missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,
        5 ill-doers evil, of eating my body,
          of sur
 
 ___________________________
 
ravely to banquet, when the bright-light of morning

{on the second day, any warrior may go unmolested to the mead-banquet.}

          which the second day bringeth, the sun in its ether-robes,
          o'er children of men shines from the southward!"
       50 then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasure

{hrothgar's spirits are revived.}

          was blithesome and joyous, the bright-danish ruler
          expected assistance; the people's protector

{the old king trusts beowulf. the heroes are joyful.}

          heard from beowulf his bold resolution.
          there was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,
       55 the words were winsome. wealhtheow advanced then,

{queen wealhtheow plays the hostess.}

          consort of hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,
          gold-decked saluted the men in the building,
          and the freeborn woman the beaker presented

{she offers the cup to her husband first.}

          to the lord of the kingdom, 
 
 ___________________________
 
first of the east-danes,
       60 bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,
          lief to his liegemen; he lustily tasted
          of banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.
          the helmingish lady then graciously circled
          'mid all the liegemen lesser and greater:

[23]

{she gives presents to the heroes.}

       65 treasure-cups tendered, till time was afforded
          that the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queen

{then she offers the cup to beowulf, thanking god that aid has come.}

          might bear to beowulf the bumper o'errunning;
          she greeted the geat-prince, god she did thank,
          most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,
       70 that in any of earlmen she ever should look for
          solace in sorrow. he accepted the beaker,
          battle-bold warrior, at wealhtheow's giving,

{beowulf states to the queen the object of his visit.}

          then equipped for combat quoth he in m
 
 ___________________________
 
easures,
          beowulf spake, offspring of ecgtheow:
       75 "i purposed in spirit when i mounted the ocean,

{i determined to do or die.}

          when i boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,
          i would work to the fullest the will of your people
          or in foe's-clutches fastened fall in the battle.
          deeds i shall do of daring and prowess,
       80 or the last of my life-days live in this mead-hall."
          these words to the lady were welcome and pleasing,
         
 
 ___________________________
 
ilding
       85 courtly discussion, conquerors' shouting,
          heroes were happy, till healfdene's son would
          go to his slumber to seek for refreshing;
          for the horrid hell-monster in the hall-building knew he
          a fight was determined,[2] since the light of the sun they
       90 no longer could see, and lowering darkness
          o'er all had descended, and dark under heaven
          shadowy shapes came shying around them.

{hrothgar retires, leaving beowulf in charge of the hall.}

          the liegemen all rose then. one saluted the other,
          hrothgar beowulf, in rhythmical measures,
       95 wishing him well, and, the wassail-hall giving
          to his care and keeping, quoth he departing:
[24]      "not to any one else have i ever entrusted,
          but thee and thee only, the hall of the danemen,
          since high i could heave my hand and my buckler.
      100 take thou in charge now the noblest of houses;
       
 
 ___________________________
 
is earl-throng attending him,
          folk-lord of scyldings, forth from the building;
          the war-chieftain wished then wealhtheow to look for,
          the queen for a bedmate. to keep away grendel

{god has provided a watch for the hall.}

        5 the glory of kings had given a hall-watch,
          as men heard recounted: for the king of the danemen
          he did special service, gave the giant a watcher:
          and the prince of the geatmen implicitly trusted

{beowulf is self-confident}

          his warlike strength and the wielder's protection.

{he prepares for rest.}

       10 his armor of iron off him he did then,
          his helmet from his head, to his henchman committed
          his chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,
          and bade him bide with his battle-equipments.
          the good one then uttered words of defiance,
       15 beowulf geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:

{beowulf boasts of his ability to cop
 
 ___________________________
 

          th' implacable foeman was powerless to hurl them
          to the land of shadows, if the lord were unwilling;
          but serving as warder, in terror to foemen,
          he angrily bided the issue of battle.[2]

    [1] gr. understood 'gódra' as meaning 'advantages in battle.' this
    rendering h.-so. rejects. the latter takes the passage as meaning that
    grendel, though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war.

    [2] b. in his masterly articles on beowulf (p. and b. xii.) rejects
    the division usually made at this point, 'þá.' (711), usually rendered
    'then,' he translates 'when,' and connects its clause with the
    foregoing sentence. these changes he makes to reduce the number of
    'cóm's' as principal verbs. (cf. 703, 711, 721.) with all deference to
    this acute scholar, i must say that it seems to me that the poet is
    exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme event on
    which the whole subsequent
 
 ___________________________
 
 action turns. first, he (grendel) came _in
    the wan night_; second, he came _from the moor_; third, he came _to
    the hall_. time, place from which, place to which, are all given.

[26]




xii.

grendel and beowulf.


{grendel comes from the fens.}

          'neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then
          grendel going, god's anger bare he.
          the monster intended some one of earthmen
          in the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:

{he goes towards the joyous building.}

        5 he went under welkin where well he knew of
          the wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,
          gold-hall of earthmen. not the earliest occasion

{this wa
 
 ___________________________
 
es of him glimmered
          a lustre unlovely likest to fire.
          he beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers,
       20 a circle of kinsmen sleeping together,

{he exults over his supposed prey.}

          a throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant,
          he minded to sunder from each of the thanemen
          the life from his body, horrible demon,
          ere morning came, since fate had allowed him

{fate has decreed that he shall devour no more heroes. beowulf suffers
from suspense.}

       25 the prospect of plenty. providence willed not
          to permit him any more of men under heaven
          to eat in the night-time. higelac's kinsman
          great sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature
[27]      in unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.
       30 no thought had the monster of deferring the matter,

{grendel immediately seizes a sleeping warrior, and devours him.}

          but on earliest occasion he quickly 
 
 ___________________________
 
laid hold of
          a soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,
          bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,
          swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man's
       35 feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.
          nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior

{beowulf and grendel grapple.}

          snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,
          forward the foeman foined with his hand;
          caught he quickly the cunning deviser,
       40 on his elbow he rested. this early discovered
          the master of malice, that in middle-earth's regions,
          'neath the whole of the heavens, no hand-grapple greater

{the monster is amazed at beowulf's strength.}

          in any man else had he ever encountered:
          fear
 
 ___________________________
 
ful in spirit, faint-mooded waxed he,
       45 not off could betake him; death he was pondering,

{he is anxious to flee.}

          would fly to his covert, seek the devils' assembly:
          his calling no more was the same he had followed
          long in his lifetime. the liege-kinsman worthy

{beowulf recalls his boast of the evening, and determines to fulfil it.}

          of higelac minded his speech of the evening,
       50 stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.
          his fingers crackled; the giant was outward,
          the earl stepped farther. the famous one minded
          to flee away farther, if he found an occasion,
          and off and away, avoiding delay,
       55 to fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware of
          the strength of his grapple i
 
 ___________________________
 
h, on all of the men there
          who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,
          the song of defeat from the foeman of heaven,
          heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow
       80 hell-bound bewailing. he held him too firmly
          who was strongest of main-strength of men of that era.

    [1] b. and t.b. emend so as to make lines 9 and 10 read: _never in his
    life, earlier or later, had he, the hell-thane, found a braver
    hero_.--they argue that beowulf's companions had done nothing to merit
    such encomiums as the usual readings allow them.

    [2] for 'réðe rén-weardas' (771), t.b. suggests 'réðe, rénhearde.'
    translate: _they were both angry, raging and mighty_.




xiii.

grendel is vanquished.


{beowulf has no idea of letting grendel live.}

          for no cause whatever would the earlmen's defender
          leave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer,
          he deemed his existence utterly useless
 
 
 ___________________________
 
         to men under heaven. many a noble
        5 of beowulf brandished his battle-sword old,
          would guard the life of his lord and protector,
          the far-famous chieftain, if able to do so;
          while waging the warfare, this wist they but little,
          brave battle-thanes, while his body intending

{no weapon would harm grendel; he bore a charmed life.}

       10 to slit into slivers, and seeking his spirit:
          that the relentless foeman nor finest of weapons
          of all on the earth, nor any of war-bil
 
 ___________________________
 
no little
          had wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen
       20 (to god he was hostile), that his body would fail him,
          but higelac's hardy henchman and kinsman
          held him by the hand; hateful to other

{grendel is sorely wounded.}

          was each one if living. a body-wound suffered
          the direful demon, damage incurable

{his body bursts.}

       25 was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered,
          his body did burst. to beowulf was given
          glory in battle; grendel from thenceward
          must flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes,
          sick unto death, his dwelling must look for
       30 unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fully

{the monster flees away to hide in the moors.}

          the end of his earthly existence was nearing,
          his life-days' limits. at last for the danemen,
          when the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.
          the comer-f
 
 ___________________________
 
then of evil,
       35 wise and valiant, the war-hall of hrothgar,
          saved it from violence. he joyed in the night-work,
          in repute for prowess; the prince of the geatmen
          for the east-danish people his boast had accomplished,
          bettered their burdensome bale-sorrows fully,
       40 the craft-begot evil they erstwhile had suffered
          and were forced to endure from crushing oppression,
          their manifold misery. 'twas a manifest token,

{beowulf suspends grendel's hand and arm in heorot.}

          when the hero-in-battle the hand suspended,
          the arm and the shoulder (there was all of the claw
       45 of grendel together) 'neath great-stretching hall-roof.

    [1] it has been proposed to translate 'myrðe' by _with sorrow_; but
    there seems no authority for such a rendering. to the present
    translator, the phrase 'módes myrðe' seems a mere padding for
    _gladly_; i.e., _he who gladly harassed mankind_
 
 ___________________________
 
mingled
          and seething with gore, welling with sword-blood;[1]
          he death-doomed had hid him, when reaved of his joyance
       15 he laid down his life in the lair he had fled to,
          his heathenish spirit, where hell did receive him.
          thence the friends from of old backward turned them,
          and many a younker from merry adventure,
          striding their stallions, stout from the seaward,
       20 heroes on horses. there were heard very often

{beowulf is the hero of the hour.}

          beowulf's praises; many often asserted
          that neither south nor north, in the circuit of waters,

{he is regarded as a probable successor to hrothgar.}

          o'er outstretching earth-plain, none other was better
          'mid bearers of war-shields, more worthy to govern,
       25 'neath the arch of the ether. not any, however,
          'gainst the friend-lord muttered, mocking-words uttered

{but no word is uttered to derogate
 
 ___________________________
 
).
          oft the famed ones permitted their fallow-skinned horses
[31]      to run in rivalry, racing and chasing,
       30 where the fieldways appeared to them fair and inviting,
          known for their excellence; oft a thane of the folk-lord,[2]

{the gleeman sings the deeds of heroes.}

          [3]a man of celebrity, mindful of rhythms,
          who ancient traditions treasured in memory,
          new word-groups found properly bound:
       35 the bard after 'gan then beowulf's venture

{he sings in alliterative measures of beowulf's prowess.}

          wisely to tell of, and words that were clever
          to utter skilfully, earnestly speaking,
          everything told he that he heard as to sigmund's

{also of sigemund, who has slain a great fire-dragon.}

          mighty achievements, many things hidden,
       40 the strife of the wælsing, the wide-going ventures
          the children of men knew of but little,
          the feud and the f
 
 ___________________________
 

          he was farthest famed of fugitive pilgrims,
          mid wide-scattered world-folk, for works of great prowess,
          war-troopers' shelter: hence waxed he in honor.[4]

{heremod, an unfortunate danish king, is introduced by way of contrast.}

          afterward heremod's hero-strength failed him,
       65 his vigor and valor. 'mid venomous haters
          to the hands of foemen he was foully delivered,
          offdriven early. agony-billows

{unlike sigemund and beowulf, heremod was a burden to his people.}

          oppressed him too long, to his people he became then,
          to all the athelings, an ever-great burden;
       70 and the daring one's journey in days of yore
          many wise men were wont to deplore,
          such as hoped he would bring them help in their sorrow,
          that the son of their ruler should rise into power,
          holding the headship held by his fathers,
       75 should govern the people, the gold-hoar
 
 ___________________________
 
d and borough,
          the kingdom of heroes, the realm of the scyldings.

{beowulf is an honor to his race.}

          he to all men became then far more beloved,
          higelac's kinsman, to kindreds and races,
          to his friends much dearer; him malice assaulted.--

{the story is resumed.}

       80 oft running and racing on roadsters they measured
          the dun-colored highways. then the light of the morning
          was hurried and hastened. went henchmen in numbers
          to the beautiful building, bold ones in spirit,
          to look 
 
 ___________________________
 
.. hid him' would then
    read: _the bloody deep welled with sword-gore_. b. accepts 'déop' for
    'déog,' but reads 'déað-fæges': _the deep boiled with the sword-gore
    of the death-doomed one_.

    [2] another and quite different rendering of this passage is as
    follows: _oft a liegeman of the king, a fame-covered man mindful of
    songs, who very many ancient traditions remembered (he found other
    word-groups accurately bound together) began afterward to tell of
    beowulf's adventure, skilfully to narrate it, etc_.

    [3] might 'guma gilp-hladen' mean 'a man laden with boasts of the
    deeds of others'?

    [4] t.b. accepts b.'s 'hé þæs áron þáh' as given by h.-so., but puts a
    comma after 'þáh,' and takes 'siððan' as introducing a dependent
    clause: _he throve in honor since heremod's strength ... had
    decreased_.

[33]




xv.

hrothgar's gratitude.


          hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he,
  
 
 ___________________________
 
 and monsters. through the might of the wielder
       15 a doughty retainer hath a deed now accomplished
          which erstwhile we all with our excellent wisdom

{if his mother yet liveth, well may she thank god for this son.}

          failed to perform. may affirm very truly
          what woman soever in all of the nations
          gave birth to the child, if yet she surviveth,
       20 that the long-ruling lord was lavish to herward
          in the birth of the bairn. now, beowulf dear,

{hereafter, beowulf, thou shalt be my son.}

          most excellent hero, i'll love thee in spirit
          as bairn of my body; bear well henceforward
          the relationship new. no lack shall befall thee
       25 of earth-joys any i ever can give thee.
          full often for lesser service i've given
[34]      hero less hardy hoard-treasure precious,

{thou hast won immortal distinction.}

          to a weaker in war-strife. by works of distinction
         
 
 ___________________________
 
 thou hast gained for thyself now that thy glory shall flourish
       30 forever and ever. the all-ruler quite thee
          with good from his hand as he hitherto did thee!"

{beowulf replies: i was most happy to render thee this service.}

          beowulf answered, ecgtheow's offspring:
          "that labor of glory most gladly achieved we,
          the combat accomplished, unquailing we ventured
       35 the enemy's grapple; i would grant it much rather
          thou wert able to look at the creature in person,
          faint unto falling, the foe in his trappings!
          on murder-bed quickly i minded to bind him,
          with firm-holding fetters, that forced by my grapple
       40 low he should lie in life-and-death str
 
 ___________________________
 
 the hated destroyer
          liveth no longer, lashed for his evils,
       50 but sorrow hath seized him, in snare-meshes hath him
          close in its clutches, keepeth him writhing
          in baleful bonds: there banished for evil
          the man shall wait for the mighty tribunal,

{god will give him his deserts.}

          how the god of glory shall give him his earnings."
       55 then the soldier kept silent, son of old ecglaf,

{unferth has nothing more to say, for beowulf's actions speak louder than
words.}

          from boasting and bragging of battle-achievements,
          since the princes beheld there the hand that depended
          'neath the lofty hall-timbers by the might of the nobleman,
          each one before him, the enemy's fingers;
       60 each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,
          the heathen one's hand-spur, the hero-in-battle's
          claw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,

[35]

{no sword will harm the mo
 
 ___________________________
 
bracelet-bestower.
          the laden-with-glory stooped to the bench then
          (their kinsmen-companions in plenty were joyful,
          many a cupful quaffing complaisantly),
       25 doughty of spirit in the high-tow'ring palace,

{hrothgar's nephew, hrothulf, is present.}

          hrothgar and hrothulf. heorot then inside
          was filled with friendly ones; falsehood and treachery
          the folk-scyldings now nowise did practise.

{hrothgar lavishes gifts upon beowulf.}

          then the offspring of healfdene offered to beowulf
       30 a golden standard, as reward for the victory,
          a banner embossed, burnie and helmet;
          many men saw then a song-famous weapon
          borne 'fore the hero. beowulf drank of
          the cup in the building; that treasure-bestowing
       35 he needed not blush for in battle-men's presence.

{four handsomer gifts were never presented.}

          ne'er heard i that many men on the ale-ben
 
 ___________________________
 
ch
          in friendlier fashion to their fellows presented
          four bright jewels with gold-work embellished.
          'round the roof of the helmet a head-guarder outside
       40 braided with wires, with bosses was furnished,
          that swords-for-the-battle fight-hardened might fail
          boldly to harm him, when the hero proceeded

{hrothgar commands that eight finely caparisoned steeds be brought to
beowulf.}

          forth against foemen. the defender of earls then
          commanded that eight steeds with bridles
       45 gold-plated, gleaming, be guided to hallward,
          inside the building; on one of them stood then
          an art-broidered saddle embellished with jewels;
          'twas the sovereign's seat, when the son of king healfdene
          was pleased to take part in the play of the edges;
       50 the famous one's valor ne'er failed at the front when
       
 
 ___________________________
 
   slain ones were bowing. and to beowulf granted
          the prince of the ingwins, power over both,
          o'er war-steeds and weapons; bade him well to enjoy them.
          in so manly a manner the mighty-famed chieftain,
[37]   55 hoard-ward of heroes, with horses and jewels
          war-storms requited, that none e'er condemneth
          who willeth to tell truth with full justice.

    [1] kl. suggests 'hroden' for 'háten,' and renders: _then quickly was
    heorot adorned within, with hands bedecked_.--b. su
 
 ___________________________
 
 one difficult point is
    to find a subject for 'gesacan.' some say 'he'; others supply 'each,'
    _i.e., every soul-bearer ... must gain the inevitable place_. the
    genitives in this case are partitive.--if 'he' be subj., the genitives
    are dependent on 'gearwe' (= prepared).--the 'he' itself is disputed,
    some referring it to grendel; but b. takes it as involved in the
    parenthesis.




xvii.

banquet (_continued_).--the scop's song of finn and hnæf.


{each of beowulf's companions receives a costly gift.}

          and the atheling of earlmen to each of the heroes
          who the ways of the waters went with beowulf,
          a costly gift-token gave on the mead-bench,
          offered an heirloom, and ordered that that man

{the warrior killed by grendel is to be paid for in gold.}

        5 with gold should be paid for, whom grendel had erstwhile
          wickedly slaughtered, as he more of them had done
          had far-seeing god an
 
 ___________________________
 

          he'll care for and honor, lord of the scyldings,
          if earth-joys thou endest earlier than he doth;
       60 i reckon that recompense he'll render with kindness
          our offspring and issue, if that all he remember,
          what favors of yore, when he yet was an infant,
          we awarded to him for his worship and pleasure."
          then she turned by the bench where her sons were carousing,
       65 hrethric and hrothmund, and the heroes' offspring,

{beowulf is sitting by the two royal sons.}

          the war-youth together; there the good one was sitting
          'twixt the brothers twain, beowulf geatman.

    [1] for 1130 (1) r. and gr. suggest 'elne unflitme' as 1098 (1) reads.
    the latter verse is undisputed; and, for the former, 'elne' would be
    as possible as 'ealles,' and 'unflitme' is well supported. accepting
    'elne unflitme' for both, i would suggest '_very peaceably_' for both
    places: (1) _finn to hengest ver
 
 ___________________________
 
relatives,
    the second a sequel of the first. 'elne,' in the sense of very
    (swíðe), needs no argument; and 'unflitme' (from 'flítan') can, it
    seems to me, be more plausibly rendered 'peaceful,' 'peaceable,' than
    'contestable,' or 'conquerable.'

    [2] some scholars have proposed 'roden'; the line would then read:
    _then the building was reddened, etc._, instead of 'covered.' the 'h'
    may have been carried over from the three alliterating 'h's.'




xix.

beowulf receives further honor.


{more gifts are offered beowulf.}

          a beaker was borne him, and bidding to quaff it
          graciously given, and gold that was twisted
          pleasantly proffered, a pair of arm-jewels,
[42]      rings and corslet, of collars the greatest
        5 i've heard of 'neath heaven. of heroes not any
          more splendid from jewels have i heard 'neath the welkin,

{a famous necklace is referred to, in comparison with the gems presented
to b
 
 ___________________________
 
   mighty folk-leader, he fell 'neath his target;
          the[2] corpse of the king then came into charge of
          the race of the frankmen, the mail-shirt and collar:
       20 warmen less noble plundered the fallen,
          when the fight was finished; the folk of the geatmen
          the field of the dead held in possession.
          the choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.
          wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she:

{queen wealhtheow magnifies beowulf's achievements.}

       25 "this collar enjoy thou, beowulf worthy,
          young man, in safety, and use thou this armor,
          gems of the people, and prosper thou fully,
          show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemen
          mild with instruction! i'll mind thy requital.
       30 thou hast brought it to pass that far and near
          forever and ever earthmen shall honor thee,
          even so widely as ocean surroundeth
          the blustering bluffs. be, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e mother of grendel,
          devil-shaped woman, her woe ever minded,
       10 who was held to inhabit the horrible waters,

{[grendel's progenitor, cain, is again referred to.]}

          the cold-flowing currents, after cain had become a
          slayer-with-edges to his one only brother,
          the son of his sire; he set out then banished,
          marked as a murderer, man-joys avoiding,
       15 lived in the desert. thence demons unnumbered

{the poet again magnifies beowulf's valor.}

          fate-sent awoke; one of them grendel,
          sword-cursèd, hateful, who at heorot met with
          a man that was watching, waiting the struggle,
          where a horrid one held him with hand-grapple sturdy;
       20 nathless he minded the might of his body,
          the glorious gift god had allowed him,
          and folk-ruling father's favor relied on,
          his help and his comfort: so he conquered the foeman,
          the hell-spirit humble
 
 ___________________________
 
d of.
          she went then hastily, outward would get her
          her life for to save, when some one did spy her;

{she seizes a favorite liegemen of hrothgar's.}

       45 soon she had grappled one of the athelings
          fast and firmly, when fenward she hied her;
          that one to hrothgar was liefest of heroes
          in rank of retainer where waters encircle,
          a mighty shield-warrior, whom she murdered at slumber,
       50 a broadly-famed battle-knight. beowulf was absent,

{beowulf was asleep in another part of the palace.}

          but another apartment was erstwhile devoted
          to the glory-decked geatman when gold was distributed.
          there was hubbub in heorot. the hand that was famous
          she grasped in its gore;[4] grief was renewed then
[46]   55 in homes and houses: 'twas no happy arrangement
          in both of the quarters to barter and purchase
          with lives of their friends. then the well-agèd rul
 
 ___________________________
 
er,
          the gray-headed war-thane, was woful in spirit,
          when his long-trusted liegeman lifeless he knew of,

{beowulf is sent for.}

       60 his dearest one gone. quick from a room was
          beowulf brought, brave and triumphant.
          as day was dawning in the dusk of the morning,

{he comes at hrothgar's summons.}

          went then that earlman, champion noble,
          came with comrades, where the clever one bided
       65 whether god all gracious would grant him a respite
          after the woe he had suffered. the war-worthy hero
          with a troop of retainers trod then the pavement
          (the hall-building groaned), till he greeted the wise one,

{b
 
 ___________________________
 
g in her fill_.' this gives a parallel to 'æse wlanc'
    (1333).

    [2] the line 'and ... yielding,' b. renders: _and she has performed a
    deed of blood-vengeance whose effect is far-reaching_.

    [3] 'sé þe' (1345) is an instance of masc. rel. with fem. antecedent.
    so v. 1888, where 'sé þe' refers to 'yldo.'

    [4] for 'hrímge' in the h.-so. edition, gr. and others read 'hrínde'
    (=hrínende), and translate: _which rustling forests overhang_.




xxii.

beowulf seeks grendel's mother.


          beowulf answered, ecgtheow's son:

{beowulf exhorts the old king to arouse himself for action.}

          "grieve not, o wise one! for each it is better,
          his friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him;
          each of us must the end-day abide of
        5 his earthly existence; who is able accomplish
          glory ere death! to battle-thane noble
          lifeless lying, 'tis at last most fitting.
          arise, o king, q
 
 ___________________________
 
zed on it).
       40 the horn anon sang the battle-song ready.
          the troop were all seated; they saw 'long the water then

{the water is filled with serpents and sea-dragons.}

          many a serpent, mere-dragons wondrous
          trying the waters, nickers a-lying
          on the cliffs of the nesses, which at noonday full often
       45 go on the sea-deeps their sorrowful journey,
          wild-beasts and wormkind; away then they hastened

{one of them is killed by beowulf.}

          hot-mooded, hateful, they heard the great clamor,
          the war-trumpet winding. one did the geat-prince
[50]      sunder from earth-joys, with arrow from bowstring,
       50 from his sea-struggle tore him, that the trusty war-missile

{the dead beast is a poor swimmer}

          pierced to his vitals; he proved in the currents
          less doughty at swimming whom death had offcarried.
          soon in the waters the wonderful swimmer
          was straiten
 
 ___________________________
 
ed most sorely with sword-pointed boar-spears,
       55 pressed in the battle and pulled to the cliff-edge;
          the liegemen then looked on the loath-fashioned stranger.

{beowulf prepares for a struggle with the monster.}

          beowulf donned then his battle-equipments,
          cared little for life; inlaid and most ample,
          the hand-woven corslet which could cover his body,
       60 must the wave-deeps explore, that war might be powerless
          to harm the great hero, and the hating one's grasp might
          not peril his safety; his head was protected
          by the light-flashing helmet that should mix with the bottoms,
          trying the eddies, treasure-emblazoned,
       65 encircled with
 
 ___________________________
 
words.}

          ecglaf's kinsman minded not soothly,
       80 exulting in strength, what erst he had spoken
          drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent to
          a sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture
          'neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,
[51]      to fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,
       85 repute for his strength. not so with the other
          when he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.




xxiii.

beowulf's fight with grendel's mother.


{beowulf makes a parting speech to hrothgar.}

          beowulf spake, ecgtheow's son:
          "recall now, oh, famous kinsman of healfdene,
          prince very prudent, now to part i am ready,
          gold-friend of earlmen, what erst we agreed on,

{if i fail, act as a kind liegelord to my thanes,}

        5 should i lay down my life in lending thee assistance,
          when my earth-joys were over, thou wouldst evermore serve me
    
 
 ___________________________
 
    may perceive from the gold, the hrethling may see it

{i should like my king to know how generous a lord i found thee to be.}

          when he looks on the jewels, that a gem-giver found i
          good over-measure, enjoyed him while able.
       15 and the ancient heirloom unferth permit thou,
          the famed one to have, the heavy-sword splendid[1]
          the hard-edgèd weapon; with hrunting to aid me,
          i shall gain me glory, or grim-death shall take me."

{beowulf is eager for the fray.}

          the atheling of geatmen uttered these words and
       20 heroic did hasten, not any rejoinder
          was willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowed

{he is a whole day reaching the bottom of the sea.}

          the doughty-in-battle. then a day's-length elapsed ere
          he was able to see the sea at its bottom.
          early she found then who fifty of winters
       25 the course of the currents kept in her fury,
          gris
 
 ___________________________
 
 him.}

          flood-beasts no few with fierce-biting tusks did
          break through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.
          the earl then discovered he was down in some cavern
       40 where no water whatever anywise harmed him,
          and the clutch of the current could come not anear him,
          since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleaming
          fire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.
          the good one saw then the sea-bottom's monster,

{beowulf attacks the mother of grendel.}

       45 the mighty mere-woman; he made a great onset
          with weapon-of-battle, his hand not desisted
          from striking, that war-blade struck on her head then
          a battle-song greedy. the stranger perceived then

{the sword will not bite.}

          the sword would not bite, her life would not injure,
       50 but the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened:
          erst had it often onsets encountered,
          
 
 ___________________________
 
n trusts to his hand-grip.}

          he hoped in his strength, his hand-grapple sturdy.
       60 so any must act whenever he thinketh
          to gain him in battle glory unending,
          and is reckless of living. the lord of the war-geats
[53]      (he shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder[2]
          the mother of grendel; then mighty in struggle
       65 swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled,
          that she fell to the floor. with furious grapple

{beowulf falls.}

          she gave him requital[3] early thereafter,
          and stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriors
          faint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces,

{the monster sits on him with drawn sword.}

       70 foot-going champion. then she sat on the hall-guest
          and wielded her war-knife wide-bladed, flashing,
          for her son would take vengeance, her one only bairn.

{his armor saves his life.}

          his breast-armor wove
 
 ___________________________
 
splendid_.'--for 'heard-ecg' in next half-verse, see note
    to 20_39 above.

    [2] sw., r., and t.b. suggest 'feaxe' for 'eaxle' (1538) and render:
    _seized by the hair_.

    [3] if 'hand-léan' be accepted (as the ms. has it), the line will
    read: _she hand-reward gave him early thereafter_.

    [4] sw. and s. change h.-so.'s semicolon (v. 1557) to a comma, and
    translate: _the ruler of heaven arranged it in justice easily, after
    he arose again_.




xxiv.

beowulf is double-conqueror.


{beowulf grasps a giant-sword,}

          then he saw mid the war-gems a weapon of victory,
          an ancient giant-sword, of edges a-doughty,
          glory of warriors: of weapons 'twas choicest,
          only 'twas larger than any man else was
[54]    5 able to bear to the battle-encounter,
          the good and splendid work of the giants.
          he grasped then the sword-hilt, knight of the scyldings,
          bold and battle-grim, brandishe
 
 ___________________________
 
  strong by the handle. the edge was not useless
       20 to the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished to
          give grendel requital for the many assaults he
          had worked on the west-danes not once, but often,
          when he slew in slumber the subjects of hrothgar,
          swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers
       25 of the folk of the danemen, and fully as many
          carried away, a horrible prey.
          he gave him requital, grim-raging champion,

{beowulf sees the body of grendel, and cuts off his head.}

          when he saw on his rest-place weary of conflict
          grendel lying, of life-joys bereavèd,
       30 as the battle at heorot erstwhile had scathed him;
          his body far bounded, a blow when he suffered,
          death having seized him, sword-smiting heavy,
          and he cut off his head then. early this noticed
          the clever carles who as comrades of hrothgar

{the waters are gory.}

       35 ga
 
 ___________________________
 
zed on the sea-deeps, that the surging wave-currents
          were mightily mingled, the mere-flood was gory:
          of the good one the gray-haired together held converse,

{beowulf is given up for dead.}

          the hoary of head, that they hoped not to see again
          the atheling ever, that exulting in victory
       40 he'd return there to visit the distinguished folk-ruler:
[55]      then many concluded the mere-wolf had killed him.[1]
          the ninth hour came then. from the ness-edge departed
          the bold-mooded scyldings; the gold-friend of heroes
          homeward betook him. the strangers sat down then
       45 soul-sick, sorrowful,
 
 ___________________________
 
ð' (1599) and 'hafað þæs geworden' (2027).--in a
    paper published some years ago in one of the johns hopkins university
    circulars, i tried to throw upon these two long-doubtful passages some
    light derived from a study of like passages in alfred's prose.--the
    impersonal verb 'geweorðan,' with an accus. of the person, and a
    þæt-clause is used several times with the meaning 'agree.' see orosius
    (sweet's ed.) 178_7; 204_34; 208_28; 210_15; 280_20. in the two
    beowulf passages, the þæt-clause is anticipated by 'þæs,' which is
    clearly a gen. of the thing agreed on.

    the first passage (v. 1599 (b)-1600) i translate literally: _then many
    agreed upon this (namely), that the sea-wolf had killed him_.

    the second passage (v. 2025 (b)-2027): _she is promised ...; to this
    the friend of the scyldings has agreed, etc_. by emending 'is' instead
    of 'wæs' (2025), the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.

    in v. 1997 ff
 
 ___________________________
 
. this same idiom occurs, and was noticed in b.'s great
    article on beowulf, which appeared about the time i published my
    reading of 1599 and 2027. translate 1997 then: _wouldst let the
    south-danes themselves decide about their struggle with grendel_. here
    'súð-dene' is accus. of person, and 'gúðe' is gen. of thing agreed on.

    with such collateral support as that afforded by b. (p. and b. xii.
    97), i have no hesitation in departing from h.-so., my usual guide.

    the idiom above treated runs through a.-s., old saxon, and other
    
 
 ___________________________
 

    [2] 'bróden-mæl' is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeened
    sword. translate: _the damaskeened sword burned up_. cf. 25_16 and
    note.

    [3] 'cyning-balde' (1635) is the much-disputed reading of k. and th.
    to render this, "_nobly bold_," "_excellently bold_," have been
    suggested. b. would read 'cyning-holde' (cf. 290), and render: _men
    well-disposed towards the king carried the head, etc._ 'cynebealde,'
    says t.b., endorsing gr.




xxv.

beowulf brings his trophies.--hrothgar's gratitude.


{beowulf relates his last exploit.}

          beowulf spake, offspring of ecgtheow:
          "lo! we blithely have brought thee, bairn of healfdene,
          prince of the scyldings, these presents from ocean
          which thine eye looketh on, for an emblem of glory.
        5 i came off alive from this, narrowly 'scaping:
          in war 'neath the water the work with great pains i
          performed, and the fight had been fi
 
 ___________________________
 
l to god.}

          the lord everlasting, through lash of the billows
          the father gave them final requital.
          so in letters of rune on the clasp of the handle
          gleaming and golden, 'twas graven exactly,
       45 set forth and said, whom that sword had been made for,
          finest of irons, who first it was wrought for,
          wreathed at its handle and gleaming with serpents.
          the wise one then said (silent they all were)

{hrothgar praises beowulf.}

          son of old healfdene: "he may say unrefuted
       50 who performs 'mid the folk-men fairness and truth
          (the hoary old ruler remembers the past),
          that better by birth is this bairn of the nobles!
          thy fame is extended through far-away countries,
          good friend beowulf, o'er all of the races,
       55 thou holdest all firmly, hero-like strength with
          prudence of spirit. i'll prove myself grateful
          as before we agree
 
 ___________________________
 
d on; thou granted for long shalt
          become a great comfort to kinsmen and comrades,

{heremod's career is again contrasted with beowulf's.}

          a help unto heroes. heremod became not
       60 such to the scyldings, successors of ecgwela;
          he grew not to please them, but grievous destruction,
[59]      and diresome death-woes to danemen attracted;
          he slew in anger his table-companions,
          trustworthy counsellors, till he turned off lonely
       65 from world-joys away, wide-famous ruler:
          though high-ruling heaven in hero-strength raised him,
          in might exalted him
 
 ___________________________
 
h too small, savage he hoardeth,
          nor boastfully giveth gold-plated rings,[1]
          the fate of the future flouts and forgetteth
          since god had erst given him greatness no little,
          wielder of glory. his end-day anear,
       10 it afterward happens that the bodily-dwelling
          fleetingly fadeth, falls into ruins;
          another lays hold who doleth the ornaments,
          the nobleman's jewels, nothing lamenting,
          heedeth no terror. oh, beowulf dear,
       15 best of the heroes, from bale-strife defend thee,
          and choose thee the better, counsels eternal;

{be not over proud: life is fleeting, and its strength soon wasteth away.}

          beware of arrogance, world-famous champion!
          but a little-while lasts thy life-vigor's fulness;
          'twill after hap early, that illness or sword-edge
       20 shall part thee from strength, or the grasp of the fire,
          or the wave of the current, or clu
 
 ___________________________
 
et with many when morning appeareth."
       40 the geatman was gladsome, ganged he immediately
          to go to the bench, as the clever one bade him.
          then again as before were the famous-for-prowess,
          hall-inhabiters, handsomely banqueted,
          feasted anew. the night-veil fell then
       45 dark o'er the warriors. the courtiers rose then;
          the gray-haired was anxious to go to his slumbers,
          the hoary old scylding. hankered the geatman,

{beowulf is fagged, and seeks rest.}

          the champion doughty, greatly, to rest him:
          an earlman early outward did lead him,
       50 fagged from his faring, from far-country springing,
          who for etiquette's sake all of a liegeman's
          needs regarded, such as seamen at that time
          were bounden to feel. the big-hearted rested;
          the building uptowered, spacious and gilded,
       55 the guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad raven
        
 
 ___________________________
 
  blithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.
          then the bright-shining sun o'er the bottoms came going;[2]
          the warriors hastened, the heads of the peoples
          were ready to go again to their peoples,

{the geats prepare to leave dane-land.}

       60 the high-mooded farer would faraway thenceward
          look for his vessel. the valiant one bade then,[3]

[62]

{unferth asks beowulf to accept his sword as a gift. beowulf thanks him.}

          offspring of ecglaf, off to bear hrunting,
          to take his weapon, his well-beloved iron;
          he him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted
       65 the war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words then
          the blade of the brand: 'twas a brave-mooded hero.
          when the warriors were ready, arrayed in their trappings,
          the atheling dear to the danemen advanced then
          on to the dais, where the other was sittin
 
 ___________________________
 
g,
       70 grim-mooded hero, greeted king hrothgar.

    [1] k. says '_proudly giveth_.'--gr. says, '_and gives no gold-plated
    rings, in order to incite the recipient to boastfulness_.'--b.
    suggests 'gyld' for 'gylp,' and renders: _and gives no beaten rings
    for reward_.

    [2] if s.'s emendation be accepted, v. 57 will read: _then came the
    light, going bright after darkness: the warriors, etc_.

    [3] as the passage stands in h.-so., unferth presents beowulf with the
    sword hrunting, and b. thanks him for the gift. if, however, the
    suggestions of grdtvg. and m. be accepted, the passage will read:
    _then the brave one (_i.e._ beowulf) commanded that hrunting be borne
    to the son of ecglaf (unferth), bade him take his sword, his dear
    weapon; he (b.) thanked him (u.) for the loan, etc_.




xxvii.

sorrow at parting.


{beowulf's farewell.}

          beowulf spake, ecgtheow's offspring:
          "we men of the w
 
 ___________________________
 
rces and bear thee
          my lance to relieve thee, if liegemen shall fail thee,
          and help of my hand-strength; if hrethric be treating,
[63]   20 bairn of the king, at the court of the geatmen,
          he thereat may find him friends in abundance:
          faraway countries he were better to seek for
          who trusts in himself." hrothgar discoursed then,
          making rejoinder: "these words thou hast uttered
       25 all-knowing god hath given thy spirit!

{o beowulf, thou art wise beyond thy years.}

          ne'er heard i an earlman thus early in life
          more clever in speaking: thou'rt cautious of spirit,
          mighty of muscle, in mouth-answers prudent.
          i count on the hope that, happen it ever
       30 that missile shall rob thee of hrethel's descendant,
          edge-horrid battle, and illness or weapon
          deprive thee of prince, of people's protector,

{should higelac die, the geats could find no better succ
 
 ___________________________
 
essor than thou
wouldst make.}

          and life thou yet holdest, the sea-geats will never
          find a more fitting folk-lord to choose them,
       35 gem-ward of heroes, than _thou_ mightest prove thee,
          if the kingdom of kinsmen thou carest to govern.
          thy mood-spirit likes me the longer the better,
          beowulf dear: thou hast brought it to pass that
          to both these peoples peace shall be common,

{thou hast healed the ancient breach between our races.}

       40 to geat-folk and danemen, the strife be suspended,
          the secret assailings they suffered in yore-days;
          and also that jewels be shared while i govern
          the wide-stretching kingdom, and that many shall visit
          others o'er the ocean with excellent gift-gems:
       45 the ring-adorned bark 
 
 ___________________________
 
shall bring o'er the currents
          presents and love-gifts. this people i know
          tow'rd foeman and friend firmly established,[1]
          after ancient etiquette everywise blameless."
          then the warden of earlmen gave him still farther,

{parting gifts}

       50 kinsman of healfdene, a dozen of jewels,
          bade him safely seek with the presents
          his well-beloved people, early returning.

[64]

{hrothgar kisses beowulf, and weeps.}

          then the noble-born king kissed the distinguished,
          dear-lovèd liegeman, the dane-prince saluted him,
       55 and claspèd his neck; tears from him fell,
          from the gray-headed man: he two things expected,
          agèd and reverend, but rather the second,
          [2]that bold in council they'd meet thereafter.
          the man was so dear that he failed to suppress the
       60 emotions that moved him, but in mood-fetters fastened

 
 ___________________________
 

{the old king is deeply grieved to part with his benefactor.}

          the long-famous hero longeth in secret
          deep in his spirit for the dear-beloved man
          though not a blood-kinsman. beowulf thenceward,
          gold-splendid warrior, walked o'er the meadows
       65 exulting in treasure: the sea-going vessel
          riding at anchor awaited its owner.
          as they pressed on their way then, the present of hrothgar

{giving liberally is the true proof of kingship.}

          was frequently referred to: a folk-king indeed that
          everyway blameless, till age did debar him
       70 the joys of his might, which hath many oft injured.

    [1] for 'gewo
 
 ___________________________
 
rhte,' the crux of this passage, b. proposes 'geþóhte,'
    rendering: _i know this people with firm thought every way blameless
    towards foe and friends_.

    [2] s. and b. emend so as to negative the verb 'meet.' "why should
    hrothgar weep if he expects to meet beowulf again?" both these
    scholars ask. but the weeping is mentioned before the 'expectations':
    the tears may have been due to many emotions, especially gratitude,
    struggling for expression.




xxviii.

the homeward journey.--the two queens.


          then the band of very valiant retainers
          came to the current; they were clad all in armor,

{the coast-guard again.}

          in link-woven burnies. the land-warder noticed
          the return of the earlm
 
 ___________________________
 
en, as he erstwhile had seen them;
        5 nowise with insult he greeted the strangers
          from the naze of the cliff, but rode on to meet them;
          said the bright-armored visitors[1] vesselward traveled
[65]      welcome to weders. the wide-bosomed craft then
          lay on the sand, laden with armor,
       10 with horses and jewels, the ring-stemmèd sailer:
          the mast uptowered o'er the treasure of hrothgar.

{beowulf gives the guard a handsome sword.}

          to the boat-ward a gold-bound brand he presented,
          that he was afterwards honored on the ale-bench more highly
          as the heirloom's owner. [2]set he out on his vessel,
       15 to drive on the deep, dane-country left he.
          along by the mast then a sea-garment fluttered,
          a rope-fastened sail. the sea-boat resounded,
          the wind o'er the waters the wave-floater nowise
          kept from its journe
 
 ___________________________
 
ð' (v. 1924) several eminent critics suggest 'wunade'
    (=remained). this makes the passage much clearer.

    [5] why should such a woman be described as an 'excellent' queen? c.
    suggests 'frécnu' = dangerous, bold.

    [6] for 'an dæges' various readings have been offered. if 'and-éges'
    be accepted, the sentence will read: _no hero ... dared look upon her,
    eye to eye_. if 'án-dæges' be adopted, translate: _dared look upon her
    the whole day_.




xxix.

beowulf and higelac.


          then the brave one departed, his band along with him,

{beowulf and his party seek higelac.}

          seeking the sea-shore, the sea-marches treading,
          the wide-stretching shores. the world-candle glimmered,
          the sun from the southward; they proceeded then onward,
        5 early arriving where they heard that the troop-lord,
          ongentheow's slayer, excellent, youthful
          folk-prince and warrior was distributing jewels,

 
 ___________________________
 
          close in his castle. the coming of beowulf
          was announced in a message quickly to higelac,
       10 that the folk-troop's defender forth to the palace
          the linden-companion alive was advancing,
          secure from the combat courtward a-going.
          the building was early inward made ready
          for the foot-going guests as the good one had ordered.

{beowulf sits by his liegelord.}

       15 he sat by the man then who had lived through the struggle,
          kinsman by kinsman, when the king of the people
          had in lordly language saluted the dear one,

{queen hygd receives the heroes.}

          in words that were formal. the daughter of hæreth
          coursed through the building, carrying mead-cups:[1]
[68]   20 she loved the retainers, tendered the beakers
          to the high-minded geatmen. higelac 'gan then

{hi
 
 ___________________________
 
gelac is greatly interested in beowulf's adventures.}

          pleasantly plying his companion with questions
          in the high-towering palace. a curious interest
          tormented his spirit, what meaning to see in
       25 the sea-geats' adventures: "beowulf worthy,

{give an account of thy adventures, beowulf dear.}

          how throve your journeying, when thou thoughtest suddenly
          far o'er the salt-streams to seek an encounter,
          a battle at heorot? hast bettered for hrothgar,
          the famous folk-leader, his far-published sorrows
       30 any at all? in agony-billows

{my suspense has been great.}

          i mused upon torture, distrusted the journey
          of the belovèd liegeman; i long time did pray thee
          by no means to seek out the murder
 
 ___________________________
 
ous spirit,
          to suffer the south-danes themselves to decide on[2]
       35 grappling with grendel. to god i am thankful
          to be suffered to see thee safe from thy journey."

{beowulf narrates his adventures.}

          beowulf answered, bairn of old ecgtheow:
          "'tis hidden by no means, higelac chieftain,
          from many of men, the meeting so famous,
       40 what mournful moments of me and of grendel
          were passed in the place where he pressing affliction
          on the victory-scyldings scathefully brought,
          anguish forever; that all i avengèd,
          so that any under heaven of the kinsmen of grendel

{grendel's kindred have no cause to boast.}

       45 needeth 
 
 ___________________________
 
ted it '_shall kill_.' (5) 'hwær,' very recently, has been
    attacked, 'wære' being suggested. (6) as a corollary to the above, the
    same critic proposes to drop 'oft' out of the text.--t.b. suggests: oft
    seldan wære after léodhryre: lýtle hwíle bongár búgeð, þéah séo brýd
    duge = _often has a treaty been (thus) struck, after a prince had
    fallen: (but only) a short time is the spear (then) wont to rest,
    however excellent the bride may be_.




xxx.

beowulf narrates his adventures to higelac.


          "it well may discomfit the prince of the heathobards
          and each of the thanemen of earls that attend him,
[70]      when he goes to the building escorting the woman,
          that a noble-born daneman the knights should be feasting:
        5 there gleam on his person the leavings of elders
          hard and ring-bright, heathobards' treasure,
          while they wielded their arms, till they misled to the battle
          
 
 ___________________________
 
o give then
[74]      the mail to his son, though dearly he loved him,
          hereward the hardy. hold all in joyance!"
          i heard that there followed hard on the jewels
          two braces of stallions of striking resemblance,
       20 dappled and yellow; he granted him usance
          of horses and treasures. so a kinsman should bear him,
          no web of treachery weave for another,
          nor by cunning craftiness cause the destruction

{higelac loves his nephew beowulf.}

          of trusty companion. most precious to higelac,
       25 the bold one in battle, was the bairn of his sister,
          and each unto other mindful of favors.

{beowulf gives hygd the necklace that wealhtheow had given him.}

          i am told that to hygd he proffered the necklace,
          wonder-gem rare that wealhtheow gave him,
          the troop-leader's daughter, a trio of horses
       30 slender and saddle-bright; soon did the jewel
          embellish h
 
 ___________________________
 
er bosom, when the beer-feast was over.
          so ecgtheow's bairn brave did prove him,

{beowulf is famous.}

          war-famous man, by deeds that were valiant,
          he lived in honor, belovèd companions
       35 slew not carousing; his mood was not cruel,
          but by hand-strength hugest of heroes then living
          the brave one retained the bountiful gift that
          the lord had allowed him. long was he wretched,
          so that sons of the geatmen accounted him worthless,
       40 and the lord of the liegemen loth was to do him
          mickle of 
 
 ___________________________
 
h,

{he is requited for the slights suffered in earlier days.}

          an indolent atheling: to the honor-blest man there
          came requital for the cuts he had suffered.
       45 the folk-troop's defender bade fetch to the building
          the heirloom of hrethel, embellished with gold,

{higelac overwhelms the conqueror with gifts.}

          so the brave one enjoined it; there was jewel no richer
          in the form of a weapon 'mong geats of that era;
          in beowulf's keeping he placed it and gave him
       50 seven of thousands, manor and lordship.
          common to both was land 'mong the people,
[75]      estate and inherited rights and possessions,
          to the second one specially spacious dominions,
          to the one who was better. it afterward happened
       55 in days that followed, befell the battle-thanes,

{after heardred's death, beowulf becomes king.}

          after higelac's death, and when heardred was murdered
  
 
 ___________________________
 
        with weapons of warfare 'neath well-covered targets,
          when valiant battlemen in victor-band sought him,
          war-scylfing heroes harassed the nephew
       60 of hereric in battle. to beowulf's keeping
          turned there in time extensive dominions:

{he rules the geats fifty years.}

          he fittingly ruled them a fifty of winters
          (he a man-ruler wise was, manor-ward old) till
          a certain one 'gan, on gloom-darkening nights, a

{the fire-drake.}

       65 dragon, to govern, who guarded a treasure,
          a high-rising stone-cliff, on heath that was grayish:
          a path 'neath it lay, unknown unto mortals.
          some one of ea
 
 ___________________________
 
 to leave there.
        5 the war of the worm widely was noticed,
          the feud of the foeman afar and anear,
          how the enemy injured the earls of the geatmen,
          harried with hatred: back he hied to the treasure,
          to the well-hidden cavern ere the coming of daylight.
       10 he had circled with fire the folk of those regions,
          with brand and burning; in the barrow he trusted,
          in the wall and his war-might: the weening deceived him.

{beowulf hears of the havoc wrought by the dragon.}

          then straight was the horror to beowulf published,
          early forsooth, that his own native homestead,[1]
       15 the best of buildings, was burning and melting,
          gift-seat of geatmen. 'twas a grief to the spirit
          of the good-mooded hero, the greatest of sorrows:

{he fears that heaven is punishing him for some crime.}

          the wise one weened then that wielding his kingdom
          'gainst the a
 
 ___________________________
 
e the last of his limited earth-days,
          of life in the world and the worm along with him,
          though he long had been holding hoard-wealth in plenty.

{he determines to fight alone.}

          then the ring-prince disdained to seek with a war-band,
       35 with army extensive, the air-going ranger;
          he felt no fear of the foeman's assaults and
          he counted for little the might of the dragon,
[80]      his power and prowess: for previously dared he

{beowulf's early triumphs referred to}

          a heap of hostility, hazarded dangers,
       40 war-thane, when hrothgar's palace he cleansèd,
          conquering combatant, clutched in the battle
          the kinsmen of grendel, of kindred detested.[2]

{higelac's death recalled.}

          'twas of hand-fights not least where higelac was slaughtered,
          when the king of the geatmen with clashings of battle,
       45 friend-lord of folks in frisian dominions,
          off
 
 ___________________________
 
spring of hrethrel perished through sword-drink,
          with battle-swords beaten; thence beowulf came then
          on self-help relying, swam through the waters;
          he bare on his arm, lone-going, thirty
       50 outfits of armor, when the ocean he mounted.
          the hetwars by no means had need to be boastful
          of their fighting afoot, who forward to meet him
          carried their war-shields: not many returned from
          the brave-mooded battle-knight back to their homesteads.
       55 ecgtheow's bairn o'er the bight-courses swam then,
          l
 
 ___________________________
 
one-goer lorn to his land-folk returning,
          where hygd to him tendered treasure and kingdom,

{heardred's lack of capacity to rule.}

          rings and dominion: her son she not trusted,
          to be able to keep the kingdom devised him
       60 'gainst alien races, on the death of king higelac.

{beowulf's tact and delicacy recalled.}

          yet the sad ones succeeded not in persuading the atheling
          in any way ever, to act as a suzerain
          to heardred, or promise to govern the kingdom;
          yet with friendly counsel in the folk he sustained him,
       65 gracious, with honor, till he grew to be older,

{reference is here made to a visit which beowulf receives from eanmund and
eadgils, why they come is not known.}

          wielded the weders. wide-fleein
 
 ___________________________
 
ohthere's sons, sought him o'er the waters:
          they had stirred a revolt 'gainst the helm of the scylfings,
          the best of the sea-kings, who in swedish dominions
       70 distributed treasure, distinguished folk-leader.
[81]      'twas the end of his earth-days; injury fatal[3]
          by swing of the sword he received as a greeting,
          offspring of higelac; ongentheow's bairn
          later departed to visit his homestead,
       75 when heardred was dead; let beowulf rule them,
          govern the geatmen: good was that folk-king.

    [1] 'hám' (2326), the suggestion of b. is accepted by t.b. and other
    scholars.

    [2] for 'láðan cynnes' (2355), t.b. suggests 'láðan cynne,' apposition
    to 'mægum.' from syntactical and other considerations, this is a most
    excellent emendation.

    [3] gr. read 'on feorme' (2386), rendering: _he there at the banquet a
    fatal wound received by blows of the sword._




xxxiv.

beowu
 
 ___________________________
 
lf seeks the dragon.--beowulf's reminiscences.


          he planned requital for the folk-leader's ruin
          in days thereafter, to eadgils the wretched
          becoming an enemy. ohthere's son then
          went with a war-troop o'er the wide-stretching currents
        5 with warriors and weapons: with woe-journeys cold he
          after avenged him, the king's life he took.

{beowulf has been preserved through many perils.}

          so he came off uninjured from all of his battles,
          perilous fights, offspring of ecgtheow,
          from his deeds of daring, till that day most momentous
       10 when he fate-driven fared to fight with the dragon.

{with eleven comrades, he seeks the dragon.}

          with eleven companions the prince of the geatmen
          went lowering with fury to look at the fire-drake:
          inquiring he'd found how the 
 
 ___________________________
 
 no easy possession
          for any of earth-folk access to get to.
          then the battle-brave atheling sat on the naze-edge,
          while the gold-friend of geatmen gracious saluted
          his fireside-companions: woe was his spirit,
       30 death-boding, wav'ring; weird very near him,
          who must seize the old hero, his soul-treasure look for,
          dragging aloof his life from his body:
          not flesh-hidden long was the folk-leader's spirit.
          beowulf spake, ecgtheow's son:

{beowulf's retrospect.}

       35 "i survived in my youth-days many a conflict,
          hours of onset: that all i remember.
          i was seven-winters old when the jewel-prince took me,
          high-lord of heroes, at the hands of my father,
          hrethel the hero-king had me in keeping,

{hrethel took me when i was seven.}

       40 gave me treasure and feasting, our kinship remembered;
          not ever was i _any_ less dear to him

{he
 
 ___________________________
 
tion would be better--a comma after 'galgan' (2447). the
    translation may be indicated as follows: _(just) as it is sad for an
    old man to see his son ride young on the gallows when he himself is
    uttering mournful measures, a sorrowful song, while his son hangs for a
    comfort to the raven, and he, old and infirm, cannot render him any
    kelp--(he is constantly reminded, etc., 2451-2463)--so the defence of
    the weders, etc._




xxxv.

reminiscences (_continued_).--beowulf's last battle.


          "he seeks then his chamber, singeth a woe-song
          one for the other; all too extensive
          seemed homesteads and plains. so the helm of the weders

{hrethel grieves for herebald.}

          mindful of herebald heart-sorrow carried,
        5 stirred with emotion, nowise was able
          to wreak his ruin on the ruthless destroyer:
          he was unable to follow the warrior with hatred,
          with deeds that were direful, though d
 
 ___________________________
 
d i
          'quited in contest, as occasion was offered:
          land he allowed me, life-joy at homestead,
          manor to live on. little he needed
          from gepids or danes or in sweden to look for
       35 trooper less true, with treasure to buy him;
          'mong foot-soldiers ever in front i would hie me,
          alone in the vanguard, and evermore gladly
          warfare shall wage, while this weapon endureth
          that late and early often did serve me

{beowulf refers to his having slain dæghrefn.}

       40 when i proved before heroes the slayer of dæghrefn,
          knight of the hugmen: he by no means was suffered
          to the king of the frisians to carry the jewels,
          the breast-decoration; but the banner-possessor
          bowed in the battle, brave-mooded atheling.
[85]   45 no weapon was slayer, but war-grapple broke then
          the surge of his spirit, his body destroying.
          now shall weapon's edge make
 
 ___________________________
 
 war for the treasure,
          and hand and firm-sword." beowulf spake then,
          boast-words uttered--the latest occasion:

{he boasts of his youthful prowess, and declares himself still fearless.}

       50 "i braved in my youth-days battles unnumbered;
          still am i willing the struggle to look for,
          fame-deeds perform, folk-warden prudent,
          if the hateful despoiler forth from his cavern
          seeketh me out!" each of the heroes,
       55 helm-bearers sturdy, he thereupon greeted

{his last salutations.}
 
 ___________________________
 
eward:
          the flood of the fountain was fuming with war-flame:
          not nigh to the hoard, for season the briefest
       85 could he brave, without burning, the abyss that was yawning,
          the drake was so fiery. the prince of the weders
          caused then that words came from his bosom,
          so fierce was his fury; the firm-hearted shouted:
          his battle-clear voice came in resounding
       90 'neath the gray-colored stone. stirred was his hatred,

{beowulf calls out under the stone arches.}

          the hoard-ward distinguished the speech of a man;
          time was no longer to look out for friendship.
          the breath of the monster issued forth first,
          vapory war-sweat, out of the stone-cave:

{the terrible encounter.}

       95 the earth re-echoed. the earl 'neath the barrow
          lifted his shield, lord of the geatmen,
          tow'rd the terrible stranger: the ring-twisted creature's
          heart was 
 
 ___________________________
 
then ready to seek for a struggle.

{beowulf brandishes his sword,}

          the excellent battle-king first brandished his weapon,
      100 the ancient heirloom, of edges unblunted,[3]
          to the death-planners twain was terror from other.

{and stands against his shield.}

          the lord of the troopers intrepidly stood then
          'gainst his high-rising shield, when the dragon coiled him

{the dragon coils himself.}

          quickly together: in corslet he bided.
[87]  105 he went then in blazes, ben
 
 ___________________________
 
  the lord of the geatmen uplifted his hand then,
          smiting the fire-drake with sword that was precious,
          that bright on the bone the blade-edge did weaken,
          bit more feebly than his folk-leader needed,
      115 burdened with bale-griefs. then the barrow-protector,

{the dragon rages}

          when the sword-blow had fallen, was fierce in his spirit,
          flinging his fires, flamings of battle
          gleamed then afar: the gold-friend of weders

{beowulf's sword fails him.}

          boasted no conquests, his battle-sword failed him
      120 naked in conflict, as by no means it ought to,
          long-trusty weapon. 'twas no slight undertaking
          that ecgtheow's famous offspring would leave
          the drake-cavern's bottom; he must live in some region
          other than this, by the will of the dragon,
      125 as each one of earthmen existence must forfeit.
          'twas early thereafter the excellent warriors


 
 ___________________________
 
 us a fight at the
    wall, as fate decrees, each one's creator._

    [3] the translation of this passage is based on 'unsláw' (2565),
    accepted by h.-so., in lieu of the long-standing 'ungléaw.' the former
    is taken as an adj. limiting 'sweord'; the latter as an adj. c.
    'gúð-cyning': _the good war-king, rash with edges, brandished his
    sword, his old relic._ the latter gives a more rhetorical anglo-saxon
    (poetical) sentence.




xxxvi.

wiglaf the trusty.--beowulf is deserted by friends and by sword.


{wiglaf remains true--the ideal teutonic liegeman.}

          the son of weohstan was wiglaf entitled,
          shield-warrior precious, prince of the scylfings,
          ælfhere's kinsman: he saw his dear liegelord
          enduring the heat 'neath helmet and visor.
        5 then he minded the holding that erst he had given him,

{wiglaf recalls beowulf's generosity.}

          the wægmunding warriors' wealth-blessèd homestead,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
s: he the feud did not mention,
          though he'd fatally smitten the son of his brother.
          many a half-year held he the treasures,
          the bill and the burnie, till his bairn became able,
       20 like his father before him, fame-deeds to 'complish;
          then he gave him 'mong geatmen a goodly array of
          weeds for his warfare; he went from life then
          old on his journey. 'twas the earliest time then

{this is wiglaf's first battle as liegeman of beowulf.}

          that the youthful champion might charge in the battle
       25 aiding his liegelord; his spirit was dauntless.
          nor did kinsman's bequest quail at the battle:
          this the dragon discovered on their coming together.
          wiglaf uttered many a right-saying,
          said to his fellows, sad was his spirit:

{wiglaf appeals to the pride of the cowards.}

       30 "i remember the time when, tasting the mead-cup,
          we promised in the hall t
 
 ___________________________
 
fell and destroy the
          long-hating foeman, to defend the life of

{surely he does not deserve to die alone.}

          the prince of the weders. well do i know 'tisn't
          earned by his exploits, he only of geatmen
          sorrow should suffer, sink in the battle:
       55 brand and helmet to us both shall be common,
          [1]shield-cover, burnie." through the bale-smoke he stalked then,
          went under helmet to the help of his chieftain,

{wiglaf reminds beowulf of his youthful boasts.}

          briefly discoursing: "beowulf dear,
          perform thou all fully, as thou formerly saidst,
       60 in thy youthful years, that while yet thou livedst
[90]      thou wouldst let thine honor not ever be lessened.
          thy life thou shalt save, mighty in actions,
          atheling undaunted, with all of thy vigor;

{the monster advances on them.}

          i'll give thee assistance." the dragon came raging,
       65 wild-mooded stran
 
 ___________________________
 
ger, when these words had been uttered
          ('twas the second occasion), seeking his enemies,
          men that were hated, with hot-gleaming fire-waves;
          with blaze-billows burned the board to its edges:
          the fight-armor failed then to furnish assistance
       70 to the youthful spear-hero: but the young-agèd stripling
          quickly advanced 'neath his kinsman's war-target,
          since his own had been ground in the grip of the fire.

{beowulf strikes at the dragon.}

          then the warrior-king was careful of glory,
          he soundly smote with sword-for-the-battle,
       75 that it stood in the head by hatred driven;
          nægling was shivered, the old and iron-made

{his sword fails him.}

          brand of beowulf in battle deceived him.
          'twas denied him that edges of irons were able
          to help in the battle; the hand was too mighty
       80 [2]which every weapon, as i heard on inqui
 
 ___________________________
 
ry,
          outstruck in its stroke, when to struggle he carried
          the wonderful war-sword: it waxed him no better.

{the dragon advances on beowulf again.}

          then the people-despoiler--third of his onsets--
          fierce-raging fire-drake, of feud-hate was mindful,
       85 charged on the strong one, when chance was afforded,
          heated and war-grim, seized on his neck
          with teeth that were bitter; he bloody did wax with
          soul-gore seething; sword-blood in waves boiled.

    [1] the passage '_brand ... burnie_,' is much disputed. in the first
    place, some eminent critics assume a gap of 
 
 ___________________________
 
rdu-scrúd' is also a crux. b. suggests 'býwdu-scrúd' =
    _splendid vestments_. nor is 'bám' accepted by all, 'béon' being
    suggested. whatever the individual words, the passage must mean, "_i
    intend to share with him my equipments of defence_."

    [2] b. would render: _which, as i heard, excelled in stroke every
    sword that he carried to the strife, even the strongest (sword)._ for
    'þonne' he reads 'þone,' rel. pr.

[91]




xxxvii.

the fatal struggle.--beowulf's last moments.


{wiglaf defends beowulf.}

          then i heard that at need of the king of the people
          the upstanding earlman exhibited prowess,
          vigor and courage, as suited his nature;
          [1]he his head did not guard, but the high-minded liegeman's
        5 hand was consumed, when he succored his kinsman,
          so he struck the strife-bringing strange-comer lower,
          earl-thane in armor, that _in_ went the weapon
          gleaming and 
 
 ___________________________
 
plated, that 'gan then the fire[2]

{beowulf draws his knife,}

          later to lessen. the liegelord himself then
       10 retained his consciousness, brandished his war-knife,
          battle-sharp, bitter, that he bare on his armor:

{and cuts the dragon.}

          the weder-lord cut the worm in the middle.
          they had felled the enemy (life drove out then[3]
          puissant prowess), the pair had destroyed him,
       15 land-chiefs related: so a liegeman should prove him,
          a thaneman when need
 
 ___________________________
 
ed. to the prince 'twas the last of
          his era of conquest by his own great achievements,

[92]

{beowulf's wound swells and burns.}

          the latest of world-deeds. the wound then began
          which the earth-dwelling dragon erstwhile had wrought him
       20 to burn and to swell. he soon then discovered
          that bitterest bale-woe in his bosom was raging,
          poison within. the atheling advanced then,

{he sits down exhausted.}

          that along by the wall, he prudent of spirit
          might sit on a settle; he saw the giant-work,
       25 how arches of
 
 ___________________________
 
 stone strengthened with pillars
          the earth-hall eternal inward supported.
          then the long-worthy liegeman laved with his hand the

{wiglaf bathes his lord's head.}

          far-famous chieftain, gory from sword-edge,
          refreshing the face of his friend-lord and ruler,
       30 sated with battle, unbinding his helmet.
          beowulf answered, of his injury spake he,
          his wound that was fatal (he was fully aware
          he had lived his allotted life-days enjoying
          the pleasures of earth; then past was entirely
       35 his measure of days, death very near):

{beowulf regrets that he has no son.}

          "my son i would give now my battle-equipments,
          had any of heirs been after me granted,
          along of my body. this people i governed
          fifty of winters: no king '
 
 ___________________________
 
r-grayish stone,
       50 well-lovèd wiglaf, now the worm is a-lying,
          sore-wounded sleepeth, disseized of his treasure.
          go thou in haste that treasures of old i,
          gold-wealth may gaze on, together see lying
[93]      the ether-bright jewels, be easier able,
       55 having the heap of hoard-gems, to yield my
          life and the land-folk whom long i have governed."

    [1] b. renders: _he_ (_w_.) did not regard his (_the dragon's_) _head_
    (since beowulf had struck it without effect), _but struck the dragon a
    little lower down.--_one crux is to find out _whose head_ is meant;
    another is to bring out the antithesis between 'head' and 'hand.'

    [2] 'þæt þæt fýr' (2702), s. emends to 'þá þæt fýr' = _when the fire
    began to grow less intense afterward_. this emendation relieves the
    passage of a plethora of conjunctive _þæt_'s.

    [3] for 'gefyldan' (2707), s. proposes 'gefylde.' the passage would
    read
 
 ___________________________
 
: _he felled the foe (life drove out strength), and they then both
    had destroyed him, chieftains related_. this gives beowulf the credit
    of having felled the dragon; then they combine to annihilate him.--for
    'ellen' (2707), kl. suggests 'e(a)llne.'--the reading '_life drove out
    strength_' is very unsatisfactory and very peculiar. i would suggest
    as follows: adopt s.'s emendation, remove h.'s parenthesis, read
    'ferh-ellen wræc,' and translate: _he felled the foe, drove out his
    life-strength_ (that is, made him _hors de combat_), _and then they
    both, etc_.




xxxviii.

wigl
 
 ___________________________
 
af plunders the dragon's den.--beowulf's death.


{wiglaf fulfils his lord's behest.}

          then heard i that wihstan's son very quickly,
          these words being uttered, heeded his liegelord
          wounded and war-sick, went in his armor,
          his well-woven ring-mail, 'neath the roof of the barrow.
        5 then the trusty retainer treasure-gems many

{the dragon's den.}

          victorious saw, when the seat he came near to,
          gold-treasure sparkling spread on the bottom,
          wo
 
 ___________________________
 
. the messenger hastened,
          not loth to return, hurried by jewels:
          curiosity urged him if, excellent-mooded,
          alive he should find the lord of the weders
       35 mortally wounded, at the place where he left him.
          'mid the jewels he found then the famous old chieftain,
          his liegelord belovèd, at his life's-end gory:
          he thereupon 'gan to lave him with water,
          till the point of his word piercèd his breast-hoard.
       40 beowulf spake (the gold-gems he noticed),

{beowulf is rejoiced to see the jewels.}

          the old one in sorrow: "for the jewels i look on
          thanks do i utter for all to the ruler,
          wielder of worship, with words of devotion,
          the lord everlasting, that he let me such treasures
       45 gain for my people ere death overtook me.
          since i've bartered the agèd life to me granted
          for treasure of jewels, attend ye henceforward

{he desires t
 
 ___________________________
 
o be held in memory by his people.}

          the wants of the war-thanes; i can wait here no longer.
          the battle-famed bid ye to build them a grave-hill,
       50 bright when i'm burned, at the brim-current's limit;
          as a memory-mark to the men i have governed,
[95]      aloft it shall tower on whale's-ness uprising,
          that earls of the ocean hereafter may call it
          beowulf's barrow, those who barks ever-dashing
       55 from a distance shall drive o'er the darkness of waters."

{the hero's last gift}

          the bold-mooded troop-lord took from his neck then
          the ring that was golden, gave to his liegeman,
          the youthful war-hero, his gold-flashing helmet,
          his collar and war-mail, bade him well to enjoy them:

{and last words.}

       60 "thou art latest left of the line of our kindred,
          of wægmunding peop
 
 ___________________________
 
an' as meaning 'to exceed,' and, inserting 'hord' after
    'gehwone,' renders: _the treasure may easily, the gold in the ground,
    exceed in value every hoard of man, hide it who will._ the other takes
    'oferhígian' as meaning 'to render arrogant,' and, giving the sentence
    a moralizing tone, renders substantially as in the body of this work.
    (cf. 28_13 et seq.)

    [2] the passage beginning here is very much disputed. 'the bill of the
    old lord' is by some regarded as beowulf's sword; by others, as that
    of the ancient possessor of the hoard. 'ær gescód' (2778), translated
    in this work as verb and adverb, is by some regarded as a compound
    participial adj. = _sheathed in brass_.




xxxix.

the dead foes.--wiglaf's bitter taunts.


{wiglaf is sorely grieved to see his lord look so un-warlike.}

          it had wofully chanced then the youthful retainer
          to behold on earth the most ardent-belovèd
          at his life-days' 
 
 ___________________________
 
ut he sank then to earthward
          through the hero-chief's handwork. i heard sure it throve then

[96]

{few warriors dared to face the monster.}

       15 but few in the land of liegemen of valor,
          though of every achievement bold he had proved him,
          to run 'gainst the breath of the venomous scather,
          or the hall of the treasure to trouble with hand-blows,
          if he watching had found the ward of the hoard-hall
       20 on the barrow abiding. beowulf's part of
          the treasure of jewels was paid for with death;
          each of the twain had attained to the end of
          life so unlasting. not long was the time till

{the cowardly thanes come out of the thicket.}

          the tardy-at-battle returned from the thicket,
       25 the timid truce-breakers ten all together,
          who durst not before play with the lances
          in the prince of the people's pressing emergency;

{they are ashamed of their desert
 
 ___________________________
 
!"

    [1] for 'dædum rædan' (2859) b. suggests 'déað árædan,' and renders:
    _the might (or judgment) of god would determine death for every man,
    as he still does._

    [2] some critics, h. himself in earlier editions, put the clause,
    'when ... him' (a.-s. 'þá ... beget') with the following sentence;
    that is, they make it dependent upon 'þorfte' (2875) instead of upon
    'forwurpe' (2873).




xl.

the messenger of death.


{wiglaf sends the news of beowulf's death to liegemen near by.}

          then he charged that the battle be announced at the hedge
          up o'er the cliff-edge, where the earl-troopers bided
          the whole of the morning, mood-wretched sat them,
          bearers of battle-shields, both things expecting,
        5 the end of his lifetime and the coming again of
          the liegelord belovèd. little reserved he
          of news that was known, who the ness-cliff did travel,
          but he truly disco
 
 ___________________________
 


          "now the free-giving friend-lord of the folk of the weders,
       10 the folk-prince of geatmen, is fast in his death-bed,
          by the deeds of the dragon in death-bed abideth;
          along with him lieth his life-taking foeman
          slain with knife-wounds: he was wholly unable
          to injure at all the ill-planning monster

{wiglaf sits by our dead lord.}

       15 with bite of his sword-edge. wiglaf is sitting,
          offspring of wihstan, up over beowulf,
          earl o'er another whose end-day hath reached him,
          head-watch holdeth o'er heroes unliving,[1]

{our lord's death will lead to attacks from our old foes.}

          for friend and for foeman. the folk now expecteth
       20 a season of strife when the death of the folk-king
          to frankmen and frisians in far-lands is published.
          the war-hatred waxed warm 'gainst the hugmen,

{higelac's death recalled.}

          when higelac came with an ar
 
 ___________________________
 
old from the morning shall be clutched in the fingers,
          heaved in the hand, no harp-music's sound shall
       80 waken the warriors, but the wan-coated raven
          fain over fey ones freely shall gabble,
          shall say to the eagle how he sped in the eating,
          when, the wolf his companion, he plundered the slain."
          so the high-minded hero was rehearsing these stories
       85 loathsome to hear; he lied as to few of

{the warriors go sadly to look at beowulf's lifeless body.}

          weirds and of words. all the war-troop arose then,
          'neath the eagle's cape sadly betook them,
          weeping and woful, the wonder to look at.
          they saw on the sand then soulless a-lying,
       90 his slaughter-bed holding, him who rings had given them
          in days that were done; then the death-bringing moment
          was come to the good one, that the king very warlike,
          wielder of weders, with wonder-death perish
 
 ___________________________
 
anslation represents the king as
    being generous beyond the possibility of reproach; but some
    authorities construe 'him' (2996) as plu., and understand the passage
    to mean that no one reproached the two brothers with having received
    more reward than they were entitled to.

    [4] the name 'scyldingas' here (3006) has caused much discussion, and
    given rise to several theories, the most important of which are as
    follows: (1) after the downfall of hrothgar's family, beowulf was king
    of the danes, or scyldings. (2) for 'scyldingas' read
    'scylfingas'--that is, after killing eadgils, the scylfing prince,
    beowulf conquered his land, and held it in subjection. (3) m.
    considers 3006 a thoughtless repetition of 2053. (cf. h.-so.)

    [5] b. takes 'nihtes' and 'hwílum' (3045) as separate adverbial cases,
    and renders: _joy in the air had he of yore by night, etc_. he thinks
    that the idea of vanished time ought to be expressed.

    [6
 
 ___________________________
 
en 'twas seen that the journey prospered him little
          who wrongly within had the ornaments hidden[1]
          down 'neath the wall. the warden erst slaughtered
          some few of the folk-troop: the feud then thereafter
        5 was hotly avengèd. 'tis a wonder where,[2]
          when the strength-famous trooper has attained to the end of
          life-days allotted, then no longer the man may
          remain with his kinsmen where mead-cups are flowing.
          so to beowulf happened when the ward of the barrow,
       10 assaults, he sought for: himself had no knowledge
          how his leaving this life was likely to happen.
          so to doomsday, famous folk-leaders down did
          call it with curses--who 'complished it there--
[104]     that that man should be ever of ill-deeds convicted,
       15 confined in foul-places, fastened in hell-bonds,
          punished with plagues, who this place should e'er ravage.[3]
          he cared not for
 
 ___________________________
 
-hoard, but let him
       25 lie where he long was, live in his dwelling
          till the end of the world. met we a destiny
          hard to endure: the hoard has been looked at,
          been gained very grimly; too grievous the fate that[5]
          the prince of the people pricked to come thither.
       30 _i_ was therein and all of it looked at,
          the building's equipments, since access was given me,
          not kindly at all entrance permitted

{he tells them of beowulf's last moments.}

          within under earth-wall. hastily seized i
          and held in my hands a huge-weighing burden
       35 of hoard-treasures costly, hither out bare them
          to my liegelord belovèd: life was yet in him,
          and consciousness also; the old one discoursed then
          much and mournfully, commanded to greet you,

{beowulf's dying request.}

          bade that remembering the deeds of your friend-lord
       40 ye build on the fire-hill o
 
 ___________________________
 
ed by 'hwár' and
    dependent upon 'wundur': _a secret is it when the hero is to die,
    etc_.--why may the two clauses not be parallel, and the whole passage
    an old english cry of '_how wonderful is death!'?_--s.'s is the best
    yet offered, if 'wundor' means 'mystery.'

    [3] for 'strude' in h.-so., s. suggests 'stride.' this would require
    'ravage' (v. 16) to be changed to 'tread.'

    [4] 'he cared ... sight of' (17, 18), s. emends so as to read as
    follows: _he (beowulf) had not before seen the favor of the avaricious
    possessor._

    [5] b. renders: _that which drew the king thither_ (i.e. _the
    treasure_) _was granted us, but in such a way that it overcomes us._

    [6] 'folc-ágende' (3114) b. takes as dat. sing. with 'gódum,' and
    refers it to beowulf; that is, _should bring fire-wood to the place
    where the good folk-ruler lay_.

    [7] c. proposes to take 'weaxan' = l. 'vescor,' and translate
    _devour_. this gives a paral
 
 ___________________________
 
lel to 'fretan' above. the parenthesis
    would be discarded and the passage read: _now shall the fire consume,
    the wan-flame devour, the prince of warriors, etc_.




xliii.

the burning of beowulf.


{beowulf's pyre.}

          the folk of the geatmen got him then ready
          a pile on the earth strong for the burning,
          behung with helmets, hero-knights' targets,
          and bright-shining burnies, as he begged they should have them;
        5 then wailing war-heroes their world-famous chieftain,
          their liegelord beloved, laid in the middle.

{the funeral-flame.}

          soldiers began then to make on the barrow
          the largest of dead-fires: dark o'e
 
 ___________________________
 
.
          so lamented mourning the men of the geats,
          fond-loving vassals, the fall of their lord,

{an ideal king.}

          said he was kindest of kings under heaven,
          gentlest of men, most winning of manner,
       45 friendliest to folk-troops and fondest of honor.

[109]




addenda.


several discrepancies and other oversights have been noticed in the h.-so.
glossary. of these a good part were avoided by harrison and sharp, the
american editors of beowulf, in their last edition, 1888. the rest will, i
hope, be noticed in their fourth edition. as, however, this book may fall
into the hands of some who have no copy of the american edition, it seems
best to notice all the principal oversights of the german editors.

~from hám~ (194).--notes and glossary conflict; the latter not having been
altered to suit the conclusions accepted in the former.

~þær gelýfan sceal dryhtnes dóme~ (440).--under 'dóm' h. says 'the might
of the lord';
 
 ___________________________
 
 while under 'gelýfan' he says 'the judgment of the lord.'

~eal bencþelu~ (486).--under 'benc-þelu' h. says _nom. plu._; while under
'eal' he says _nom. sing._

~heatho-ræmas~ (519).--under 'ætberan' h. translates 'to the heathoremes';
while under 'heatho-ræmas' he says 'heathoræmas reaches breca in the
swimming-match with beowulf.' harrison and sharp (3d edition, 1888) avoid
the discrepancy.

~fáh féond-scaða~ (554).--under 'féond-scaða' h. says 'a gleaming
sea-monster'; under 'fáh' he says 'hostile.'

~onfeng hraðe inwit-þancum~ (749).--under 'onfón' h. says 'he _received_
the maliciously-disposed one'; under 'inwit-þanc' he says 'he _grasped_,'
etc.

~níð-wundor séon~ (1366).--under 'níð-wundor' h. calls this word itself
_nom. sing._; under 'séon' he translates it as accus. sing., underst