
she wanted revenge take it by laughing at him?

"oh, mr. tansley," she said, "do take me to the lighthouse with you. i
should so love it."

she was telling lies he could see. she was saying what she did not
mean to annoy him, for some reason. she was laughing at him. he was in
his old flannel trousers. he had no others. he felt very rough and
isolated and lonely. he knew that she was trying to tease him for some
reason; she didn't want to go to the lighthouse with him; she despised
him: so did prue ramsay; so did they all. but he was not going to be
made a fool of by women, so he turned deliberately in his chair and
looked out of the window and said, all in a jerk, very rudely, it would
be too rough for her tomorrow. she would be sick.

it annoyed him that she should have made him speak like that, with mrs.
ramsay listening. if only he could be alone in his room working, he
thought, among his books. that was where he felt at his ease. and he
had never run a penny into debt; he had never cost his
 
 ___________________________
 
, looking at a
stone, asking themselves "what am i," "what is this?" had suddenly an
answer vouchsafed them: (they could not say what it was) so that they
were warm in the frost and had comfort in the desert. but mrs. mcnab
continued to drink and gossip as before.


6


the spring without a leaf to toss, bare and bright like a virgin fierce
in her chastity, scornful in her purity, was laid out on fields wide-
eyed and watchful and entirely careless of what was done or thought by
the beholders. [prue ramsay, leaning on her father's arm, was given in
marriage. what, people said, could have been more fitting? and, they
added, how beautiful she looked!]

as summer neared, as the evenings lengthened, there came to the
wakeful, the hopeful, walking the beach, stirring the pool,
imaginations of the strangest kind--of flesh turned to atoms which
drove before the wind, of stars flashing in their hearts, of cliff,
sea, cloud, and sky brought purposely together to assemble outwardly
the scattered parts of t
 
 ___________________________
 
ood, some crystal of intensity, remote from the known
pleasures and familiar virtues, something alien to the processes of
domestic life, single, hard, bright, like a diamond in the sand, which
would render the possessor secure. moreover, softened and acquiescent,
the spring with her bees humming and gnats dancing threw her cloak
about her, veiled her eyes, averted her head, and among passing shadows
and flights of small rain seemed to have taken upon her a knowledge of
the sorrows of mankind.

[prue ramsay died that summer in some illness connected with
childbirth, which was indeed a tragedy, people said, everything, they
said, had promised so well.]

and now in the heat of summer the wind sent its spies about the house
again. flies wove a web in the sunny rooms; weeds that had grown close
to the glass in the night tapped methodically at the window pane. when
darkness fell, the stroke of the lighthouse, which had laid itself with
such authority upon the carpet in the darkness, tracing its pattern