e boys had a
custom of carving their names. it was completely covered with such
inscriptions. in my dread of the end of the vacation and their coming
back, i could not read a boy’s name, without inquiring in what tone and
with what emphasis he would read, ‘take care of him. he bites.’ there
was one boy--a certain j. steerforth--who cut his name very deep and
very often, who, i conceived, would read it in a rather strong voice,
and afterwards pull my hair. there was another boy, one tommy traddles,
who i dreaded would make game of it, and pretend to be dreadfully
frightened of me. there was a third, george demple, who i fancied would
sing it. i have looked, a little shrinking creature, at that door, until
the owners of all the names--there were five-and-forty of them in the
school then, mr. mell said--seemed to send me to coventry by general
acclamation, and to cry out, each in his own way, ‘take care of him. he
bites!’

it was the same with the places at the desks and forms
 
 ___________________________
 
r. mell took his meals with the boys, but
mr. sharp dined and supped at mr. creakle’s table. he was a limp,
delicate-looking gentleman, i thought, with a good deal of nose, and a
way of carrying his head on one side, as if it were a little too heavy
for him. his hair was very smooth and wavy; but i was informed by the
very first boy who came back that it was a wig (a second-hand one he
said), and that mr. sharp went out every saturday afternoon to get it
curled.

it was no other than tommy traddles who gave me this piece of
intelligence. he was the first boy who returned. he introduced himself
by informing me that i should find his name on the right-hand corner of
the gate, over the top-bolt; upon that i said, ‘traddles?’ to which he
replied, ‘the same,’ and then he asked me for a full account of myself
and family.

it was a happy circumstance for me that traddles came back first. he
enjoyed my placard so much, that he saved me from the embarrassment of
either disclosure 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the key in it for his
successor, he went out of the school, with his property under his arm.
mr. creakle then made a speech, through tungay, in which he thanked
steerforth for asserting (though perhaps too warmly) the independence
and respectability of salem house; and which he wound up by shaking
hands with steerforth, while we gave three cheers--i did not quite know
what for, but i supposed for steerforth, and so joined in them ardently,
though i felt miserable. mr. creakle then caned tommy traddles for
being discovered in tears, instead of cheers, on account of mr. mell’s
departure; and went back to his sofa, or his bed, or wherever he had
come from.

we were left to ourselves now, and looked very blank, i recollect, on
one another. for myself, i felt so much self-reproach and contrition for
my part in what had happened, that nothing would have enabled me to keep
back my tears but the fear that steerforth, who often looked at me, i
saw, might think it unfriendly--or, i should r
 
 ___________________________
 
o you good.’

with these words, mrs. crupp, affecting to be very careful of the
brandy--which was all gone--thanked me with a majestic curtsey, and
retired. as her figure disappeared into the gloom of the entry, this
counsel certainly presented itself to my mind in the light of a slight
liberty on mrs. crupp’s part; but, at the same time, i was content
to receive it, in another point of view, as a word to the wise, and a
warning in future to keep my secret better.



chapter 27. tommy traddles


it may have been in consequence of mrs. crupp’s advice, and, perhaps,
for no better reason than because there was a certain similarity in the
sound of the word skittles and traddles, that it came into my head, next
day, to go and look after traddles. the time he had mentioned was more
than out, and he lived in a little street near the veterinary college
at camden town, which was principally tenanted, as one of our clerks who
lived in that direction informed me, by gentlemen student