m. we all went together, she before us:
and a glorious old room it was, with more oak beams, and diamond panes;
and the broad balustrade going all the way up to it.

i cannot call to mind where or when, in my childhood, i had seen a
stained glass window in a church. nor do i recollect its subject. but
i know that when i saw her turn round, in the grave light of the old
staircase, and wait for us, above, i thought of that window; and i
associated something of its tranquil brightness with agnes wickfield
ever afterwards.

my aunt was as happy as i was, in the arrangement made for me; and we
went down to the drawing-room again, well pleased and gratified. as she
would not hear of staying to dinner, lest she should by any chance fail
to arrive at home with the grey pony before dark; and as i apprehend mr.
wickfield knew her too well to argue any point with her; some lunch was
provided for her there, and agnes went back to her governess, and mr.
wickfield to his office. so we were left to
 
 ___________________________
 
opperfield,’ he replied, ‘you perceive i am not bound
to answer that question. you may not, you know. but then, you see, you
may!’

anything to equal the low cunning of his visage, and of his shadowless
eyes without the ghost of an eyelash, i never saw.

‘come then!’ said i. ‘for the sake of miss wickfield--’

‘my agnes!’ he exclaimed, with a sickly, angular contortion of himself.
‘would you be so good as call her agnes, master copperfield!’

‘for the sake of agnes wickfield--heaven bless her!’

‘thank you for that blessing, master copperfield!’ he interposed.

‘i will tell you what i should, under any other circumstances, as soon
have thought of telling to--jack ketch.’

‘to who, sir?’ said uriah, stretching out his neck, and shading his ear
with his hand.

‘to the hangman,’ i returned. ‘the most unlikely person i could think
of,’--though his own face had suggested the allusion quite as a natural
sequence. ‘i am engaged to anoth
 
 ___________________________
 
ile i made every effort i decently could to get it away. but i was
quite unsuccessful. he drew it under the sleeve of his mulberry-coloured
great-coat, and i walked on, almost upon compulsion, arm-in-arm with
him.

‘shall we turn?’ said uriah, by and by wheeling me face about towards
the town, on which the early moon was now shining, silvering the distant
windows.

‘before we leave the subject, you ought to understand,’ said i, breaking
a pretty long silence, ‘that i believe agnes wickfield to be as far
above you, and as far removed from all your aspirations, as that moon
herself!’

‘peaceful! ain’t she!’ said uriah. ‘very! now confess, master
copperfield, that you haven’t liked me quite as i have liked you. all
along you’ve thought me too umble now, i shouldn’t wonder?’

‘i am not fond of professions of humility,’ i returned, ‘or professions
of anything else.’ ‘there now!’ said uriah, looking flabby and
lead-coloured in the moonlight. ‘di
 
 ___________________________
 

at the picture she was so like, put his hand to his forehead, and shrink
back in his elbow-chair.

‘i’m an umble individual to give you her elth,’ proceeded uriah, ‘but i
admire--adore her.’

no physical pain that her father’s grey head could have borne, i think,
could have been more terrible to me, than the mental endurance i saw
compressed now within both his hands.

‘agnes,’ said uriah, either not regarding him, or not knowing what the
nature of his action was, ‘agnes wickfield is, i am safe to say, the
divinest of her sex. may i speak out, among friends? to be her father is
a proud distinction, but to be her usband--’

spare me from ever again hearing such a cry, as that with which her
father rose up from the table! ‘what’s the matter?’ said uriah, turning
of a deadly colour. ‘you are not gone mad, after all, mr. wickfield, i
hope? if i say i’ve an ambition to make your agnes my agnes, i have as
good a right to it as another man. i have a better r