m by
the throat with an unaccommodating grasp, like a stubborn fact, as it
was,—all helped the emphasis.

‘in this life, we want nothing but facts, sir; nothing but facts!’

the speaker, and the schoolmaster, and the third grown person present,
all backed a little, and swept with their eyes the inclined plane of
little vessels then and there arranged in order, ready to have imperial
gallons of facts poured into them until they were full to the brim.



chapter ii
murdering the innocents


thomas gradgrind, sir.  a man of realities.  a man of facts and
calculations.  a man who proceeds upon the principle that two and two are
four, and nothing over, and who is not to be talked into allowing for
anything over.  thomas gradgrind, sir—peremptorily thomas—thomas
gradgrind.  with a rule and a pair of scales, and the multiplication
table always in his pocket, sir, ready to weigh and measure any parcel of
human nature, and tell you exactly what it comes to.  it is a mere
question of figures, a case o
 
 ___________________________
 
f simple arithmetic.  you might hope to get
some other nonsensical belief into the head of george gradgrind, or
augustus gradgrind, or john gradgrind, or joseph gradgrind (all
supposititious, non-existent persons), but into the head of thomas
gradgrind—no, sir!

in such terms mr. gradgrind always mentally introduced himself, whether
to his private circle of acquaintance, or to the public in general.  in
such terms, no doubt, substituting the words ‘boys and girls,’ for ‘sir,’
thomas gradgrind now presented thomas gradgrind to the little pitchers
before him, who were to be filled so full of facts.

indeed, as he eagerly sparkled at them from the cellarage before
mentioned, he seemed a kind of cannon loaded to the muzzle with facts,
and prepared to blow them clean out of the regions of childhood at one
discharge.  he seemed a galvanizing apparatus, too, charged with a grim
mechanical substitute for the tender young imaginations that were to be
stormed away.

‘girl number twenty,’ 
 
 ___________________________
 
red to draw out of him what little colour he ever possessed.
his cold eyes would hardly have been eyes, but for the short ends of
lashes which, by bringing them into immediate contrast with something
paler than themselves, expressed their form.  his short-cropped hair
might have been a mere continuation of the sandy freckles on his forehead
and face.  his skin was so unwholesomely deficient in the natural tinge,
that he looked as though, if he were cut, he would bleed white.

‘bitzer,’ said thomas gradgrind.  ‘your definition of a horse.’

‘quadruped.  graminivorous.  forty teeth, namely twenty-four grinders,
four eye-teeth, and twelve incisive.  sheds coat in the spring; in marshy
countries, sheds hoofs, too.  hoofs hard, but requiring to be shod with
iron.  age known by marks in mouth.’  thus (and much more) bitzer.

‘now girl number twenty,’ said mr. gradgrind.  ‘you know what a horse
is.’

she curtseyed again, and would have blushed deeper, if she could have
blushed deeper than
 
 ___________________________
 
 she had blushed all this time.  bitzer, after rapidly
blinking at thomas gradgrind with both eyes at once, and so catching the
light upon his quivering ends of lashes that they looked like the antennæ
of busy insects, put his knuckles to his freckled forehead, and sat down
again.

the third gentleman now stepped forth.  a mighty man at cutting and
drying, he was; a government officer; in his way (and in most other
people’s too), a professed pugilist; always in training, always with a
system to force down the general throat like a bolus, always to be heard
of at the bar of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the children cried in chorus, ‘yes, sir!’
upon which the other half, seeing in the gentleman’s face that yes was
wrong, cried out in chorus, ‘no, sir!’—as the custom is, in these
examinations.

‘of course, no.  why wouldn’t you?’

a pause.  one corpulent slow boy, with a wheezy manner of breathing,
ventured the answer, because he wouldn’t paper a room at all, but would
paint it.

‘you _must_ paper it,’ said the gentleman, rather warmly.

‘you must paper it,’ said thomas gradgrind, ‘whether you like it or not.
don’t tell _us_ you wouldn’t paper it.  what do you mean, boy?’

‘i’ll explain to you, then,’ said the gentleman, after another and a
dismal pause, ‘why you wouldn’t paper a room with representations of
horses.  do you ever see horses walking up and down the sides of rooms in
reality—in fact?  do you?’

‘yes, sir!’ from one half.  ‘no, sir!’ from the other.

‘of course no,’ said the gentleman, with an indignant look at the wrong
ha
 
 ___________________________
 
lf.  ‘why, then, you are not to see anywhere, what you don’t see in
fact; you are not to have anywhere, what you don’t have in fact.  what is
called taste, is only another name for fact.’  thomas gradgrind nodded
his approbation.

‘this is a new principle, a discovery, a great discovery,’ said the
gentleman.  ‘now, i’ll try you again.  suppose you were going to carpet a
room.  would you use a carpet having a representation of flowers upon
it?’

there being a general conviction by this time that ‘no, sir!’ was always
the right answer to this gentleman, the chorus of no was very strong.
only a few feeble stragglers said yes: among them sissy jupe.

‘girl number twenty,’ said the g
 
 ___________________________
 
the girl.

‘and is that why you would put tables and chairs upon them, and have
people walking over them with heavy boots?’

‘it wouldn’t hurt them, sir.  they wouldn’t crush and wither, if you
please, sir.  they would be the pictures of what was very pretty and
pleasant, and i would fancy—’

‘ay, ay, ay!  but you mustn’t fancy,’ cried the gentleman, quite elated
by coming so happily to his point.  ‘that’s it!  you are never to fancy.’

‘you are not, cecilia jupe,’ thomas gradgrind solemnly repeated, ‘to do
anything of that kind.’

‘fact, fact, fact!’ said the gentleman.  and ‘fact, fact, fact!’ repeated
thomas gradgrind.

‘you are to be in all things regulated and governed,’ said the gentleman,
‘by fact.  we hope to have, before long, a board of fact, composed of
commissioners of fact, who will force the people to be a people of fact,
and of nothing but fact.  you must discard the word fancy altogether.
you have nothing to do with it.  you are not to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ver before
attempted in this or any other country, and which having elicited such
rapturous plaudits from enthusiastic throngs it cannot be withdrawn.’
the same signor jupe was to ‘enliven the varied performances at frequent
intervals with his chaste shaksperean quips and retorts.’  lastly, he was
to wind them up by appearing in his favourite character of mr. william
button, of tooley street, in ‘the highly novel and laughable
hippo-comedietta of the tailor’s journey to brentford.’

thomas gradgrind took no heed of these trivialities of course, but passed
on as a practical man ought to pass on, either brushing the noisy insects
from his thoughts, or consigning them to the house of correction.  but,
the turning of the road took him by the back of the booth, and at the
back of the booth a number of children were congregated in a number of
stealthy attitudes, striving to peep in at the hidden glories of the
place.

this brought him to a stop.  ‘now, to think of these vagabonds,’ said he,

 
 ___________________________
 
se,’ said mr. gradgrind, calmly; he worked out the
whole matter like a sum: ‘you may be quite at ease, jupe, on that score.
in such a case, your father, i apprehend, must find out mr.—’

‘thleary.  thath my name, thquire.  not athamed of it.  known all over
england, and alwayth paythe ith way.’

‘must find out mr. sleary, who would then let him know where you went.  i
should have no power of keeping you against his wish, and he would have
no difficulty, at any time, in finding mr. thomas gradgrind of coketown.
i am well known.’

‘well known,’ assented mr. sleary, rolling his loose eye.  ‘you’re one of
the thort, thquire, that keepth a prethiouth thight of money out of the
houthe.  but never mind that at prethent.’

there was another silence; and then she exclaimed, sobbing with her hands
before her face, ‘oh, give me my clothes, give me my clothes, and let me
go away before i break my heart!’

the women sadly bestirred themselves to get the clothes together—it was
soon 
 
 ___________________________
 
bout men and
women, more or less like themselves, and about children, more or less
like their own.  they took de foe to their bosoms, instead of euclid, and
seemed to be on the whole more comforted by goldsmith than by cocker.
mr. gradgrind was for ever working, in print and out of print, at this
eccentric sum, and he never could make out how it yielded this
unaccountable product.

‘i am sick of my life, loo.  i, hate it altogether, and i hate everybody
except you,’ said the unnatural young thomas gradgrind in the
hair-cutting chamber at twilight.

‘you don’t hate sissy, tom?’

‘i hate to be obliged to call her jupe.  and she hates me,’ said tom,
moodily.

‘no, she does not, tom, i am sure!’

‘she must,’ said tom.  ‘she must just hate and detest the whole set-out
of us.  they’ll bother her head off, i think, before they have done with
her.  already she’s getting as pale as wax, and as heavy as—i am.’

young thomas expressed these sentiments sitting astride of a chair be
 
 ___________________________
 
;
neither did the clocks go any faster, or any slower, than at other
seasons.  the deadly statistical recorder in the gradgrind observatory
knocked every second on the head as it was born, and buried it with his
accustomed regularity.

so the day came, as all other days come to people who will only stick to
reason; and when it came, there were married in the church of the florid
wooden legs—that popular order of architecture—josiah bounderby esquire
of coketown, to louisa eldest daughter of thomas gradgrind esquire of
stone lodge, m.p. for that borough.  and when they were united in holy
matrimony, they went home to breakfast at stone lodge aforesaid.

there was an improving party assembled on the auspicious occasion, who
knew what everything they had to eat and drink was made of, and how it
was imported or exported, and in what quantities, and in what bottoms,
whether native or foreign, and all about it.  the bridesmaids, down to
little jane gradgrind, were, in an intellectual point of view, fit

 
 ___________________________
 
u a devilish good speech,
look after my brother jem, for he’s your man.’  after a few dashes in the
public meeting way, mr. gradgrind and a council of political sages
approved of jem, and it was resolved to send him down to coketown, to
become known there and in the neighbourhood.  hence the letter jem had
last night shown to mrs. sparsit, which mr. bounderby now held in his
hand; superscribed, ‘josiah bounderby, esquire, banker, coketown.
specially to introduce james harthouse, esquire.  thomas gradgrind.’

within an hour of the receipt of this dispatch and mr. james harthouse’s
card, mr. bounderby put on his hat and went down to the hotel.  there he
found mr. james harthouse looking out of window, in a state of mind so
disconsolate, that he was already half-disposed to ‘go in’ for something
else.

‘my name, sir,’ said his visitor, ‘is josiah bounderby, of coketown.’

mr. james harthouse was very happy indeed (though he scarcely looked so)
to have a pleasure he had long expected
 
 ___________________________
 
mind the name—is, that we know it
is all meaningless, and say so; while they know it equally and will never
say so.’

why should she be shocked or warned by this reiteration?  it was not so
unlike her father’s principles, and her early training, that it need
startle her.  where was the great difference between the two schools,
when each chained her down to material realities, and inspired her with
no faith in anything else?  what was there in her soul for james
harthouse to destroy, which thomas gradgrind had nurtured there in its
state of innocence!

it was even the worse for her at this pass, that in her mind—implanted
there before her eminently practical father began to form it—a struggling
disposition to believe in a wider and nobler humanity than she had ever
heard of, constantly strove with doubts and resentments.  with doubts,
because the aspiration had been so laid waste in her youth.  with
resentments, because of the wrong that had been done her, if it were
indeed a whisper of the t
 
 ___________________________
 
e is sharp enough;
she could manage to coax it out of him, if she chose.  then why doesn’t
she choose, when i tell her of what consequence it is?  but no.  there
she sits in his company like a stone, instead of making herself agreeable
and getting it easily.  i don’t know what you may call this, but i call
it unnatural conduct.’

there was a piece of ornamental water immediately below the parapet, on
the other side, into which mr. james harthouse had a very strong
inclination to pitch mr. thomas gradgrind junior, as the injured men of
coketown threatened to pitch their property into the atlantic.  but he
preserved his easy attitude; and nothing more solid went over the stone
balustrades than the accumulated rosebuds now floating about, a little
surface-island.

‘my dear tom,’ said harthouse, ‘let me try to be your banker.’

‘for god’s sake,’ replied tom, suddenly, ‘don’t talk about bankers!’  and
very white he looked, in contrast with the roses.  very white.

mr. harthouse, a