st, and sells his flag; who, at such a time, turns a traitor and a
craven and a recreant, who, at such a time, is not ashamed to make to you
the dastardly and humiliating avowal that he will hold himself aloof, and
will _not_ be one of those associated in the gallant stand for freedom
and for right?’

the assembly was divided at this point.  there were some groans and
hisses, but the general sense of honour was much too strong for the
condemnation of a man unheard.  ‘be sure you’re right, slackbridge!’
‘put him up!’  ‘let’s hear him!’  such things were said on many sides.
finally, one strong voice called out, ‘is the man heer?  if the man’s
heer, slackbridge, let’s hear the man himseln, ’stead o’ yo.’  which was
received with a round of applause.

slackbridge, the orator, looked about him with a withering smile; and,
holding out his right hand at arm’s length (as the manner of all
slackbridges is), to still the thundering sea, waited until there was a
profound sile
 
 ___________________________
 
nce.

‘oh, my friends and fellow-men!’ said slackbridge then, shaking his head
with violent scorn, ‘i do not wonder that you, the prostrate sons of
labour, are incredulous of the existence of such a man.  but he who sold
his birthright for a mess of pottage existed, and judas iscariot existed,
and castlereagh existed, and this man exists!’

here, a brief press and confusion near the stage, ended in the man
himself standing at the orator’s side before the concourse.  he was pale
and a little moved in the face—his lips especially showed it; bu
 
 ___________________________
 
t he
stood quiet, with his left hand at his chin, waiting to be heard.  there
was a chairman to regulate the proceedings, and this functionary now took
the case into his own hands.

‘my friends,’ said he, ‘by virtue o’ my office as your president, i askes
o’ our friend slackbridge, who may be a little over hetter in this
business, to take his seat, whiles this man stephen blackpool is heern.
you all know this man stephen blackpool.  you know him awlung o’ his
misfort’ns, and his good name.’

with that, the chairman shook him frankly by the hand, and sat down
again.  slackbridge likewise sat down, wiping his hot forehead—always
from left to right, and never the reverse way.

‘my friends,’ stephen began, in the midst of a dead calm; ‘i ha’ hed
what’s been
 
 ___________________________
 
 spok’n o’ me, and ’tis lickly that i shan’t mend it.  but i’d
liefer you’d hearn the truth concernin myseln, fro my lips than fro onny
other man’s, though i never cud’n speak afore so monny, wi’out bein
moydert and muddled.’

slackbridge shook his head as if he would shake it off, in his
bitterness.

‘i’m th’ one single hand in bounderby’s mill, o’ a’ the men theer, as
don’t coom in wi’ th’ proposed reg’lations.  i canna coom in wi’ ’em.  my
friends, i doubt their doin’ yo onny good.  licker they’ll do yo hurt.’

slackbridge laughed, folded his arms, and frowned sarcastically.

‘but ’t an’t sommuch for that as i stands out.  if that were aw, i’d coom
in wi’ th’ rest.  but i ha’ my rea
 
 ___________________________
 
sons—mine, yo see—for being hindered;
not on’y now, but awlus—awlus—life long!’

slackbridge jumped up and stood beside him, gnashing and tearing.  ‘oh,
my friends, what but this did i tell you?  oh, my fellow-countrymen, what
warning but this did i give you?  and how shows this recreant conduct in
a man on whom unequal laws are known to have fallen heavy?  oh, you
englishmen, i ask you how does this subornation show in one of
yourselves, who is thus consenting to his own undoing and to yours, and
to your children’s and your children’s children’s?’

there was some applause, a
 
 ___________________________
 
ns it evinced; and, in
the kindness of their nature, they were more sorry than indignant.

‘’tis this delegate’s trade for t’ speak,’ said stephen, ‘an’ he’s paid
for ’t, an’ he knows his work.  let him keep to ’t.  let him give no heed
to what i ha had’n to bear.  that’s not for him.  that’s not for nobbody
but me.’

there was a propriety, not to say a dignity in these words, that made the
hearers yet more quiet and attentive.  the same strong voice called out,
‘slackbridge, let the man be heern, and howd thee tongue!’  then the
place was wonderfully still.

‘my brothers,’ said stephen, whose low voice was distinctly heard, ‘and
my fellow-workmen—for that yo are to me, though not, as i knows on, to
this delegate here—i ha but a word to sen, and i could sen nommore if i
was to speak till strike o’ day.  i know weel, aw what’s afore me.  i
know weel that yo aw resolve to ha nommore ado wi’ a man who is not wi’
yo in this matther.  i know weel tha
 
 ___________________________
 
e to them by holding up his arms, and stood for
the moment in that attitude; not speaking until they slowly dropped at
his sides.

‘monny’s the pleasant word as soom heer has spok’n wi’ me; monny’s the
face i see heer, as i first seen when i were yoong and lighter heart’n
than now.  i ha’ never had no fratch afore, sin ever i were born, wi’ any
o’ my like; gonnows i ha’ none now that’s o’ my makin’.  yo’ll ca’ me
traitor and that—yo i mean t’ say,’ addressing slackbridge, ‘but ’tis
easier to ca’ than mak’ out.  so let be.’

he had moved away a pace or two to come down from the platform, when he
remembered something he had not said, and returned again.

‘haply,’ he said, turning his furrowed face slowly about, that he might
as it were individually address the whole audience, those both near and
distant; ‘haply, when this question has been tak’n up and discoosed,
there’ll be a threat to turn out if i’m let to work among yo.  i hope i
shall d
 
 ___________________________
 
ight for me at aw, my friends, i think ’tis that.’

not a word was spoken.  not a sound was audible in the building, but the
slight rustle of men moving a little apart, all along the centre of the
room, to open a means of passing out, to the man with whom they had all
bound themselves to renounce companionship.  looking at no one, and going
his way with a lowly steadiness upon him that asserted nothing and sought
nothing, old stephen, with all his troubles on his head, left the scene.

then slackbridge, who had kept his oratorical arm extended during the
going out, as if he were repressing with infinite solicitude and by a
wonderful moral power the vehement passions of the multitude, applied
himself to raising their spirits.  had not the roman brutus, oh, my
british countrymen, condemned his son to death; and had not the spartan
mothers, oh my soon to be victorious friends, driven their flying
children on the points of their enemies’ swords?  then was it not the
sacred duty of the men of co
 
 ___________________________
 
ketown, with forefathers before them, an
admiring world in company with them, and a posterity to come after them,
to hurl out traitors from the tents they had pitched in a sacred and a
god-like cause?  the winds of heaven answered yes; and bore yes, east,
west, north, and south.  and consequently three cheers for the united
aggregate tribunal!

slackbridge acted as fugleman, and gave the time.  the multitude of
doubtful faces (a little conscience-stricken) brightened at the sound,
and took it up.  private feeling must yield to the common cause.  hurrah!
the roof yet vibrated with the cheering, when the assembly dispersed.

thus easily did stephen blackpool fall into the loneliest of lives, the
life of solitude among a familiar crowd.  the stranger in the land who
looks into ten thousand faces for some answering look and never finds it,
is in chee
 
 ___________________________
 
at he was going in the wrong direction.
now, would you believe it, that although they have put this mark upon
him, he is such a slave to them still, that he’s afraid to open his lips
about them?’

‘i sed as i had nowt to sen, sir; not as i was fearfo’ o’ openin’ my
lips.’

‘you said!  ah!  _i_ know what you said; more than that, i know what you
mean, you see.  not always the same thing, by the lord harry!  quite
different things.  you had better tell us at once, that that fellow
slackbridge is not in the town, stirring up the people to mutiny; and
that he is not a regular qualified leader of the people: that is, a most
confounded scoundrel.  you had better tell us so at once; you can’t
deceive me.  you want to tell us so.  why don’t you?’

‘i’m as sooary as yo, sir, when the people’s leaders is bad,’ said
stephen, shaking his head.  ‘they taks such as offers.  haply ’tis na’
the sma’est o’ their misfortuns when they can get no better.’

the wind began to 
 
 ___________________________
 
,’ said mr. bounderby.  ‘now perhaps you’ll let the gentleman
know, how you would set this muddle (as you’re so fond of calling it) to
rights.’

‘i donno, sir.  i canna be expecten to ’t.  ’tis not me as should be
looken to for that, sir.  ’tis them as is put ower me, and ower aw the
rest of us.  what do they tak upon themseln, sir, if not to do’t?’

‘i’ll tell you something towards it, at any rate,’ returned mr.
bounderby.  ‘we will make an example of half a dozen slackbridges.  we’ll
indict the blackguards for felony, and get ’em shipped off to penal
settlements.’

stephen gravely shook his head.

‘don’t tell me we won’t, man,’ said mr. bounderby, by this time blowing a
hurricane, ‘because we will, i tell you!’

‘sir,’ returned stephen, with the quiet confidence of absolute certainty,
‘if yo was t’ tak a hundred slackbridges—aw as there is, and aw the
number ten times towd—an’ was t’ sew ’em up in separate sacks, an’ sink
’em
 
 ___________________________
 
trangers!  ’tis not by _them_ the
trouble’s made, sir.  ’tis not wi’ _them_ ’t commences.  i ha no favour
for ’em—i ha no reason to favour ’em—but ’tis hopeless and useless to
dream o’ takin them fro their trade, ’stead o’ takin their trade fro
them!  aw that’s now about me in this room were heer afore i coom, an’
will be heer when i am gone.  put that clock aboard a ship an’ pack it
off to norfolk island, an’ the time will go on just the same.  so ’tis
wi’ slackbridge every bit.’

reverting for a moment to his former refuge, he observed a cautionary
movement of her eyes towards the door.  stepping back, he put his hand
upon the lock.  but he had not spoken out of his own will and desire; and
he felt it in his heart a noble return for his late injurious treatment
to be faithful to the last to those who had repudiated him.  he stayed to
finish what was in his mind.

‘sir, i canna, wi’ my little learning an’ my common way, tell the
genelman what will be
 
 ___________________________
 
ways
some such ready to help them—stared at the characters which meant so much
with a vague awe and respect that would have been half ludicrous, if any
aspect of public ignorance could ever be otherwise than threatening and
full of evil.  many ears and eyes were busy with a vision of the matter
of these placards, among turning spindles, rattling looms, and whirling
wheels, for hours afterwards; and when the hands cleared out again into
the streets, there were still as many readers as before.

slackbridge, the delegate, had to address his audience too that night;
and slackbridge had obtained a clean bill from the printer, and had
brought it in his pocket.  oh, my friends and fellow-countrymen, the
down-trodden operatives of coketown, oh, my fellow-brothers and
fellow-workmen and fellow-citizens and fellow-men, what a to-do was
there, when slackbridge unfolded what he called ‘that damning document,’
and held it up to the gaze, and for the execration of the working-man
community!  ‘oh, my fe
 
 ___________________________
 
en and your children’s children yet unborn have
set their infant hands and seals, i propose to you on the part of the
united aggregate tribunal, ever watchful for your welfare, ever zealous
for your benefit, that this meeting does resolve: that stephen blackpool,
weaver, referred to in this placard, having been already solemnly
disowned by the community of coketown hands, the same are free from the
shame of his misdeeds, and cannot as a class be reproached with his
dishonest actions!’

thus slackbridge; gnashing and perspiring after a prodigious sort.  a few
stern voices called out ‘no!’ and a score or two hailed, with assenting
cries of ‘hear, hear!’ the caution from one man, ‘slackbridge, y’or over
hetter in’t; y’or a goen too fast!’  but these were pigmies against an
army; the general assemblage subscribed to the gospel according to
slackbridge, and gave three cheers for him, as he sat demonstratively
panting at them.

these men and women were yet in the streets, passing 