
sir.  rachael made the tea (so large a party necessitated the borrowing
of a cup), and the visitor enjoyed it mightily.  it was the first glimpse
of sociality the host had had for many days.  he too, with the world a
wide heath before him, enjoyed the meal—again in corroboration of the
magnates, as exemplifying the utter want of calculation on the part of
these people, sir.

‘i ha never thowt yet, missus,’ said stephen, ‘o’ askin thy name.’

the old lady announced herself as ‘mrs. pegler.’

‘a widder, i think?’ said stephen.

‘oh, many long years!’  mrs. pegler’s husband (one of the best on record)
was already dead, by mrs. pegler’s calculation, when stephen was born.

‘’twere a bad job, too, to lose so good a one,’ said stephen.  ‘onny
children?’

mrs. pegler’s cup, rattling against her saucer as she held it, denoted
some nervousness on her part.  ‘no,’ she said.  ‘not now, not now.’

‘dead, stephen,’ rachael softly hinted.

‘i’m sooar
 
 ___________________________
 
 curiously distressed, and not by any of the usual
appearances of sorrow; ‘and he did well, wonderfully well.  but he is not
to be spoken of if you please.  he is—’  putting down her cup, she moved
her hands as if she would have added, by her action, ‘dead!’  then she
said aloud, ‘i have lost him.’

stephen had not yet got the better of his having given the old lady pain,
when his landlady came stumbling up the narrow stairs, and calling him to
the door, whispered in his ear.  mrs. pegler was by no means deaf, for
she caught a word as it was uttered.

‘bounderby!’ she cried, in a suppressed voice, starting up from the
table.  ‘oh hide me!  don’t let me be seen for the world.  don’t let him
come up till i’ve got away.  pray, pray!’  she trembled, and was
excessively agitated; getting behind rachael, when rachael tried to
reassure her; and not seeming to know what she was about.

‘but hearken, missus, hearken,’ said stephen, astonished.  ‘’tisn’t mr.
bounde
 
 ___________________________
 
be sure you don’t make any mistake then,
and don’t forget.  i shall tell my sister as we go home, what i have in
view, and she’ll approve, i know.  now look here!  you’re all right, are
you?  you understand all about it?  very well then.  come along, loo!’

he pushed the door open as he called to her, but did not return into the
room, or wait to be lighted down the narrow stairs.  he was at the bottom
when she began to descend, and was in the street before she could take
his arm.

mrs. pegler remained in her corner until the brother and sister were
gone, and until stephen came back with the candle in his hand.  she was
in a state of inexpressible admiration of mrs. bounderby, and, like an
unaccountable old woman, wept, ‘because she was such a pretty dear.’  yet
mrs. pegler was so flurried lest the object of her admiration should
return by chance, or anybody else should come, that her cheerfulness was
ended for that night.  it was late too, to people who rose early and
worked har
 
 ___________________________
 
ground,
consisting of the busiest of the neighbours to the number of some
five-and-twenty, closed in after sissy and rachael, as they closed in
after mrs. sparsit and her prize; and the whole body made a disorderly
irruption into mr. bounderby’s dining-room, where the people behind lost
not a moment’s time in mounting on the chairs, to get the better of the
people in front.

‘fetch mr. bounderby down!’ cried mrs. sparsit.  ‘rachael, young woman;
you know who this is?’

‘it’s mrs. pegler,’ said rachael.

‘i should think it is!’ cried mrs. sparsit, exulting.  ‘fetch mr.
bounderby.  stand away, everybody!’  here old mrs. pegler, muffling
herself up, and shrinking from observation, whispered a word of entreaty.
‘don’t tell me,’ said mrs. sparsit, aloud.  ‘i have told you twenty
times, coming along, that i will _not_ leave you till i have handed you
over to him myself.’

mr. bounderby now appeared, accompanied by mr. gradgrind and the whelp,
with whom he had bee
 
 ___________________________
 
rachael, fortunately now
present to identify, i have had the happiness to succeed, and to bring
that person with me—i need not say most unwillingly on her part.  it has
not been, sir, without some trouble that i have effected this; but
trouble in your service is to me a pleasure, and hunger, thirst, and cold
a real gratification.’

here mrs. sparsit ceased; for mr. bounderby’s visage exhibited an
extraordinary combination of all possible colours and expressions of
discomfiture, as old mrs. pegler was disclosed to his view.

‘why, what do you mean by this?’ was his highly unexpected demand, in
great warmth.  ‘i ask you, what do you mean by this, mrs. sparsit,
ma’am?’

‘sir!’ exclaimed mrs. sparsit, faintly.

‘why don’t you mind your own business, ma’am?’ roared bounderby.  ‘how
dare you go and poke your officious nose into my family affairs?’

this allusion to her favourite feature overpowered mrs. sparsit.  she sat
down stiffly in a chair, as if she were frozen
 
 ___________________________
 
; and with a fixed stare at
mr. bounderby, slowly grated her mittens against one another, as if they
were frozen too.

‘my dear josiah!’ cried mrs. pegler, trembling.  ‘my darling boy!  i am
not to blame.  it’s not my fault, josiah.  i told this lady over and over
again, that i knew she was doing what would not be agreeable to you, but
she would do it.’

‘what did you let her bring you for?  couldn’t you knock her cap off, or
her tooth out, or scratch her, or do something or other to her?’ asked
bounderby.

‘my own boy!  she threatened me that if i resisted her, i should be
brought by constables, and it was better to come quietly th
 
 ___________________________
 
an make that
stir in such a’—mrs. pegler glanced timidly but proudly round the
walls—‘such a fine house as this.  indeed, indeed, it is not my fault!
my dear, noble, stately boy!  i have always lived quiet, and secret,
josiah, my dear.  i have never broken the condition once.  i have never
said i was your mother.  i have admired you at a distance; and if i have
come to town sometimes, with long times between, to take a proud peep at
you, i have done it unbeknown, my love, and gone away again.’

mr. bounderby, with his hands in h
 
 ___________________________
 
is pockets, walked in impatient
mortification up and down at the side of the long dining-table, while the
spectators greedily took in every syllable of mrs. pegler’s appeal, and
at each succeeding syllable became more and more round-eyed.  mr.
bounderby still walking up and down when mrs. pegler had done, mr.
gradgrind addressed that maligned old lady:

‘i am surprised, madam,’ he observed with severity, ‘that in your old age
you have the face to claim mr. bounderby for your son, after your
unnatural and inhuman treatment of him.’

‘_me_ unnatural!’ cried poor old mrs. pegler.  ‘_me_ inhuman!  to my dear
boy?’

‘dear!’ repeated mr. gradgrind.  ‘yes; dear in his self-made prosperity,
madam, i dare say.  not very dear, however, when you deserted him in his
infancy, 
 
 ___________________________
 
and left him to the brutality of a drunken grandmother.’

‘_i_ deserted my josiah!’ cried mrs. pegler, clasping her hands.  ‘now,
lord forgive you, sir, for your wicked imaginations, and for your scandal
against the memory of my poor mother, who died in my arms before josiah
was born.  may you repent of it, sir, and live to know better!’

she was so very earnest and injured, that mr. gradgrind, shocked by the
possibility which dawned upon him, said in a gentler tone:

‘do you deny, then, madam, that you left your son to—to be brought up in
the gutter?’

‘josiah in the gutter!’ exc
 
 ___________________________
 
laimed mrs. pegler.  ‘no such a thing, sir.
never!  for shame on you!  my dear boy knows, and will give _you_ to
know, that though he come of humble parents, he come of parents that
loved him as dear as the best could, and never thought it hardship on
themselves to pinch a bit that he might write and cipher beautiful, and
i’ve his books at home to show it!  aye, have i!’ said mrs. pegler, with
indignant pride.  ‘and my dear boy knows, and will give _you_ to know,
sir, that after his beloved father died, when he was eight years old, his
mother, too, could pinch a bit, as it was her duty and her pleasure and
her pride to do it, to help him out in life, and put him ’prentice.  and
a steady lad he was, and a kind master he had to lend him a hand, and
well he worked his own way forward to be rich and thriving.  and _i_’ll
give you to know, sir—for this my dear boy won’t—
 
 ___________________________
 
that though his mother
kept but a little village shop, he never forgot her, but pensioned me on
thirty pound a year—more than i want, for i put by out of it—only making
the condition that i was to keep down in my own part, and make no boasts
about him, and not trouble him.  and i never have, except with looking at
him once a year, when he has never knowed it.  and it’s right,’ said poor
old mrs. pegler, in affectionate championship, ‘that i _should_ keep down
in my own part, and i have no doubts that if i was here i should do a
many unbefitting things, and i am well contented, and i can keep my pride
in my josiah to myself, and i can love for love’s own sake!  and i am
ashamed of you, sir,’ said mrs. pegler, lastly, ‘for your slanders and
suspicions.  and i never stood here before, nor never wanted to stand
here when my dear son said no.  and i shouldn’t be here now, if it hadn’t

 
 ___________________________
 
been for being brought here.  and for shame upon you, oh, for shame, to
accuse me of being a bad mother to my son, with my son standing here to
tell you so different!’

the bystanders, on and off the dining-room chairs, raised a murmur of
sympathy with mrs. pegler, and mr. gradgrind felt himself innocently
placed in a very distressing predicament, when mr. bounderby, who had
never ceased walking up and down, and had every moment swelled larger and
larger, and grown redder and redder, stopped short.

‘i don’t exactly know,’ said mr. bounderby, ‘how i come to be favoured
with the attendance of the present company, but i don’t inquire.  when
they’re quite satisfied, perhaps they’ll be so good as to disperse;
whether they’re satisfied or not,
 
 ___________________________
 
cut a most ridiculous figure.  with the people filing off
at the door he held, who he knew would carry what had passed to the whole
town, to be given to the four winds, he could not have looked a bully
more shorn and forlorn, if he had had his ears cropped.  even that
unlucky female, mrs. sparsit, fallen from her pinnacle of exultation into
the slough of despond, was not in so bad a plight as that remarkable man
and self-made humbug, josiah bounderby of coketown.

rachael and sissy, leaving mrs. pegler to occupy a bed at her son’s for
that night, walked together to the gate of stone lodge and there parted.
mr. gradgrind joined them before they had gone very far, and spoke with
much interest of stephen blackpool; for whom he thought this signal
failure of the suspicions against mrs. pegler was likely to work well.

as to the whelp; throughout this scene as on all other late occasions, he
had stuck close to bounderby.  he seemed to feel that as long as
bounderby could make no discovery withou
 
 ___________________________
 
d make the betht of uth; not the wurtht!’

‘and i never thought before,’ said mr. sleary, putting his head in at the
door again to say it, ‘that i wath tho muth of a cackler!’



chapter ix
final


it is a dangerous thing to see anything in the sphere of a vain
blusterer, before the vain blusterer sees it himself.  mr. bounderby felt
that mrs. sparsit had audaciously anticipated him, and presumed to be
wiser than he.  inappeasably indignant with her for her triumphant
discovery of mrs. pegler, he turned this presumption, on the part of a
woman in her dependent position, over and over in his mind, until it
accumulated with turning like a great snowball.  at last he made the
discovery that to discharge this highly connected female—to have it in
his power to say, ‘she was a woman of family, and wanted to stick to me,
but i wouldn’t have it, and got rid of her’—would be to get the utmost
possible amount of crowning glory out of the connection, and at the same
time to punish mr
 
 ___________________________
 
s. sparsit according to her deserts.

filled fuller than ever, with this great idea, mr. bounderby came in to
lunch, and sat himself down in the dining-room of former days, where his
portrait was.  mrs. sparsit sat by the fire, with her foot in her cotton
stirrup, little thinking whither she was posting.

since the pegler affair, this gentlewoman had covered her pity for mr.
bounderby with a veil of quiet melancholy and contrition.  in virtue
thereof, it had become her habit to assume a woful look, which woful look
she now bestowed upon her patron.

‘what’s the matter now, ma’am?’ said mr. bounderby, in a very short,
rough way.

‘pray, sir,’ returned mrs. sparsit, ‘do not bite my nose off.’

‘bite your nose off, ma’am?’ repeated mr. bounderby.  ‘_your_ nose!’
meaning, as mrs. sparsit co