s of a wife, zekiel’s did; nor did his well-scratched
face less denote her talents (or rather talons) of a different kind.

no longer bore this amazon the shameful flight of her party. she stopt
short, and, calling aloud to all who fled, spoke as follows: “ye
somersetshire men, or rather ye somersetshire women, are ye not
ashamed thus to fly from a single woman? but if no other will oppose
her, i myself and joan top here will have the honour of the victory.”
 having thus said, she flew at molly seagrim, and easily wrenched the
thigh-bone from her hand, at the same time clawing off her cap from
her head. then laying hold of the hair of molly with her left hand,
she attacked her so furiously in the face with the right, that the
blood soon began to trickle from her nose. molly was not idle this
while. she soon removed the clout from the head of goody brown, and
then fastening on her hair with one hand, with the other she caused
another bloody stream to issue forth from the nostrils of the enemy.
 
 ___________________________
 
 he
would suffer her to absent herself from supper. to this request
likewise the squire agreed, though not without some reluctance; for he
scarce ever permitted her to be out of his sight, unless when he was
engaged with his horses, dogs, or bottle. nevertheless he yielded to
the desire of his daughter, though the poor man was at the same time
obliged to avoid his own company (if i may so express myself), by
sending for a neighbouring farmer to sit with him.



chapter xi.

the narrow escape of molly seagrim, with some observations for which
we have been forced to dive pretty deep into nature.


tom jones had ridden one of mr western’s horses that morning in the
chase; so that having no horse of his own in the squire’s stable, he
was obliged to go home on foot: this he did so expeditiously that he
ran upwards of three miles within the half-hour.

just as he arrived at mr allworthy’s outward gate, he met the
constable and company with molly in their possession, whom they were
conducting to tha
 
 ___________________________
 
 poor
body, i am an honest person’s child, and my father and mother were
married, which is more than some people can say, as high as they hold
their heads. marry, come up! i assure you, my dirty cousin! thof his
skin be so white, and to be sure it is the most whitest that ever was
seen, i am a christian as well as he, and nobody can say that i am
base born: my grandfather was a clergyman,[*] and would have been very
angry, i believe, to have thought any of his family should have taken
up with molly seagrim’s dirty leavings.”

  [*] this is the second person of low condition whom we have recorded
  in this history to have sprung from the clergy. it is to be hoped
  such instances will, in future ages, when some provision is made for
  the families of the inferior clergy, appear stranger than they can
  be thought at present.

perhaps sophia might have suffered her maid to run on in this manner,
from wanting sufficient spirits to stop her tongue, which the reader
may probably conjecture was no 
 
 ___________________________
 
now checked the torrent, as there seemed no
end of its flowing. “i wonder,” says she, “at your assurance in daring
to talk thus of one of my father’s friends. as to the wench, i order
you never to mention her name to me. and with regard to the young
gentleman’s birth, those who can say nothing more to his disadvantage,
may as well be silent on that head, as i desire you will be for the
future.”

“i am sorry i have offended your ladyship,” answered mrs honour. “i am
sure i hate molly seagrim as much as your ladyship can; and as for
abusing squire jones, i can call all the servants in the house to
witness, that whenever any talk hath been about bastards, i have
always taken his part; for which of you, says i to the footmen, would
not be a bastard, if he could, to be made a gentleman of? and, says i,
i am sure he is a very fine gentleman; and he hath one of the whitest
hands in the world; for to be sure so he hath: and, says i, one of the
sweetest temperedest, best naturedest men in 
 
 ___________________________
 
that matter; for to be sure you won’t
mention it any more. and for that matter, if you knew where i have
been, unless you knew what i have been about, it would not signify
much. nay, i don’t see why it should be kept a secret for my part; for
to be sure she is the best lady in the world.” upon this, jones began
to beg earnestly to be let into this secret, and faithfully promised
not to divulge it. she then proceeded thus:--“why, you must know, sir,
my young lady sent me to enquire after molly seagrim, and to see
whether the wench wanted anything; to be sure, i did not care to go,
methinks; but servants must do what they are ordered.--how could you
undervalue yourself so, mr jones?--so my lady bid me go and carry her
some linen, and other things. she is too good. if such forward sluts
were sent to bridewell, it would be better for them. i told my lady,
says i, madam, your la’ship is encouraging idleness.”--“and was my
sophia so good?” says jones. “my sophia! i assure you, marry com
 
 ___________________________
 
d a hermit be colder in their embraces.
sophia, sophia alone shall be mine. what raptures are in that name! i
will engrave it on every tree.”

at these words he started up, and beheld--not his sophia--no, nor a
circassian maid richly and elegantly attired for the grand signior’s
seraglio. no; without a gown, in a shift that was somewhat of the
coarsest, and none of the cleanest, bedewed likewise with some
odoriferous effluvia, the produce of the day’s labour, with a
pitchfork in her hand, molly seagrim approached. our hero had his
penknife in his hand, which he had drawn for the before-mentioned
purpose of carving on the bark; when the girl coming near him, cryed
out with a smile, “you don’t intend to kill me, squire, i hope!”--“why
should you think i would kill you?” answered jones. “nay,” replied
she, “after your cruel usage of me when i saw you last, killing me
would, perhaps, be too great kindness for me to expect.”

here ensued a parley, which, as i do not think myself 
 
 ___________________________
 
of jones himself, when they were all in company together.
lastly, and indeed principally, he was well assured there was not
another self in the case. he fancied that he knew jones to the bottom,
and had in reality a great contempt for his understanding, for not
being more attached to his own interest. he had no apprehension that
jones was in love with sophia; and as for any lucrative motives, he
imagined they would sway very little with so silly a fellow. blifil,
moreover, thought the affair of molly seagrim still went on, and
indeed believed it would end in marriage; for jones really loved him
from his childhood, and had kept no secret from him, till his
behaviour on the sickness of mr allworthy had entirely alienated his
heart; and it was by means of the quarrel which had ensued on this
occasion, and which was not yet reconciled, that mr blifil knew
nothing of the alteration which had happened in the affection which
jones had formerly borne towards molly.

from these reasons, therefore, mr blifil
 
 ___________________________
 
nour, that she called him jackanapes, and returned in a violent
hurry to her mistress, whom she acquainted with the success of her
errand, and with the account she had received; which, if possible, she
exaggerated, being as angry with jones as if he had pronounced all the
words that came from the mouth of partridge. she discharged a torrent
of abuse on the master, and advised her mistress to quit all thoughts
of a man who had never shown himself deserving of her. she then ripped
up the story of molly seagrim, and gave the most malicious turn to his
formerly quitting sophia herself; which, i must confess, the present
incident not a little countenanced.

the spirits of sophia were too much dissipated by concern to enable
her to stop the torrent of her maid. at last, however, she interrupted
her, saying, “i never can believe this; some villain hath belied him.
you say you had it from his friend; but surely it is not the office of
a friend to betray such secrets.” “i suppose,” cries honour, “
 
 ___________________________
 
 instance of sophia, western
hath bestowed a considerable living.

black george, hearing the discovery that had been made, ran away, and
was never since heard of; and jones bestowed the money on his family,
but not in equal proportions, for molly had much the greatest share.

as for partridge, jones hath settled £50 a-year on him; and he hath
again set up a school, in which he meets with much better
encouragement than formerly, and there is now a treaty of marriage on
foot between him and miss molly seagrim, which, through the mediation
of sophia, is likely to take effect.

we now return to take leave of mr jones and sophia, who, within two
days after their marriage, attended mr western and mr allworthy into
the country. western hath resigned his family seat, and the greater
part of his estate, to his son-in-law, and hath retired to a lesser
house of his in another part of the country, which is better for
hunting. indeed, he is often as a visitant with mr jones, who, as well
as his daughter, hath 