amily that he was certainly born to be hanged.

indeed, i am sorry to say there was too much reason for this
conjecture; the lad having from his earliest years discovered a
propensity to many vices, and especially to one which hath as direct a
tendency as any other to that fate which we have just now observed to
have been prophetically denounced against him: he had been already
convicted of three robberies, viz., of robbing an orchard, of stealing
a duck out of a farmer’s yard, and of picking master blifil’s pocket
of a ball.

the vices of this young man were, moreover, heightened by the
disadvantageous light in which they appeared when opposed to the
virtues of master blifil, his companion; a youth of so different a
cast from little jones, that not only the family but all the
neighbourhood resounded his praises. he was, indeed, a lad of a
remarkable disposition; sober, discreet, and pious beyond his age;
qualities which gained him the love of every one who knew him: while
tom jones was univers
 
 ___________________________
 
hen turned towards tom, with more than usual anger in
his countenance, and advised him to confess who was with him;
repeating, that he was resolved to know. the lad, however, still
maintained his resolution, and was dismissed with much wrath by mr
allworthy, who told him he should have to the next morning to consider
of it, when he should be questioned by another person, and in another
manner.

poor jones spent a very melancholy night; and the more so, as he was
without his usual companion; for master blifil was gone abroad on a
visit with his mother. fear of the punishment he was to suffer was on
this occasion his least evil; his chief anxiety being, lest his
constancy should fail him, and he should be brought to betray the
gamekeeper, whose ruin he knew must now be the consequence.

nor did the gamekeeper pass his time much better. he had the same
apprehensions with the youth; for whose honour he had likewise a much
tenderer regard than for his skin.

in the morning, when tom attended the reveren
 
 ___________________________
 
peared!

upon the whole, it is not religion or virtue, but the want of them,
which is here exposed. had not thwackum too much neglected virtue, and
square, religion, in the composition of their several systems, and had
not both utterly discarded all natural goodness of heart, they had
never been represented as the objects of derision in this history; in
which we will now proceed.

this matter then, which put an end to the debate mentioned in the last
chapter, was no other than a quarrel between master blifil and tom
jones, the consequence of which had been a bloody nose to the former;
for though master blifil, notwithstanding he was the younger, was in
size above the other’s match, yet tom was much his superior at the
noble art of boxing.

tom, however, cautiously avoided all engagements with that youth; for
besides that tommy jones was an inoffensive lad amidst all his
roguery, and really loved blifil, mr thwackum being always the second
of the latter, would have been sufficient to deter him.

b
 
 ___________________________
 
ut well says a certain author, no man is wise at all hours; it is
therefore no wonder that a boy is not so. a difference arising at play
between the two lads, master blifil called tom a beggarly bastard.
upon which the latter, who was somewhat passionate in his disposition,
immediately caused that phenomenon in the face of the former, which we
have above remembered.

master blifil now, with his blood running from his nose, and the tears
galloping after from his eyes, appeared before his uncle and the
tremendous thwackum. in which court an indictment of assault, battery,
and wounding, was instantly preferred against tom; who in his excuse
only pleaded the provocation, which was indeed all the matter that
master blifil had omitted.

it is indeed possible that this circumstance might have escaped his
memory; for, in his reply, he positively insisted, that he had made
use of
 
 ___________________________
 
 no such appellation; adding, “heaven forbid such naughty words
should ever come out of his mouth!”

tom, though against all form of law, rejoined in affirmance of the
words. upon which master blifil said, “it is no wonder. those who will
tell one fib, will hardly stick at another. if i had told my master
such a wicked fib as you have done, i should be ashamed to show my
face.”

“what fib, child?” cries thwackum pretty eagerly.

“why, he told you that nobody was with him a shooting when he killed
the partridge; but he knows” (here he burst into a flood of tears),
“yes, he knows, for he confessed it to me, that black george the
gamekeeper was there. nay, he said--yes you did--d
 
 ___________________________
 
ue, but could not. he owned there was
something which at first sight appeared like fortitude in the action;
but as fortitude was a virtue, and falsehood a vice, they could by no
means agree or unite together. he added, that as this was in some
measure to confound virtue and vice, it might be worth mr thwackum’s
consideration, whether a larger castigation might not be laid on upon
the account.

as both these learned men concurred in censuring jones, so were they
no less unanimous in applauding master blifil. to bring truth to
light, was by the parson asserted to be the duty of every religious
man; and by the philosopher this was declared to be highly conformable
with the rule of right, and the eternal and unalterable fitness of
things.

all this, however, weighed very little with mr allworthy. he could not
be prevailed on to sign the warrant for the execution of jones. there
was something within his own breast with which the invincible fidelity
which that youth had preserved, corresponded much bet
 
 ___________________________
 
served, that there was a great difference
between being guilty of a falsehood to excuse yourself, and to excuse
another. he likewise urged, as the principal motive to his inflexible
severity against this man, that he had basely suffered tom jones to
undergo so heavy a punishment for his sake, whereas he ought to have
prevented it by making the discovery himself.

when this story became public, many people differed from square and
thwackum, in judging the conduct of the two lads on the occasion.
master blifil was generally called a sneaking rascal, a poor-spirited
wretch, with other epithets of the like kind; whilst tom was honoured
with the appellations of a brave lad, a jolly dog, and an honest
fellow. indeed, his behaviour to black george much ingratiated him
with all the servants; for though that fellow was before universally
disliked, yet he was no sooner turned away than he was as universally
pitied; and the friendship and gallantry of tom jones was celebrated
by them all with the highest appl
 
 ___________________________
 
curring the danger of
offending his mother. for all this, however, poor tom smarted in the
flesh; for though thwackum had been inhibited to exercise his arm on
the foregoing account, yet, as the proverb says, it is easy to find a
stick, &c. so was it easy to find a rod; and, indeed, the not being
able to find one was the only thing which could have kept thwackum any
long time from chastising poor jones.

had the bare delight in the sport been the only inducement to the
pedagogue, it is probable master blifil would likewise have had his
share; but though mr allworthy had given him frequent orders to make
no difference between the lads, yet was thwackum altogether as kind
and gentle to this youth, as he was harsh, nay even barbarous, to the
other. to say the truth, blifil had greatly gained his master’s
affections; partly by the profound respect he always showed his
person, but much more by the decent reverence with which he received
his doctrine; for he had got by heart, and frequently repeated, h
 
 ___________________________
 
nd indecently laugh at
his companion for his serious behaviour.

mr square had the same reason for his preference of the former lad;
for tom jones showed no more regard to the learned discourses which
this gentleman would sometimes throw away upon him, than to those of
thwackum. he once ventured to make a jest of the rule of right; and at
another time said, he believed there was no rule in the world capable
of making such a man as his father (for so mr allworthy suffered
himself to be called).

master blifil, on the contrary, had address enough at sixteen to
recommend himself at one and the same time to both these opposites.
with one he was all religion, with the other he was all virtue. and
when both were present, he was profoundly silent, which both
interpreted in his favour and in their own.

nor was blifil contented with flattering both these gentlemen to their
faces; he took frequent occasions of praising them behind their backs
to allworthy; before whom, when they two were alone, and his uncl
 
 ___________________________
 

death at last a little reconciled him to her affections. it will not
be therefore greatly wondered at, if she had not the most violent
regard to the offspring she had by him. and, in fact, she had so
little of this regard, that in his infancy she seldom saw her son, or
took any notice of him; and hence she acquiesced, after a little
reluctance, in all the favours which mr allworthy showered on the
foundling; whom the good man called his own boy, and in all things put
on an entire equality with master blifil. this acquiescence in mrs
blifil was considered by the neighbours, and by the family, as a mark
of her condescension to her brother’s humour, and she was imagined by
all others, as well as thwackum and square, to hate the foundling in
her heart; nay, the more civility she showed him, the more they
conceived she detested him, and the surer schemes she was laying for
his ruin: for as they thought it her interest to hate him, it was very
difficult for her to persuade them she did not.

thwackum 
 
 ___________________________
 
yet was this affection of mrs blifil to tom,
and the preference which she too visibly gave him to her own son, of
the utmost disadvantage to that youth.

for such was the compassion which inhabited mr allworthy’s mind, that
nothing but the steel of justice could ever subdue it. to be
unfortunate in any respect was sufficient, if there was no demerit to
counterpoise it, to turn the scale of that good man’s pity, and to
engage his friendship and his benefaction.

when therefore he plainly saw master blifil was absolutely detested
(for that he was) by his own mother, he began, on that account only,
to look with an eye of compassion upon him; and what the effects of
compassion are, in good and benevolent minds, i need not here explain
to most of my readers.

henceforward he saw every appearance of virtue in the youth through
the magnifying end, and viewed all his faults with the glass inverted,
so that they became scarce perceptible. and this perhaps the amiable
temper of pity may make commendable;
 
 ___________________________
 
om than myself, that misfortunes seldom come single. an instance
of this may, i believe, be seen in those gentlemen who have the
misfortune to have any of their rogueries detected; for here discovery
seldom stops till the whole is come out. thus it happened to poor tom;
who was no sooner pardoned for selling the horse, than he was
discovered to have some time before sold a fine bible which mr
allworthy gave him, the money arising from which sale he had disposed
of in the same manner. this bible master blifil had purchased, though
he had already such another of his own, partly out of respect for the
book, and partly out of friendship to tom, being unwilling that the
bible should be sold out of the family at half-price. he therefore
deposited the said half-price himself; for he was a very prudent lad,
and so careful of his money, that he had laid up almost every penny
which he had received from mr allworthy.

some people have been noted to be able to read in no book but their
own. on the contrary, fr
 
 ___________________________
 
om the time when master blifil was first
possessed of this bible, he never used any other. nay, he was seen
reading in it much oftener than he had before been in his own. now, as
he frequently asked thwackum to explain difficult passages to him,
that gentleman unfortunately took notice of tom’s name, which was
written in many parts of the book. this brought on an inquiry, which
obliged master blifil to discover the whole matter.

thwackum was resolved a crime of this kind, which he called sacrilege,
should not go unpunished. he therefore proceeded immediately to
castigation: and not contented with that he acquainted mr allworthy,
at their next meeting, with this monstrous crime, as it appeared to
him: inveighing against tom in the most bitter terms, and likening him
to the buyers and sellers who were driven out of the temple.

square saw this matter in a very different light. he said, he c
 
 ___________________________
 
; and whether he
was or was not angry with the lad, i must leave to the reader’s own
conjecture.

soon after this, an action was brought against the gamekeeper by
squire western (the gentleman in whose manor the partridge was
killed), for depredations of the like kind. this was a most
unfortunate circumstance for the fellow, as it not only of itself
threatened his ruin, but actually prevented mr allworthy from
restoring him to his favour: for as that gentleman was walking out one
evening with master blifil and young jones, the latter slily drew him
to the habitation of black george; where the family of that poor
wretch, namely, his wife and children, were found in all the misery
with which cold, hunger, and nakedness, can affect human creatures:
for as to the money they had received from jones, former debts had
consumed almost the whole.

such a scene as this could not fail of affecting the heart of mr
allworthy. he immediately gave the mother a couple of guineas, with
which he bid her cloath her
 
 ___________________________
 
d think of some means of providing for him and his
family.

jones was so delighted with this news, that, though it was dark when
they returned home, he could not help going back a mile, in a shower
of rain, to acquaint the poor woman with the glad tidings; but, like
other hasty divulgers of news, he only brought on himself the trouble
of contradicting it: for the ill fortune of black george made use of
the very opportunity of his friend’s absence to overturn all again.



chapter x.

in which master blifil and jones appear in different lights.


master blifil fell very short of his companion in the amiable quality
of mercy; but he as greatly exceeded him in one of a much higher kind,
namely, in justice: in which he followed both the precepts and example
of thwackum and square; for though they would both make frequent use
of the word mercy, yet it was plain that in reality square held it to
be inconsistent with the rule of right; and thwackum was for doing
justice, and leaving mercy to heaven. the
 
 ___________________________
 
 two gentlemen did indeed
somewhat differ in opinion concerning the objects of this sublime
virtue; by which thwackum would probably have destroyed one half of
mankind, and square the other half.

master blifil then, though he had kept silence in the presence of
jones, yet, when he had better considered the matter, could by no
means endure the thought of suffering his uncle to confer favours on
the undeserving. he therefore resolved immediately to acquaint him
with the fact which we have above slightly hinted to the readers. the
truth of which was as follows:

the gamekeeper, about a year after he was dismissed from mr
allworthy’s service, and before tom’s selling the horse, being in want
of bread
 
 ___________________________
 
make, as he had
supplied him with no game since; and by this means the witness had an
opportunity of screening his better customers: for the squire, being
charmed with the power of punishing black george, whom a single
transgression was sufficient to ruin, made no further enquiry.

had this fact been truly laid before mr allworthy, it might probably
have done the gamekeeper very little mischief. but there is no zeal
blinder than that which is inspired with the love of justice against
offenders. master blifil had forgot the distance of the time. he
varied likewise in the manner of the fact: and by the hasty addition
of the single letter s he considerably altered the story; for he said
that george had wired hares. these alterations might probably have
been set right, had not master blifil unluckily insisted on a promise
of secrecy from mr allworthy before he revealed the matter to him; but
by that means the poor gamekeeper was condemned without having an
opportunity to defend himself: for as the fact
 
 ___________________________
 
rthy had no
doubt concerning the rest.

short-lived then was the joy of these poor people; for mr allworthy
the next morning declared he had fresh reason, without assigning it,
for his anger, and strictly forbad tom to mention george any more:
though as for his family, he said he would endeavour to keep them from
starving; but as to the fellow himself, he would leave him to the
laws, which nothing could keep him from breaking.

tom could by no means divine what had incensed mr allworthy, for of
master blifil he had not the least suspicion. however, as his
friendship was to be tired out by no disappointments, he now
determined to try another method of preserving the poor gamekeeper
from ruin.

jones was lately grown very intimate with mr western. he had so
greatly recommended himself to that gentleman, by leaping over
five-barred gates, and by other acts of sportsmanship, that the squire
had declared tom would certainly make a great man if he had but
sufficient encouragement. he often wished he had 
 
 ___________________________
 
recapitulation of some
previous matters may be necessary.

though the different tempers of mr allworthy and of mr western did not
admit of a very intimate correspondence, yet they lived upon what is
called a decent footing together; by which means the young people of
both families had been acquainted from their infancy; and as they were
all near of the same age, had been frequent playmates together.

the gaiety of tom’s temper suited better with sophia, than the grave
and sober disposition of master blifil. and the preference which she
gave the former of these, would often appear so plainly, that a lad of
a more passionate turn than master blifil was, might have shown some
displeasure at it.

as he did not, however, outwardly express any such disgust, it would
be an ill office in us to pay a visit to the inmost recesses of his
mind, as some scandalous people search into the most secret affairs of
their friends, and often pry into their closets and cupboards, only to
discover their poverty and mea
 
 ___________________________
 
nness to the world.

however, as persons who suspect they have given others cause of
offence, are apt to conclude they are offended; so sophia imputed an
action of master blifil to his anger, which the superior sagacity of
thwackum and square discerned to have arisen from a much better
principle.

tom jones, when very young, had presented sophia with a little bird,
which he had taken from the nest, had nursed up, and taught to sing.

of this bird, sophia, then about thirteen years old, was so extremely
fond, that her chief business was to feed and tend it, and her chief
pleasure to play with it. by these means little tommy, for so the bird
was called, was become so tam
 
 ___________________________
 
e, that it would feed out of the hand of
its mistress, would perch upon the finger, and lie contented in her
bosom, where it seemed almost sensible of its own happiness; though
she always kept a small string about its leg, nor would ever trust it
with the liberty of flying away.

one day, when mr allworthy and his whole family dined at mr western’s,
master blifil, being in the garden with little sophia, and observing
the extreme fondness that she showed for her little bird, desired her
to trust it for a moment in his hands. sophia presently complied with
the young gentleman’s request, and after some previous caution,
delivered him her bird; of which he was no sooner in possession, than
he slipt the string from its leg and tossed it into the air.

the foolish animal no sooner perceived itself at liberty, than
forgetting all the favours it had received 
 
 ___________________________
 
han he cursed blifil
for a pitiful malicious rascal; and then immediately stripping off his
coat he applied himself to climbing the tree to which the bird
escaped.

tom had almost recovered his little namesake, when the branch on which
it was perched, and that hung over a canal, broke, and the poor lad
plumped over head and ears into the water.

sophia’s concern now changed its object. and as she apprehended the
boy’s life was in danger, she screamed ten times louder than before;
and indeed master blifil himself now seconded her with all the
vociferation in his power.

the company, who were sitting in a room next the garden, were
instantly alarmed, and came all forth; but just as they reached the
canal, tom (for the water was luckily pretty shallow in that part)
arrived safely on shore.

thwackum fell violently on poor tom, who stood dropping and shivering
before him, when mr allworthy desired him to have patience; and
turning to master blifil, said, “pray, child, what is the reason of
all th
 
 ___________________________
 
is disturbance?”

master blifil answered, “indeed, uncle, i am very sorry for what i
have done; i have been unhappily the occasion of it all. i had miss
sophia’s bird in my hand, and thinking the poor creature languished
for liberty, i own i could not forbear giving it what it desired; for
i always thought there was something very cruel in confining anything.
it seemed to be against the law of nature, by which everything hath a
right to liberty; nay, it is even unchristian, for it is not doing
what we would be done by; bu
 
 ___________________________
 
if they had been hanged too for those crimes,” cried thwackum,
“they would have had no more than their deserts. a couple of
heathenish villains! heaven be praised we have no brutuses now-a-days!
i wish, mr square, you would desist from filling the minds of my
pupils with such antichristian stuff; for the consequence must be,
while they are under my care, its being well scourged out of them
again. there is your disciple tom almost spoiled already. i overheard
him the other day disputing with master blifil that there was no merit
in faith without works. i know that is one of your tenets, and i
suppose he had it from you.”

“don’t accuse me of spoiling him,” says square. “who taught him to
laugh at whatever is virtuous and decent, and fit and right in the
nature of things? he is your own scholar, and i disclaim him. no, no,
master blifil is my boy. young as he is, that lad’s notions of moral
rectitude i defy you ever to eradicate.”

thwackum put on a contemptuous sneer at this, and r
 
 ___________________________
 
ness for tom
jones, and no little aversion for his companion.

many accidents from time to time improved both these passions in her
breast; which, without our recounting, the reader may well conclude,
from what we have before hinted of the different tempers of these
lads, and how much the one suited with her own inclinations more than
the other. to say the truth, sophia, when very young, discerned that
tom, though an idle, thoughtless, rattling rascal, was nobody’s enemy
but his own; and that master blifil, though a prudent, discreet, sober
young gentleman, was at the same time strongly attached to the
interest only of one single person; and who that single person was the
reader will be able to divine without any assistance of ours.

these two characters are not always received in the world with the
different regard which seems severally due to either; and which one
would imagine mankind, from self-interest, should show towards them.
but perhaps there may be a political reason for it: in finding 
 
 ___________________________
 
that to trumpet
forth the praises of such a person, would, in the vulgar phrase, be
crying roast-meat, and calling in partakers of what they intend to
apply solely to their own use. if this reason does not satisfy the
reader, i know no other means of accounting for the little respect
which i have commonly seen paid to a character which really does great
honour to human nature, and is productive of the highest good to
society. but it was otherwise with sophia. she honoured tom jones, and
scorned master blifil, almost as soon as she knew the meaning of those
two words.

sophia had been absent upwards of three years with her aunt; during
all which time she had seldom seen either of these young gentlemen.
she dined, however, once, together with her aunt, at mr allworthy’s.
this was a few days after the adventure of the partridge, before
commemorated. sophia heard the whole story at table, where she said
nothing: nor indeed could her aunt get many words from her as she
returned home; but her maid, whe
 
 ___________________________
 
n undressing her, happening to say,
“well, miss, i suppose you have seen young master blifil to-day?” she
answered with much passion, “i hate the name of master blifil, as i do
whatever is base and treacherous: and i wonder mr allworthy would
suffer that old barbarous schoolmaster to punish a poor boy so cruelly
for what was only the effect of his good-nature.” she then recounted
the story to her maid, and concluded with saying, “don’t you think he
is a boy of noble spirit?”

this young lady was now returned to her father; who gave her the
command of his house, and placed her at the upper end of his table,
where tom (who for his great love of hunting 
 
 ___________________________
 
was become a great
favourite of the squire) often dined. young men of open, generous
dispositions are naturally inclined to gallantry, which, if they have
good understandings, as was in reality tom’s case, exerts itself in an
obliging complacent behaviour to all women in general. this greatly
distinguished tom from the boisterous brutality of mere country
squires on the one hand, and from the solemn and somewhat sullen
deportment of master blifil on the other; and he began now, at twenty,
to have the name of a pretty fellow among all the women in the
neighbourhood.

tom behaved to sophia with no particularity, unless perhaps by showing
her a higher respect than he paid to any other. this distinction her
beauty, fortune, sense, and amiable carriage, seemed to demand; but as
to design upon her person he had none; for which we shall at present
suffer the reader to condemn him of stupidity; but perhaps we shall be
able indifferently well to
 
 ___________________________
 
attributed the conquest entirely to himself, and considered
the young woman as one who had yielded to the violent attacks of his
passion. he likewise imputed her yielding to the ungovernable force of
her love towards him; and this the reader will allow to have been a
very natural and probable supposition, as we have more than once
mentioned the uncommon comeliness of his person: and, indeed, he was
one of the handsomest young fellows in the world.

as there are some minds whose affections, like master blifil’s, are
solely placed on one single person, whose interest and indulgence
alone they consider on every occasion; regarding the good and ill of
all others as merely indifferent, any farther than as they contribute
to the pleasure or advantage of that person: so there is a different
temper of mind which borrows a degree of virtue even from self-love.
such can never receive any kind of satisfaction from another, without
loving the creature to whom that satisfaction is owing, and without
making it
 
 ___________________________
 
l in colour as in many other properties, exactly resembling an
antient piece of parchment, upon which any one might have drummed a
considerable while without doing her any great damage.

molly, beside her present unhappy condition, was differently formed in
those parts, and might, perhaps, have tempted the envy of brown to
give her a fatal blow, had not the lucky arrival of tom jones at this
instant put an immediate end to the bloody scene.

this accident was luckily owing to mr square; for he, master blifil,
and jones, had mounted their horses, after church, to take the air,
and had ridden about a quarter of a mile, when square, changing his
mind (not idly, but for a reason which we shall unfold as soon as we
have leisure), desired the young gentlemen to ride with him another
way than they had at first purposed. this motion being complied with,
brought them of necessity back again to the churchyard.

master blifil, who rode first, seeing such a mob assembled, and two
women in the posture in which 
 
 ___________________________
 
n
which must give both me and my reader pain, was it to be described
here. tom raved like a madman, beat his breast, tore his hair, stamped
on the ground, and vowed the utmost vengeance on all who had been
concerned. he then pulled off his coat, and buttoned it round her, put
his hat upon her head, wiped the blood from her face as well as he
could with his handkerchief, and called out to the servant to ride as
fast as possible for a side-saddle, or a pillion, that he might carry
her safe home.

master blifil objected to the sending away the servant, as they had
only one with them; but as square seconded the order of jones, he was
obliged to comply.

the servant returned in a very short time with the pillion, and molly,
having collected her rags as well as she could, was placed behind him.
in which manner she was carried home, square, blifil, and jones
attending.

here jones having received his coat, given her a sly kiss, and
whispered her, that he would return in the evening, quitted his molly,
and