 law, rejoined in affirmance of the
words. upon which master blifil said, “it is no wonder. those who will
tell one fib, will hardly stick at another. if i had told my master
such a wicked fib as you have done, i should be ashamed to show my
face.”

“what fib, child?” cries thwackum pretty eagerly.

“why, he told you that nobody was with him a shooting when he killed
the partridge; but he knows” (here he burst into a flood of tears),
“yes, he knows, for he confessed it to me, that black george the
gamekeeper was there. nay, he said--yes you did--deny it if you can,
that you would not have confest the truth, though master had cut you
to pieces.”

at this the fire flashed from thwackum’s eyes, and he cried out in
triumph--“oh! ho! this is your mistaken notion of honour! this is the
boy who was not to be whipped again!” but mr allworthy, with a more
gentle aspect, turned towards the lad, and said, “is this true, child?
how came you to persist so obstinately in a falsehood?”

 
 ___________________________
 
om jones to
undergo so heavy a punishment for his sake, whereas he ought to have
prevented it by making the discovery himself.

when this story became public, many people differed from square and
thwackum, in judging the conduct of the two lads on the occasion.
master blifil was generally called a sneaking rascal, a poor-spirited
wretch, with other epithets of the like kind; whilst tom was honoured
with the appellations of a brave lad, a jolly dog, and an honest
fellow. indeed, his behaviour to black george much ingratiated him
with all the servants; for though that fellow was before universally
disliked, yet he was no sooner turned away than he was as universally
pitied; and the friendship and gallantry of tom jones was celebrated
by them all with the highest applause; and they condemned master
blifil as openly as they durst, without incurring the danger of
offending his mother. for all this, however, poor tom smarted in the
flesh; for though thwackum had been inhibited to exercise his arm on
the
 
 ___________________________
 
’s own
conjecture.

soon after this, an action was brought against the gamekeeper by
squire western (the gentleman in whose manor the partridge was
killed), for depredations of the like kind. this was a most
unfortunate circumstance for the fellow, as it not only of itself
threatened his ruin, but actually prevented mr allworthy from
restoring him to his favour: for as that gentleman was walking out one
evening with master blifil and young jones, the latter slily drew him
to the habitation of black george; where the family of that poor
wretch, namely, his wife and children, were found in all the misery
with which cold, hunger, and nakedness, can affect human creatures:
for as to the money they had received from jones, former debts had
consumed almost the whole.

such a scene as this could not fail of affecting the heart of mr
allworthy. he immediately gave the mother a couple of guineas, with
which he bid her cloath her children. the poor woman burst into tears
at this goodness, and while she wa
 
 ___________________________
 
ing her gratitude to tom; who had, she said, long
preserved both her and hers from starving. “we have not,” says she,
“had a morsel to eat, nor have these poor children had a rag to put
on, but what his goodness hath bestowed on us.” for, indeed, besides
the horse and the bible, tom had sacrificed a night-gown, and other
things, to the use of this distressed family.

on their return home, tom made use of all his eloquence to display the
wretchedness of these people, and the penitence of black george
himself; and in this he succeeded so well, that mr allworthy said, he
thought the man had suffered enough for what was past; that he would
forgive him, and think of some means of providing for him and his
family.

jones was so delighted with this news, that, though it was dark when
they returned home, he could not help going back a mile, in a shower
of rain, to acquaint the poor woman with the glad tidings; but, like
other hasty divulgers of news, he only brought on himself the trouble
of contr
 
 ___________________________
 
adicting it: for the ill fortune of black george made use of
the very opportunity of his friend’s absence to overturn all again.



chapter x.

in which master blifil and jones appear in different lights.


master blifil fell very short of his companion in the amiable quality
of mercy; but he as greatly exceeded him in one of a much higher kind,
namely, in justice: in which he followed both the precepts and example
of thwackum and square; for though they would both make frequent use
of the word mercy, yet it was plain that in reality square
 
 ___________________________
 
f bread, either to fill his own mouth or those of his family, as he
passed through a field belonging to mr western espied a hare sitting
in her form. this hare he had basely and barbarously knocked on the
head, against the laws of the land, and no less against the laws of
sportsmen.

the higgler to whom the hare was sold, being unfortunately taken many
months after with a quantity of game upon him, was obliged to make his
peace with the squire, by becoming evidence against some poacher. and
now black george was pitched upon by him, as being a person already
obnoxious to mr western, and one of no good fame in the country. he
was, besides, the best sacrifice the higgler could make, as he had
supplied him with no game since; and by this means the witness had an
opportunity of screening his better customers: for the squire, being
charmed with the power of punishing black george, whom a single
transgression was sufficient to ruin, made no further enquiry.

had this fact been truly laid before mr allwor
 
 ___________________________
 
ut,
that tom should hunt a pack of hounds for a thousand pound of his
money, with any huntsman in the whole country.

by such kind of talents he had so ingratiated himself with the squire,
that he was a most welcome guest at his table, and a favourite
companion in his sport: everything which the squire held most dear, to
wit, his guns, dogs, and horses, were now as much at the command of
jones, as if they had been his own. he resolved therefore to make use
of this favour on behalf of his friend black george, whom he hoped to
introduce into mr western’s family, in the same capacity in which he
had before served mr allworthy.

the reader, if he considers that this fellow was already obnoxious to
mr western, and if he considers farther the weighty business by which
that gentleman’s displeasure had been incurred, will perhaps condemn
this as a foolish and desperate undertaking; but if he should totally
condemn young jones on that account, he will greatly applaud him for
strengthening himself with 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing sophia did not fail to remind him of his engagement; and his
attorney was immediately sent for, ordered to stop any further
proceedings in the action, and to make out the deputation.

tom’s success in this affair soon began to ring over the country, and
various were the censures passed upon it; some greatly applauding it
as an act of good nature; others sneering, and saying, “no wonder that
one idle fellow should love another.” young blifil was greatly enraged
at it. he had long hated black george in the same proportion as jones
delighted in him; not from any offence which he had ever received, but
from his great love to religion and virtue;--for black george had the
reputation of a loose kind of a fellow. blifil therefore represented
this as flying in mr allworthy’s face; and declared, with great
concern, that it was impossible to find any other motive for doing
good to such a wretch.

thwackum and square likewise sung to the same tune. they were now
(especially the latter) become gre
 
 ___________________________
 
d to mention some suspicions of her affection for tom, we have
not hitherto given the least latitude for imagining that he had any
for her; and, indeed, i am sorry to say it, but the youth of both
sexes are too apt to be deficient in their gratitude for that regard
with which persons more advanced in years are sometimes so kind to
honour them.

that the reader may be no longer in suspense, he will be pleased to
remember, that we have often mentioned the family of george seagrim
(commonly called black george, the gamekeeper), which consisted at
present of a wife and five children.

the second of these children was a daughter, whose name was molly, and
who was esteemed one of the handsomest girls in the whole country.

congreve well says there is in true beauty something which vulgar
souls cannot admire; so can no dirt or rags hide this something from
those souls which are not of the vulgar stamp.

the beauty of this girl made, however, no impression on tom, till she
grew towards the age of sixteen,
 
 ___________________________
 
amily,
and might possibly place the girl about her own person, when her own
maid, who was now going away, had left her.

poor seagrim was thunderstruck at this; for he was no stranger to the
fault in the shape of his daughter. he answered, in a stammering
voice, “that he was afraid molly would be too awkward to wait on her
ladyship, as she had never been at service.” “no matter for that,”
 says sophia; “she will soon improve. i am pleased with the girl, and
am resolved to try her.”

black george now repaired to his wife, on whose prudent counsel he
depended to extricate him out of this dilemma; but when he came
thither he found his house in some confusion. so great envy had this
sack occasioned, that when mr allworthy and the other gentry were gone
from church, the rage, which had hitherto been confined, burst into an
uproar; and, having vented itself at first in opprobrious words,
laughs, hisses, and gestures, betook itself at last to certain missile
weapons; which, though from their 
 
 ___________________________
 
pbraid me with that, mother,” cries molly; “you
yourself was brought-to-bed of sister there, within a week after you
was married.”

“yes, hussy,” answered the enraged mother, “so i was, and what was the
mighty matter of that? i was made an honest woman then; and if you was
to be made an honest woman, i should not be angry; but you must have
to doing with a gentleman, you nasty slut; you will have a bastard,
hussy, you will; and that i defy any one to say of me.”

in this situation black george found his family, when he came home for
the purpose before mentioned. as his wife and three daughters were all
of them talking together, and most of them crying, it was some time
before he could get an opportunity of being heard; but as soon as such
an interval occurred, he acquainted the company with what sophia had
said to him.

goody seagrim then began to revile her daughter afresh. “here,” says
she, “you have brought us into a fine quandary indeed. what will madam
say to that big bell
 
 ___________________________
 
ut of the shop.”

“well, but consider,” cried george, “what answer shall i make to
madam?”

“i don’t know what answer,” says she; “you are always bringing your
family into one quandary or other. do you remember when you shot the
partridge, the occasion of all our misfortunes? did not i advise you
never to go into squire western’s manor? did not i tell you many a
good year ago what would come of it? but you would have your own
headstrong ways; yes, you would, you villain.”

black george was, in the main, a peaceable kind of fellow, and nothing
choleric nor rash; yet did he bear about him something of what the
antients called the irascible, and which his wife, if she had been
endowed with much wisdom, would have feared. he had long experienced,
that when the storm grew very high, arguments were but wind, which
served rather to increase, than to abate it. he was therefore seldom
unprovided with a small switch, a remedy of wonderful force, as he had
often essayed, and which the w
 
 ___________________________
 
 i think i have seen your ladyship in such a one. however, in
the country, such dresses are

     _rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno._

that is, madam, as much as to say, ‘a rare bird upon the earth, and
very like a black swan.’ the verse is in juvenal. but to return to
what i was relating. i was saying such garments are rare sights in the
country; and perchance, too, it was thought the more rare, respect
being had to the person who wore it, who, they tell me, is the
daughter of black george, your worship’s gamekeeper, whose sufferings,
i should have opined, might have taught him more wit, than to dress
forth his wenches in such gaudy apparel. she created so much confusion
in the congregation, that if squire allworthy had not silenced it, it
would have interrupted the service: for i was once about to stop in
the middle of the first lesson. howbeit, nevertheless, after prayer
was over, and i was departed home, this occasioned a battle in the
churchyard, where, amongst other mischi
 
 ___________________________
 
 nor
indeed anything else, therein; for in truth he had, in his frantic
disposition, tossed everything from him, and amongst the rest, his
pocket-book, which he had received from mr allworthy, which he had
never opened, and which now first occurred to his memory.

the house supplied him with a wafer for his present purpose, with
which, having sealed his letter, he returned hastily towards the brook
side, in order to search for the things which he had there lost. in
his way he met his old friend black george, who heartily condoled with
him on his misfortune; for this had already reached his ears, and
indeed those of all the neighbourhood.

jones acquainted the gamekeeper with his loss, and he as readily went
back with him to the brook, where they searched every tuft of grass in
the meadow, as well where jones had not been as where he had been; but
all to no purpose, for they found nothing; for, indeed, though the
things were then in the meadow, they omitted to search the only place
where they were 
 
 ___________________________
 
 recollect
if he had been in no other place: “for sure,” said he, “if you had
lost them here so lately, the things must have been here still; for
this is a very unlikely place for any one to pass by.” and indeed it
was by great accident that he himself had passed through that field,
in order to lay wires for hares, with which he was to supply a
poulterer at bath the next morning.

jones now gave over all hopes of recovering his loss, and almost all
thoughts concerning it, and turning to black george, asked him
earnestly if he would do him the greatest favour in the world?

george answered with some hesitation, “sir, you know you may command
me whatever is in my power, and i heartily wish it was in my power to
do you any service.” in fact, the question staggered him; for he had,
by selling game, amassed a pretty good sum of money in mr western’s
service, and was afraid that jones wanted to borrow some small matter
of him; but he was presently relieved from his anxiety, by being
desire
 
 ___________________________
 
 that he had made use of the interval
of his messenger’s absence to write and dispatch a letter to mr
allworthy, in which he had faithfully promised and bound himself to
quit all thoughts of his love. however, when his cool reflections
returned, he plainly perceived that his case was neither mended nor
altered by sophia’s billet, unless to give him some little glimpse of
hope, from her constancy, of some favourable accident hereafter. he
therefore resumed his resolution, and taking leave of black george,
set forward to a town about five miles distant, whither he had desired
mr allworthy, unless he pleased to revoke his sentence, to send his
things after him.



chapter xiii.

the behaviour of sophia on the present occasion; which none of her sex
will blame, who are capable of behaving in the same manner. and the
discussion of a knotty point in the court of conscience.


sophia had passed the last twenty-four hours in no very desirable
manner. during a large part of them she had been entertaine
 
 ___________________________
 
“do but consider, if my master
should miss any of these things, i should be made to answer for them.
therefore let me beg your la’ship not to part with your watch and
jewels. besides, the money, i think, is enough of all conscience; and
as for that, my master can never know anything of the matter.” “here,
then,” cries sophia, “take every farthing i am worth, find him out
immediately, and give it him. go, go, lose not a moment.”

mrs honour departed according to orders, and finding black george
below-stairs, delivered him the purse, which contained sixteen
guineas, being, indeed, the whole stock of sophia; for though her
father was very liberal to her, she was much too generous to be rich.

black george having received the purse, set forward towards the
alehouse; but in the way a thought occurred to him, whether he should
not detain this money likewise. his conscience, however, immediately
started at this suggestion, and began to upbraid him with ingratitude
to his benefactor. to this
 
 ___________________________
 
sion. in short, poor
conscience had certainly been defeated in the argument, had not fear
stept in to her assistance, and very strenuously urged that the real
distinction between the two actions, did not lie in the different
degrees of honour but of safety: for that the secreting the £500 was a
matter of very little hazard; whereas the detaining the sixteen
guineas was liable to the utmost danger of discovery.

by this friendly aid of fear, conscience obtained a compleat victory
in the mind of black george, and, after making him a few compliments
on his honesty, forced him to deliver the money to jones.



chapter xiv.

a short chapter, containing a short dialogue between squire western
and his sister.


mrs western had been engaged abroad all that day. the squire met her
at her return home; and when she enquired after sophia, he acquainted
her that he had secured her safe enough. “she is locked up in
chamber,” cries he, “and honour keeps the key.” as his looks were full
of prodigious wis
 
 ___________________________
 
 will the behaviour of her spectators no less admit the
above-mentioned comparison than that of her actors. in this vast
theatre of time are seated the friend and the critic; here are claps
and shouts, hisses and groans; in short, everything which was ever
seen or heard at the theatre-royal.

let us examine this in one example; for instance, in the behaviour of
the great audience on that scene which nature was pleased to exhibit
in the twelfth chapter of the preceding book, where she introduced
black george running away with the £500 from his friend and
benefactor.

those who sat in the world’s upper gallery treated that incident, i am
well convinced, with their usual vociferation; and every term of
scurrilous reproach was most probably vented on that occasion.

if we had descended to the next order of spectators, we should have
found an equal degree of abhorrence, though less of noise and
scurrility; yet here the good women gave black george to the devil,
and many of them expected every minute
 
 ___________________________
 
ic proclamation of what you told
them of a quarrel between yourself and squire allworthy, they added
lies of their own, things which i knew to be lies.”--“you surprize me
greatly,” cries jones. “upon my word, sir,” answered benjamin, “i tell
the truth, and i need not tell you my landlady was the person. i am
sure it moved me to hear the story, and i hope it is all false; for i
have a great respect for you, i do assure you i have, and have had
ever since the good-nature you showed to black george, which was
talked of all over the country, and i received more than one letter
about it. indeed, it made you beloved by everybody. you will pardon
me, therefore; for it was real concern at what i heard made me ask
many questions; for i have no impertinent curiosity about me: but i
love good-nature and thence became _amoris abundantia erga te_.”

every profession of friendship easily gains credit with the miserable;
it is no wonder therefore, if jones, who, besides his being miserable,
was ext
 
 ___________________________
 
dge; but i here absolve you from all filial duty, for i do
assure you, you are no son of mine.” “how!” replied jones, “and is it
possible that a false suspicion should have drawn all the ill
consequences upon you, with which i am too well acquainted?” “it is
possible,” cries benjamin, “for it is so: but though it is natural
enough for men to hate even the innocent causes of their sufferings,
yet i am of a different temper. i have loved you ever since i heard of
your behaviour to black george, as i told you; and i am convinced,
from this extraordinary meeting, that you are born to make me amends
for all i have suffered on that account. besides, i dreamt, the night
before i saw you, that i stumbled over a stool without hurting myself;
which plainly showed me something good was towards me: and last night
i dreamt again, that i rode behind you on a milk-white mare, which is
a very excellent dream, and betokens much good fortune, which i am
resolved to pursue unless you have the cruelty
 
 ___________________________
 
e.


while jones was exulting in the consciousness of his integrity,
partridge came capering into the room, as was his custom when he
brought, or fancied he brought, any good tidings. he had been
despatched that morning by his master, with orders to endeavour, by
the servants of lady bellaston, or by any other means, to discover
whither sophia had been conveyed; and he now returned, and with a
joyful countenance told our heroe that he had found the lost bird. “i
have seen, sir,” says he, “black george, the gamekeeper, who is one of
the servants whom the squire hath brought with him to town. i knew him
presently, though i have not seen him these several years; but you
know, sir, he is a very remarkable man, or, to use a purer phrase, he
hath a most remarkable beard, the largest and blackest i ever saw. it
was some time, however, before black george could recollect me.”
 “well, but what is your good news?” cries jones; “what do you know of
my sophia?” “you shall know presently, sir
 
 ___________________________
 
ry at me you
will frighten all of it out of my head, or, to use a purer phrase, out
of my memory. i never saw you look so angry since the day we left
upton, which i shall remember if i was to live a thousand
years.”--“well, pray go on your own way,” said jones: “you are
resolved to make me mad i find.” “not for the world,” answered
partridge, “i have suffered enough for that already; which, as i said,
i shall bear in my remembrance the longest day i have to live.” “well,
but black george?” cries jones. “well, sir, as i was saying, it was a
long time before he could recollect me; for, indeed, i am very much
altered since i saw him. _non sum qualis eram._ i have had troubles in
the world, and nothing alters a man so much as grief. i have heard it
will change the colour of a man’s hair in a night. however, at last,
know me he did, that’s sure enough; for we are both of an age, and
were at the same charity school. george was a great dunce, but no
matter for that; all men do
 
 ___________________________
 
he said, she perceived to be a very hastish kind of a
gentleman.

though sophia eat but little, yet she was regularly served with her
meals; indeed, i believe, if she had liked any one rarity, that the
squire, however angry, would have spared neither pains nor cost to
have procured it for her; since, however strange it may appear to some
of my readers, he really doated on his daughter, and to give her any
kind of pleasure was the highest satisfaction of his life.

the dinner-hour being arrived, black george carried her up a pullet,
the squire himself (for he had sworn not to part with the key)
attending the door. as george deposited the dish, some compliments
passed between him and sophia (for he had not seen her since she left
the country, and she treated every servant with more respect than some
persons shew to those who are in a very slight degree their
inferiors). sophia would have had him take the pullet back, saying,
she could not eat; but george begged her to try, and particularly
recommend
 
 ___________________________
 
y ordering chairs to be called. i say luckily, for had
it continued much longer, fresh matter of dissension would, most
probably, have arisen between the brother and sister; between whom
education and sex made the only difference; for both were equally
violent and equally positive: they had both a vast affection for
sophia, and both a sovereign contempt for each other.



chapter v.

in which jones receives a letter from sophia, and goes to a play with
mrs miller and partridge.


the arrival of black george in town, and the good offices which that
grateful fellow had promised to do for his old benefactor, greatly
comforted jones in the midst of all the anxiety and uneasiness which
he had suffered on the account of sophia; from whom, by the means of
the said george, he received the following answer to his letter, which
sophia, to whom the use of pen, ink, and paper was restored with her
liberty, wrote the very evening when she departed from her
confinement:

  “sir,

  “as i do not doubt your s
 
 ___________________________
 
.

he went to the gatehouse with trembling knees and a beating heart, and
was no sooner arrived in the presence of jones than he lamented the
misfortune that had befallen him with many tears, looking all the
while frequently about him in great terror; for as the news now
arrived that mr fitzpatrick was dead, the poor fellow apprehended
every minute that his ghost would enter the room. at last he delivered
him a letter, which he had like to have forgot, and which came from
sophia by the hands of black george.

jones presently dispatched every one out of the room, and, having
eagerly broke open the letter, read as follows:--

  “you owe the hearing from me again to an accident which i own
  surprizes me. my aunt hath just now shown me a letter from you to
  lady bellaston, which contains a proposal of marriage. i am
  convinced it is your own hand; and what more surprizes me is, that
  it is dated at the very time when you would have me imagine you was
  under such concern on my account.--i leave 
 
 ___________________________
 

sincerity of which she averred she had an entire faith; and now the
remainder of the conversation past in the joint attempts of that good
woman and mr nightingale to cheer the dejected spirits of mr jones, in
which they so far succeeded as to leave him much better comforted and
satisfied than they found him; to which happy alteration nothing so
much contributed as the kind undertaking of mrs miller to deliver his
letter to sophia, which he despaired of finding any means to
accomplish; for when black george produced the last from sophia, he
informed partridge that she had strictly charged him, on pain of
having it communicated to her father, not to bring her any answer. he
was, moreover, not a little pleased to find he had so warm an advocate
to mr allworthy himself in this good woman, who was, in reality, one
of the worthiest creatures in the world.

after about an hour’s visit from the lady (for nightingale had been
with him much longer), they both took their leave, promising to return
to him 
 
 ___________________________
 
took it up, and having received consent by silence, read it
likewise; nor had it upon him a less sensible effect. the pencil, and
not the pen, should describe the horrors which appeared in both their
countenances. while they both remained speechless the turnkey entered
the room, and, without taking any notice of what sufficiently
discovered itself in the faces of them both, acquainted jones that a
man without desired to speak with him. this person was presently
introduced, and was no other than black george.

as sights of horror were not so usual to george as they were to the
turnkey, he instantly saw the great disorder which appeared in the
face of jones. this he imputed to the accident that had happened,
which was reported in the very worst light in mr western’s family; he
concluded, therefore, that the gentleman was dead, and that mr jones
was in a fair way of coming to a shameful end. a thought which gave
him much uneasiness; for george was of a compassionate disposition,
and notwithstanding
 
 ___________________________
 
ty was so great, that, after having sat with him three hours,
he at last prevailed with him to consent to see his son.

here an accident happened of a very extraordinary kind; one indeed of
those strange chances whence very good and grave men have concluded
that providence often interposes in the discovery of the most secret
villany, in order to caution men from quitting the paths of honesty,
however warily they tread in those of vice.

mr allworthy, at his entrance into mr nightingale’s, saw black george;
he took no notice of him, nor did black george imagine he had
perceived him.

however, when their conversation on the principal point was over,
allworthy asked nightingale, whether he knew one george seagrim, and
upon what business he came to his house? “yes,” answered nightingale,
“i know him very well, and a most extraordinary fellow he is, who, in
these days, hath been able to hoard up £500 from renting a very small
estate of £30 a year.” “and is this the story which he hath tol
 
 ___________________________
 

on his marriage.

mr nightingale hath purchased an estate for his son in the
neighbourhood of jones, where the young gentleman, his lady, mrs
miller, and her little daughter reside, and the most agreeable
intercourse subsists between the two families.

as to those of lower account, mrs waters returned into the country,
had a pension of £60 a-year settled upon her by mr allworthy, and is
married to parson supple, on whom, at the instance of sophia, western
hath bestowed a considerable living.

black george, hearing the discovery that had been made, ran away, and
was never since heard of; and jones bestowed the money on his family,
but not in equal proportions, for molly had much the greatest share.

as for partridge, jones hath settled £50 a-year on him; and he hath
again set up a school, in which he meets with much better
encouragement than formerly, and there is now a treaty of marriage on
foot between him and miss molly seagrim, which, through the mediation
of sophia, is likely to take effect