our for so doing.

‚Äúhonour!‚Äù cryed thwackum, with some warmth, ‚Äúmere stubbornness and
obstinacy! can honour teach any one to tell a lie, or can any honour
exist independent of religion?‚Äù

this discourse happened at table when dinner was just ended; and there
were present mr allworthy, mr thwackum, and a third gentleman, who now
entered into the debate, and whom, before we proceed any further, we
shall briefly introduce to our reader‚Äôs acquaintance.



chapter iii.

the character of mr square the philosopher, and of mr thwackum the
divine; with a dispute concerning----


the name of this gentleman, who had then resided some time at mr
allworthy‚Äôs house, was mr square. his natural parts were not of the
first rate, but he had greatly improved them by a learned education.
he was deeply read in the antients, and a profest master of all the
works of plato and aristotle. upon which great models he had
principally formed himself; sometimes according with the opinion of
the one, and somet
 
 ___________________________
 
 sentiment he carried a great
way; indeed, so far, as to regard all virtue as matter of theory only.
this, it is true, he never affirmed, as i have heard, to any one; and
yet upon the least attention to his conduct, i cannot help thinking it
was his real opinion, as it will perfectly reconcile some
contradictions which might otherwise appear in his character.

this gentleman and mr thwackum scarce ever met without a disputation;
for their tenets were indeed diametrically opposite to each other.
square held human nature to be the perfection of all virtue, and that
vice was a deviation from our nature, in the same manner as deformity
of body is. thwackum, on the contrary, maintained that the human mind,
since the fall, was nothing but a sink of iniquity, till purified and
redeemed by grace. in one point only they agreed, which was, in all
their discourses on morality never to mention the word goodness. the
favourite phrase of the former, was the natural beauty of virtue; that
of the latter, wa
 
 ___________________________
 
right, and the eternal fitness of
things; the latter decided all matters by authority; but in doing
this, he always used the scriptures and their commentators, as the
lawyer doth his coke upon lyttleton, where the comment is of equal
authority with the text.

after this short introduction, the reader will be pleased to remember,
that the parson had concluded his speech with a triumphant question,
to which he had apprehended no answer; viz., can any honour exist
independent on religion?

to this square answered; that it was impossible to discourse
philosophically concerning words, till their meaning was first
established: that there were scarce any two words of a more vague and
uncertain signification, than the two he had mentioned; for that there
were almost as many different opinions concerning honour, as
concerning religion. ‚Äúbut,‚Äù says he, ‚Äúif by honour you mean the true
natural beauty of virtue, i will maintain it may exist independent of
any religion whatever. nay,‚Äù added he, ‚Ä
 
 ___________________________
 
ligion; and not only the protestant religion, but the
church of england. and when i mention honour, i mean that mode of
divine grace which is not only consistent with, but dependent upon,
this religion; and is consistent with and dependent upon no other. now
to say that the honour i here mean, and which was, i thought, all the
honour i could be supposed to mean, will uphold, much less dictate an
untruth, is to assert an absurdity too shocking to be conceived.‚Äù

‚Äúi purposely avoided,‚Äù says square, ‚Äúdrawing a conclusion which i
thought evident from what i have said; but if you perceived it, i am
sure you have not attempted to answer it. however, to drop the article
of religion, i think it is plain, from what you have said, that we
have different ideas of honour; or why do we not agree in the same
terms of its explanation? i have asserted, that true honour and true
virtue are almost synonymous terms, and they are both founded on the
unalterable rule of right, and the eternal fitness of 
 
 ___________________________
 
er will be pleased to consider, that, as neither of these men were
fools, they could not be supposed to have holden none but wrong
principles, and to have uttered nothing but absurdities; what
injustice, therefore, must i have done to their characters, had i
selected only what was bad! and how horribly wretched and maimed must
their arguments have appeared!

upon the whole, it is not religion or virtue, but the want of them,
which is here exposed. had not thwackum too much neglected virtue, and
square, religion, in the composition of their several systems, and had
not both utterly discarded all natural goodness of heart, they had
never been represented as the objects of derision in this history; in
which we will now proceed.

this matter then, which put an end to the debate mentioned in the last
chapter, was no other than a quarrel between master blifil and tom
jones, the consequence of which had been a bloody nose to the former;
for though master blifil, notwithstanding he was the younger, 
 
 ___________________________
 
.

thwackum, whose meditations were full of birch, exclaimed against this
weak, and, as he said he would venture to call it, wicked lenity. to
remit the punishment of such crimes was, he said, to encourage them.
he enlarged much on the correction of children, and quoted many texts
from solomon, and others; which being to be found in so many other
books, shall not be found here. he then applied himself to the vice of
lying, on which head he was altogether as learned as he had been on
the other.

square said, he had been endeavouring to reconcile the behaviour of
tom with his idea of perfect virtue, but could not. he owned there was
something which at first sight appeared like fortitude in the action;
but as fortitude was a virtue, and falsehood a vice, they could by no
means agree or unite together. he added, that as this was in some
measure to confound virtue and vice, it might be worth mr thwackum‚Äôs
consideration, whether a larger castigation might not be laid on upon
the account.

as bot
 
 ___________________________
 
ery religious
man; and by the philosopher this was declared to be highly conformable
with the rule of right, and the eternal and unalterable fitness of
things.

all this, however, weighed very little with mr allworthy. he could not
be prevailed on to sign the warrant for the execution of jones. there
was something within his own breast with which the invincible fidelity
which that youth had preserved, corresponded much better than it had
done with the religion of thwackum, or with the virtue of square. he
therefore strictly ordered the former of these gentlemen to abstain
from laying violent hands on tom for what had past. the pedagogue was
obliged to obey those orders; but not without great reluctance, and
frequent mutterings that the boy would be certainly spoiled.

towards the gamekeeper the good man behaved with more severity. he
presently summoned that poor fellow before him, and after many bitter
remonstrances, paid him his wages, and dismist him from his service;
for mr allworthy righ
 
 ___________________________
 
tly observed, that there was a great difference
between being guilty of a falsehood to excuse yourself, and to excuse
another. he likewise urged, as the principal motive to his inflexible
severity against this man, that he had basely suffered tom jones to
undergo so heavy a punishment for his sake, whereas he ought to have
prevented it by making the discovery himself.

when this story became public, many people differed from square and
thwackum, in judging the conduct of the two lads on the occasion.
master blifil was generally called a sneaking rascal, a poor-spirited
wretch, with other epithets of the like kind; whilst tom was honoured
with the appellations of a brave lad, a jolly dog, and an honest
fellow. indeed, his behaviour to black george much ingratiated him
with all the servants; for though that fellow was before universally
disliked, yet he was no sooner turned away than he was as universally
pitied; and the fr
 
 ___________________________
 
d which greatly endeared
him to the worthy preceptor.

tom jones, on the other hand, was not only deficient in outward tokens
of respect, often forgetting to pull off his hat, or to bow at his
master‚Äôs approach; but was altogether as unmindful both of his
master‚Äôs precepts and example. he was indeed a thoughtless, giddy
youth, with little sobriety in his manners, and less in his
countenance; and would often very impudently and indecently laugh at
his companion for his serious behaviour.

mr square had the same reason for his preference of the former lad;
for tom jones showed no more regard to the learned discourses which
this gentleman would sometimes throw away upon him, than to those of
thwackum. he once ventured to make a jest of the rule of right; and at
another time said, he believed there was no rule in the world capable
of making such a man as his father (for so mr allworthy suffered
himself to be called).

master blifil, on the contrary, had address enough at sixteen to
recommend
 
 ___________________________
 
nd
when both were present, he was profoundly silent, which both
interpreted in his favour and in their own.

nor was blifil contented with flattering both these gentlemen to their
faces; he took frequent occasions of praising them behind their backs
to allworthy; before whom, when they two were alone, and his uncle
commended any religious or virtuous sentiment (for many such came
constantly from him) he seldom failed to ascribe it to the good
instructions he had received from either thwackum or square; for he
knew his uncle repeated all such compliments to the persons for whose
use they were meant; and he found by experience the great impressions
which they made on the philosopher, as well as on the divine: for, to
say the truth, there is no kind of flattery so irresistible as this,
at second hand.

the young gentleman, moreover, soon perceived how extremely grateful
all those panegyrics on his instructors were to mr allworthy himself,
as they so loudly resounded the praise of that singular 
 
 ___________________________
 
cquaintance which he himself could have had with that
divine, would have informed him of those things which we, from our
inspiration, are enabled to open and discover. of readers who, from
such conceits as these, condemn the wisdom or penetration of mr
allworthy, i shall not scruple to say, that they make a very bad and
ungrateful use of that knowledge which we have communicated to them.

these apparent errors in the doctrine of thwackum served greatly to
palliate the contrary errors in that of square, which our good man no
less saw and condemned. he thought, indeed, that the different
exuberancies of these gentlemen would correct their different
imperfections; and that from both, especially with his assistance, the
two lads would derive sufficient precepts of true religion and virtue.
if the event happened contrary to his expectations, this possibly
proceeded from some fault in the plan itself; which the reader hath my
leave to discover, if he can: for we do not pretend to introduce any
inf
 
 ___________________________
 
w a little descended into the vale of
years; but in reality bosom friends, and intimate acquaintance, have a
kind of natural propensity to particular females at the house of a
friend--viz., to his grandmother, mother, sister, daughter, aunt,
niece, or cousin, when they are rich; and to his wife, sister,
daughter, niece, cousin, mistress, or servant-maid, if they should be
handsome.

we would not, however, have our reader imagine, that persons of such
characters as were supported by thwackum and square, would undertake a
matter of this kind, which hath been a little censured by some rigid
moralists, before they had thoroughly examined it, and considered
whether it was (as shakespear phrases it) ‚Äústuff o‚Äô th‚Äô conscience,‚Äù
 or no. thwackum was encouraged to the undertaking by reflecting that
to covet your neighbour‚Äôs sister is nowhere forbidden: and he knew it
was a rule in the construction of all laws, that ‚Äú_expressum facit
cessare tacitum._‚Äù the sense of which is, ‚Äúwhen a law
 
 ___________________________
 
giver sets down
plainly his whole meaning, we are prevented from making him mean what
we please ourselves.‚Äù as some instances of women, therefore, are
mentioned in the divine law, which forbids us to covet our neighbour‚Äôs
goods, and that of a sister omitted, he concluded it to be lawful. and
as to square, who was in his person what is called a jolly fellow, or
a widow‚Äôs man, he easily reconciled his choice to the eternal fitness
of things.

now, as both of these gentlemen were industrious in taking every
opportunity of recommending themselves to the widow, they apprehended
one certain method was, by giving her son the constant preference to
the other lad; and as they conceived the kindness and affection which
mr allworthy showed the latter, must be highly disagreeable to her,
they doubted not
 
 ___________________________
 
 but the laying hold on all occasions to degrade and
vilify him, would be highly pleasing to her; who, as she hated the
boy, must love all those who did him any hurt. in this thwackum had
the advantage; for while square could only scarify the poor lad‚Äôs
reputation, he could flea his skin; and, indeed, he considered every
lash he gave him as a compliment paid to his mistress; so that he
could, with the utmost propriety, repeat this old flogging line,
_‚Äúcastigo te non quod odio habeam, sed quod_ amem. i chastise thee not
out of hatred, but out of love.‚Äù and this, indeed, he often had in his
mouth, or rather, according to the old phrase, never more properly
applied, at his fingers‚Äô ends.

for this reason,
 
 ___________________________
 
it; or, indeed, intended she should: for they proceeded with
great caution, lest she should be offended, and acquaint mr allworthy.
but they had no reason for any such fear; she was well enough pleased
with a passion, of which she intended none should have any fruits but
herself. and the only fruits she designed for herself were, flattery
and courtship; for which purpose she soothed them by turns, and a long
time equally. she was, indeed, rather inclined to favour the parson‚Äôs
principles; but square‚Äôs person was more agreeable to her eye, for he
was a comely man; whereas the pedagogue did in countenance very nearly
resemble that gentleman, who, in the harlot‚Äôs progress, is seen
correcting the ladies in bridewell.

whether mrs blifil had been surfeited with the sweets of marriage, or
disgusted by its bitters, or from what other cause it proceeded, i
will not determine; but she could never be brought to listen to any
second proposals. however, she at last conversed with square with such

 
 ___________________________
 
a degree of intimacy that malicious tongues began to whisper things of
her, to which, as well for the sake of the lady, as that they were
highly disagreeable to the rule of right and the fitness of things, we
will give no credit, and therefore shall not blot our paper with them.
the pedagogue, ‚Äòtis certain, whipped on, without getting a step nearer
to his journey‚Äôs end.

indeed he had committed a great error, and that square discovered much
sooner than himself. mrs blifil (as, perhaps, the reader may have
formerly guessed) was not over and above pleased with the behaviour of
her husband; nay, to be honest, she absolutely hated him, till his
death at last a little reconciled him to her affections. it will not
be therefore greatly wondered at, if she had not the most violent
regard to the offspring she had by him. and, in fact, she had so
little of this regard, that in his infancy she seldom saw her son, or
took any 
 
 ___________________________
 
notice of him; and hence she acquiesced, after a little
reluctance, in all the favours which mr allworthy showered on the
foundling; whom the good man called his own boy, and in all things put
on an entire equality with master blifil. this acquiescence in mrs
blifil was considered by the neighbours, and by the family, as a mark
of her condescension to her brother‚Äôs humour, and she was imagined by
all others, as well as thwackum and square, to hate the foundling in
her heart; nay, the more civility she showed him, the more they
conceived she detested him, and the surer schemes she was laying for
his ruin: for as they thought it her interest to hate him, it was very
difficult for her to persuade them she did not.

thwackum was the more confirmed in his opinion, as she had more than
once slily caused him to whip tom jones, when mr allworthy, who was an
enemy to this exercise, was abroad; whereas she had never given any
such orders 
 
 ___________________________
 
concerning young blifil. and this had likewise imposed
upon square. in reality, though she certainly hated her own son--of
which, however monstrous it appears, i am assured she is not a
singular instance--she appeared, notwithstanding all her outward
compliance, to be in her heart sufficiently displeased with all the
favour shown by mr allworthy to the foundling. she frequently
complained of this behind her brother‚Äôs back, and very sharply
censured him for it, both to thwackum and square; nay, she would throw
it in the teeth of allworthy himself, when a little quarrel, or miff,
as it is vulgarly called, arose between them.

however, when tom grew up, and gave tokens of that gallantry of temper
which greatly recommends men to women, this disinclination which she
had discovered to him when a child, by degrees abated, and at last she
so evidently demonstrated her affection to him to be much stronger
than what she bore her own son, that it was impossible to mistake her
any longer. 
 
 ___________________________
 
she was so desirous of often seeing him, and discovered
such satisfaction and delight in his company, that before he was
eighteen years old he was become a rival to both square and thwackum;
and what is worse, the whole country began to talk as loudly of her
inclination to tom, as they had before done of that which she had
shown to square: on which account the philosopher conceived the most
implacable hatred for our poor heroe.



chapter vii.

in which the author himself makes his appearance on the stage.


though mr allworthy was not of himself hasty to see things in a
disadvantageous light, and was a stranger to the public voice, which
seldom reaches to a brother or a husband, though it rings in the ears
of all the neighbourhood; yet was this affection of mrs blifil to tom,
and the preference which she too visibly gave him to
 
 ___________________________
 
with your dear present, notwithstanding all the value i had for
it: i sold the horse for them, and they have every farthing of the
money.‚Äù

mr allworthy now stood silent for some moments, and before he spoke
the tears started from his eyes. he at length dismissed tom with a
gentle rebuke, advising him for the future to apply to him in cases of
distress, rather than to use extraordinary means of relieving them
himself.

this affair was afterwards the subject of much debate between thwackum
and square. thwackum held, that this was flying in mr allworthy‚Äôs
face, who had intended to punish the fellow for his disobedience. he
said, in some instances, what the world called charity appeared to him
to be opposing the will of the almighty, which had marked some
particular persons for destruction; and that this was in like manner
acting in opposition to mr allworthy; concluding, as usual, with a
hearty recommendation of birch.

square argued strongly on the other side, in opposition perhaps to
thw
 
 ___________________________
 
ackum, or in compliance with mr allworthy, who seemed very much to
approve what jones had done. as to what he urged on this occasion, as
i am convinced most of my readers will be much abler advocates for
poor jones, it would be impertinent to relate it. indeed it was not
difficult to reconcile to the rule of right an action which it would
have been impossible to deduce from the rule of wrong.



chapter ix.

containing an incident of a more heinous kind, with the comments of
thwackum and square.


it hath been observed by some man of much greater reputation for
wisdom than myself, that misfortunes seldom come single. an instance
of this may, i believe, be seen in those gentlemen who have the
misfortune to have any of their rogueries detected; for here discovery
seldom stops till the whole is come out. thus it happened to poor tom;
who was no sooner pardoned for selling the horse, than he was
discovered to have some time before sold a fine bible which mr
allworthy gave him, the money a
 
 ___________________________
 
e book. this brought on an inquiry, which
obliged master blifil to discover the whole matter.

thwackum was resolved a crime of this kind, which he called sacrilege,
should not go unpunished. he therefore proceeded immediately to
castigation: and not contented with that he acquainted mr allworthy,
at their next meeting, with this monstrous crime, as it appeared to
him: inveighing against tom in the most bitter terms, and likening him
to the buyers and sellers who were driven out of the temple.

square saw this matter in a very different light. he said, he could
not perceive any higher crime in selling one book than in selling
another. that to sell bibles was strictly lawful by all laws both
divine and human, and consequently there was no unfitness in it. he
told thwackum, that his great concern on this occasion brought to his
mind the story of a very devout woman, who, out of pure regard to
religion, stole tillotson‚Äôs sermons from a lady of her acquaintance.

this story caused a vast quant
 
 ___________________________
 
ity of blood to rush into the parson‚Äôs
face, which of itself was none of the palest; and he was going to
reply with great warmth and anger, had not mrs blifil, who was present
at this debate, interposed. that lady declared herself absolutely of
mr square‚Äôs side. she argued, indeed, very learnedly in support of his
opinion; and concluded with saying, if tom had been guilty of any
fault, she must confess her own son appeared to be equally culpable;
for that she could see no difference between the buyer and the seller;
both of whom were alike to be driven out of the temple.

mrs blifil having declared her opinion, put an end to the debate.
square‚Äôs triumph would almost have stopt his words, had he needed
them; and thwackum, who, for reasons be
 
 ___________________________
 
ulgers of news, he only brought on himself the trouble
of contradicting it: for the ill fortune of black george made use of
the very opportunity of his friend‚Äôs absence to overturn all again.



chapter x.

in which master blifil and jones appear in different lights.


master blifil fell very short of his companion in the amiable quality
of mercy; but he as greatly exceeded him in one of a much higher kind,
namely, in justice: in which he followed both the precepts and example
of thwackum and square; for though they would both make frequent use
of the word mercy, yet it was plain that in reality square held it to
be inconsistent with the rule of right; and thwackum was for doing
justice, and leaving mercy to heaven. the two gentlemen did indeed
somewhat differ in opinion concerning the objects of this sublime
virtue; by which thwackum would probably have destroyed one half of
mankind, and square the other half.

master blifil then, though he had kept silence in the presence of
jones, yet, 
 
 ___________________________
 
 such disgust, it would
be an ill office in us to pay a visit to the inmost recesses of his
mind, as some scandalous people search into the most secret affairs of
their friends, and often pry into their closets and cupboards, only to
discover their poverty and meanness to the world.

however, as persons who suspect they have given others cause of
offence, are apt to conclude they are offended; so sophia imputed an
action of master blifil to his anger, which the superior sagacity of
thwackum and square discerned to have arisen from a much better
principle.

tom jones, when very young, had presented sophia with a little bird,
which he had taken from the nest, had nursed up, and taught to sing.

of this bird, sophia, then about thirteen years old, was so extremely
fond, that her chief business was to feed and tend it, and her chief
pleasure to play with it. by these means little tommy, for so the bird
was called, was become so tame, that it would feed out of the hand of
its mistress, would perc
 
 ___________________________
 
 chid her for crying so for a foolish bird; but
could not help telling young blifil, if he was a son of his, his
backside should be well flead.

sophia now returned to her chamber, the two young gentlemen were sent
home, and the rest of the company returned to their bottle; where a
conversation ensued on the subject of the bird, so curious, that we
think it deserves a chapter by itself.



chapter iv.

containing such very deep and grave matters, that some readers,
perhaps, may not relish it.


square had no sooner lighted his pipe, than, addressing himself to
allworthy, he thus began: ‚Äúsir, i cannot help congratulating you on
your nephew; who, at an age when few lads have any ideas but of
sensible objects, is arrived at a capacity of distinguishing right
from wrong. to confine anything, seems to me against the law of
nature, by which everything hath a right to liberty. these were his
words; and the impression they have made on me is never to be
eradicated. can any man have a higher notion
 
 ___________________________
 
ng some of his wine, and
swallowing the rest with great eagerness, answered, ‚Äúfrom another
expression he made use of, i hope he will resemble much better men.
the law of nature is a jargon of words, which means nothing. i know
not of any such law, nor of any right which can be derived from it. to
do as we would be done by, is indeed a christian motive, as the boy
well expressed himself; and i am glad to find my instructions have
borne such good fruit.‚Äù

‚Äúif vanity was a thing fit,‚Äù says square, ‚Äúi might indulge some on the
same occasion; for whence only he can have learnt his notions of right
or wrong, i think is pretty apparent. if there be no law of nature,
there is no right nor wrong.‚Äù

‚Äúhow!‚Äù says the parson, ‚Äúdo you then banish revelation? am i talking
with a deist or an atheist?‚Äù

‚Äúdrink about,‚Äù says western. ‚Äúpox of your laws of nature! i don‚Äôt know
what you mean, either of you, by right and wrong. to take away my
girl‚Äôs bird was wrong, in my opinion; and
 
 ___________________________
 
úif the boy had stolen the
bird, none would have been more ready to vote for a severe
chastisement than himself; but it was plain that was not his design:‚Äù
 and, indeed, it was as apparent to him, that he could have no other
view but what he had himself avowed. (for as to that malicious purpose
which sophia suspected, it never once entered into the head of mr
allworthy.) he at length concluded with again blaming the action as
inconsiderate, and which, he said, was pardonable only in a child.

square had delivered his opinion so openly, that if he was now silent,
he must submit to have his judgment censured. he said, therefore, with
some warmth, ‚Äúthat mr allworthy had too much respect to the dirty
consideration of property. that in passing our judgments on great and
mighty actions, all private regards should be laid aside; for by
adhering to those narrow rules, the younger brutus had been condemned
of ingratitude, and the elder of parricide.‚Äù

‚Äúand if they had been hanged too for thos
 
 ___________________________
 
e crimes,‚Äù cried thwackum,
‚Äúthey would have had no more than their deserts. a couple of
heathenish villains! heaven be praised we have no brutuses now-a-days!
i wish, mr square, you would desist from filling the minds of my
pupils with such antichristian stuff; for the consequence must be,
while they are under my care, its being well scourged out of them
again. there is your disciple tom almost spoiled already. i overheard
him the other day disputing with master blifil that there was no merit
in faith without works. i know that is one of your tenets, and i
suppose he had it from you.‚Äù

‚Äúdon‚Äôt accuse me of spoiling him,‚Äù says square. ‚Äúwho taught him to
laugh 
 
 ___________________________
 
 and fit and right in the
nature of things? he is your own scholar, and i disclaim him. no, no,
master blifil is my boy. young as he is, that lad‚Äôs notions of moral
rectitude i defy you ever to eradicate.‚Äù

thwackum put on a contemptuous sneer at this, and replied, ‚Äúay, ay, i
will venture him with you. he is too well grounded for all your
philosophical cant to hurt. no, no, i have taken care to instil such
principles into him--‚Äù

‚Äúand i have instilled principles into him too,‚Äù cries square. ‚Äúwhat
but the sublime idea of virtue could inspire a human mind with the
generous thought of giving liberty? and i repeat to you again, if it
was a fit thing to be proud, i might claim the honour of having
infused that idea.‚Äù--

‚Äúand if pride was not forbidden,‚Äù said thwackum, ‚Äúi might boast of
having taught him that duty which he himself assigned as his motive.‚Äù

‚Äúso between you both,‚Äù says the squire, ‚Äúthe young gentleman hath been
taught to rob my daughter of her bird. i f
 
 ___________________________
 
love another.‚Äù young blifil was greatly enraged
at it. he had long hated black george in the same proportion as jones
delighted in him; not from any offence which he had ever received, but
from his great love to religion and virtue;--for black george had the
reputation of a loose kind of a fellow. blifil therefore represented
this as flying in mr allworthy‚Äôs face; and declared, with great
concern, that it was impossible to find any other motive for doing
good to such a wretch.

thwackum and square likewise sung to the same tune. they were now
(especially the latter) become greatly jealous of young jones with the
widow; for he now approached the age of twenty, was really a fine
young fellow, and that lady, by her encouragements to him, seemed
daily more and more to think him so.

allworthy was not, however, moved with their malice. he declared
himself very well satisfied with what jones had done. he said the
perseverance and integrity of his friendship was highly commendable,
and he wishe
 
 ___________________________
 
, a penetration which nothing can deceive, and an
integrity which nothing can corrupt.

this active principle may perhaps be said to constitute the most
essential barrier between us and our neighbours the brutes; for if
there be some in the human shape who are not under any such dominion,
i choose rather to consider them as deserters from us to our
neighbours; among whom they will have the fate of deserters, and not
be placed in the first rank.

our heroe, whether he derived it from thwackum or square i will not
determine, was very strongly under the guidance of this principle; for
though he did not always act rightly, yet he never did otherwise
without feeling and suffering for it. it was this which taught him,
that to repay the civilities and little friendships of hospitality by
robbing the house where you have received them, is to be the basest
and meanest of thieves. he did not think the baseness of this offence
lessened by the height of the injury committed; on the contrary, if to
steal
 
 ___________________________
 
 called), as
well in colour as in many other properties, exactly resembling an
antient piece of parchment, upon which any one might have drummed a
considerable while without doing her any great damage.

molly, beside her present unhappy condition, was differently formed in
those parts, and might, perhaps, have tempted the envy of brown to
give her a fatal blow, had not the lucky arrival of tom jones at this
instant put an immediate end to the bloody scene.

this accident was luckily owing to mr square; for he, master blifil,
and jones, had mounted their horses, after church, to take the air,
and had ridden about a quarter of a mile, when square, changing his
mind (not idly, but for a reason which we shall unfold as soon as we
have leisure), desired the young gentlemen to ride with him another
way than they had at first purposed. this motion being complied with,
brought them of necessity back again to the churchyard.

master blifil, who rode first, seeing such a mob assembled, and two
women i
 
 ___________________________
 
man, beat his breast, tore his hair, stamped
on the ground, and vowed the utmost vengeance on all who had been
concerned. he then pulled off his coat, and buttoned it round her, put
his hat upon her head, wiped the blood from her face as well as he
could with his handkerchief, and called out to the servant to ride as
fast as possible for a side-saddle, or a pillion, that he might carry
her safe home.

master blifil objected to the sending away the servant, as they had
only one with them; but as square seconded the order of jones, he was
obliged to comply.

the servant returned in a very short time with the pillion, and molly,
having collected her rags as well as she could, was placed behind him.
in which manner she was carried home, square, blifil, and jones
attending.

here jones having received his coat, given her a sly kiss, and
whispered her, that he would return in the evening, quitted his molly,
and rode on after his companions.



chapter ix.

containing matter of no very peaceable co
 
 ___________________________
 
d all his rancour against
poor tom. allworthy gave a patient hearing to their invectives, and
then answered coldly: ‚Äúthat young men of tom‚Äôs complexion were too
generally addicted to this vice; but he believed that youth was
sincerely affected with what he had said to him on the occasion, and
he hoped he would not transgress again.‚Äù so that, as the days of
whipping were at an end, the tutor had no other vent but his own mouth
for his gall, the usual poor resource of impotent revenge.

but square, who was a less violent, was a much more artful man; and as
he hated jones more perhaps than thwackum himself did, so he contrived
to do him more mischief in the mind of mr allworthy.

the reader must remember the several little incidents of the
partridge, the horse, and the bible, which were recounted in the
second book. by all which jones had rather improved than injured the
affection which mr allworthy was inclined to entertain for him. the
same, i believe, must have happened to him with eve
 
 ___________________________
 
ry other person who
hath any idea of friendship, generosity, and greatness of spirit, that
is to say, who hath any traces of goodness in his mind.

square himself was not unacquainted with the true impression which
those several instances of goodness had made on the excellent heart of
allworthy; for the philosopher very well knew what virtue was, though
he was not always perhaps steady in its pursuit; but as for thwackum,
from what reason i will not determine, no such thoughts ever entered
into his head: he saw jones in a bad light, and he imagined allworthy
saw him in the same, but that he was resolved, from pride and
stubbornness of spirit, not
 
 ___________________________
 
 to give up the boy whom he had once
cherished; since by so doing, he must tacitly acknowledge that his
former opinion of him had been wrong.

square therefore embraced this opportunity of injuring jones
in the tenderest part, by giving a very bad turn to all these
before-mentioned occurrences. ‚Äúi am sorry, sir,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúto own i
have been deceived as well as yourself. i could not, i confess, help
being pleased with what i ascribed to the motive of friendship, though
it was carried to an excess, and all excess is faulty and vicious: but
in this i made allowance for youth. little did i suspect that the
sacrifice of truth, which we bot
 
 ___________________________
 
e says, `gluttons who give high prices for delicacies, are very
worthy to be called generous.‚Äô in short i am resolved, from this
instance, never to give way to the weakness of human nature more, nor
to think anything virtue which doth not exactly quadrate with the
unerring rule of right.‚Äù

the goodness of allworthy had prevented those considerations from
occurring to himself; yet were they too plausible to be absolutely and
hastily rejected, when laid before his eyes by another. indeed what
square had said sunk very deeply into his mind, and the uneasiness
which it there created was very visible to the other; though the good
man would not acknowledge this, but made a very slight answer, and
forcibly drove off the discourse to some other subject. it was well
perhaps for poor tom, that no such suggestions had been made before he
was pardoned; for they certainly stamped in the mind of allworthy the
first bad impression concerning jones.



chapter xii.

containing much clearer matters; but 
 
 ___________________________
 
sincere repentance as is not to be expected or hoped for
from one so abandoned in his youth, and whose mind, i am afraid, is
totally corrupted. it is my duty, however, to exhort you to this
repentance, though i too well know all exhortations will be vain and
fruitless. but _liberavi animam meam._ i can accuse my own conscience
of no neglect; though it is at the same time with the utmost concern i
see you travelling on to certain misery in this world, and to as
certain damnation in the next.‚Äù

square talked in a very different strain; he said, ‚Äúsuch accidents as
a broken bone were below the consideration of a wise man. that it was
abundantly sufficient to reconcile the mind to any of these
mischances, to reflect that they are liable to befal the wisest of
mankind, and are undoubtedly for the good of the whole.‚Äù he said, ‚Äúit
was a mere abuse of words to call those things evils, in which there
was no moral unfitness: that pain, which was the worst consequence of
such accidents, was the 
 
 ___________________________
 
served in a manner to supply the
want of curtains. now, whether molly, in the agonies of her rage,
pushed this rug with her feet; or jones might touch it; or whether the
pin or nail gave way of its own accord, i am not certain; but as molly
pronounced those last words, which are recorded above, the wicked rug
got loose from its fastening, and discovered everything hid behind it;
where among other female utensils appeared--(with shame i write it,
and with sorrow will it be read)--the philosopher square, in a posture
(for the place would not near admit his standing upright) as
ridiculous as can possibly be conceived.

the posture, indeed, in which he stood, was not greatly unlike that of
a soldier who is tied neck and heels; or rather resembling the
attitude in which we often see fellows in the public streets of
london, who are not suffering but deserving punishment by so standing.
he had a nightcap belonging to molly on his head, and his two large
eyes, the moment the rug fell, stared directl
 
 ___________________________
 
re hinted, that consists the difference: for though such
great beings think much better and more wisely, they always act
exactly like other men. they know very well how to subdue all
appetites and passions, and to despise both pain and pleasure; and
this knowledge affords much delightful contemplation, and is easily
acquired; but the practice would be vexatious and troublesome; and,
therefore, the same wisdom which teaches them to know this, teaches
them to avoid carrying it into execution.

mr square happened to be at church on that sunday, when, as the reader
may be pleased to remember, the appearance of molly in her sack had
caused all that disturbance. here he first observed her, and was so
pleased with her beauty, that he prevailed with the young gentlemen to
change their intended ride that evening, that he might pass by the
habitation of molly, and by that means might obtain a second chance of
seeing her. this reason, however, as he did not at that time mention
to any, so neither did w
 
 ___________________________
 
e think proper to communicate it then to the
reader.

among other particulars which constituted the unfitness of things in
mr square‚Äôs opinion, danger and difficulty were two. the difficulty
therefore which he apprehended there might be in corrupting this young
wench, and the danger which would accrue to his character on the
discovery, were such strong dissuasives, that it is probable he at
first intended to have contented himself with the pleasing ideas which
the sight of beauty furnishes us with. these the gravest men, after a
full meal of serious meditation, often allow themselves by way of
dessert: for which purpose, c
 
 ___________________________
 
ersation.

but when the philosopher heard, a day or two afterwards, that the
fortress of virtue had already been subdued, he began to give a larger
scope to his desires. his appetite was not of that squeamish kind
which cannot feed on a dainty because another hath tasted it. in
short, he liked the girl the better for the want of that chastity,
which, if she had possessed it, must have been a bar to his pleasures;
he pursued and obtained her.

the reader will be mistaken, if he thinks molly gave square the
preference to her younger lover: on the contrary, had she been
confined to the choice of one only, tom jones would undoubtedly have
been, of the two, the victorious person. nor was it solely the
consideration that two are better than one (though this had its proper
weight) to which mr square owed his success: the absence of jones
during his confinement was an unlucky circumstance; and in that
interval some well-chosen presents from the philosopher so softened
and unguarded the girl‚Äôs hear
 
 ___________________________
 
t, that a favourable opportunity became
irresistible, and square triumphed over the poor remains of virtue
which subsisted in the bosom of molly.

it was now about a fortnight since this conquest, when jones paid the
above-mentioned visit to his mistress, at a time when she and square
were in bed together. this was the true reason why the mother denied
her as we have seen; for as the old woman shared in the profits
arising from the iniquity of her daughter, she encouraged and
protected her in it to the utmost of her power; but such was the envy
and hatred which the elder sister bore towards molly, that,
notwithstanding she had some part of the booty, she would willingly
have parted with this to ruin her sister and spoil her trade. hence
she had acquainted jones with her bein
 
 ___________________________
 
g above-stairs in bed, in hopes
that he might have caught her in square‚Äôs arms. this, however, molly
found means to prevent, as the door was fastened; which gave her an
opportunity of conveying her lover behind that rug or blanket where he
now was unhappily discovered.

square no sooner made his appearance than molly flung herself back in
her bed, cried out she was undone, and abandoned herself to despair.
this poor girl, who was yet but a novice in her business, had not
arrived to that perfection of assurance which helps off a town lady in
any extremity; and either prompts her with an excuse, or else inspires
her to brazen out the matter with her husband, who, from love of
quiet, or out of fear of his reputation--and sometimes, perhaps, from
fear of the gallant, who
 
 ___________________________
 
th such solemn and vehement protestations of the
purest love and constancy.

as to the gentleman behind the arras, he was not in much less
consternation. he stood for a while motionless, and seemed equally at
a loss what to say, or whither to direct his eyes. jones, though
perhaps the most astonished of the three, first found his tongue; and
being immediately recovered from those uneasy sensations which molly
by her upbraidings had occasioned, he burst into a loud laughter, and
then saluting mr square, advanced to take him by the hand, and to
relieve him from his place of confinement.

square being now arrived in the middle of the room, in which part only
he could stand upright, looked at jones with a very grave countenance,
and said to him, ‚Äúwell, sir, i see you enjoy this mighty discovery,
and, i dare swear, take great delight in the thoughts of exposing me;
but if you will consider the matter fairly, you will find you are
yourself only to blame. i am not guilty of corrupting innocence. 
 
 ___________________________
 

matters by the rule of right, will condemn me. fitness is governed by
the nature of things, and not by customs, forms, or municipal laws.
nothing is indeed unfit which is not unnatural.‚Äù--‚Äúwell reasoned, old
boy,‚Äù answered jones; ‚Äúbut why dost thou think that i should desire to
expose thee? i promise thee, i was never better pleased with thee in
my life; and unless thou hast a mind to discover it thyself, this
affair may remain a profound secret for me.‚Äù--‚Äúnay, mr jones,‚Äù replied
square, ‚Äúi would not be thought to undervalue reputation. good fame is
a species of the kalon, and it is by no means fitting to neglect it.
besides, to murder one‚Äôs own reputation is a kind of suicide, a
detestable and odious vice. if you think proper, therefore, to conceal
any infirmity of mine (for such i may have, since no man is perfectly
perfect), i promise you i will not betray myself. things may be
fitting to be done, which are not fitting to be boasted of; for
by the perverse judgment of t
 
 ___________________________
 
he world, that often becomes the
subject of censure, which is, in truth, not only innocent but
laudable.‚Äù--‚Äúright!‚Äù cries jones: ‚Äúwhat can be more innocent than the
indulgence of a natural appetite? or what more laudable than the
propagation of our species?‚Äù--‚Äúto be serious with you,‚Äù answered
square, ‚Äúi profess they always appeared so to me.‚Äù--‚Äúand yet,‚Äù said
jones, ‚Äúyou was of a different opinion when my affair with this girl
was first discovered.‚Äù--‚Äúwhy, i must confess,‚Äù says square, ‚Äúas the
matter was misrepresented to me, by that parson thwackum, i might
condemn the corruption of innocence: it was that, sir, it was
that--and that--: for you must know, mr jones, in the consideration of
fitness, very minute circumstances, sir, very minute circumstances
cause great alter
 
 ___________________________
 
ation.‚Äù--‚Äúwell,‚Äù cries jones, ‚Äúbe that as it will, it
shall be your own fault, as i have promised you, if you ever hear any
more of this adventure. behave kindly to the girl, and i will never
open my lips concerning the matter to any one. and, molly, do you be
faithful to your friend, and i will not only forgive your infidelity
to me, but will do you all the service i can.‚Äù so saying, he took a
hasty leave, and, slipping down the ladder, retired with much
expedition.

square was rejoiced to find this adventure was likely to have no worse
conclusion; and as for molly, being recovered from her confusion, she
began at first to upbraid square with having been the occasion of her
loss of jones; but that gentleman soon found the means of mitigating
her anger, partly by caresses, and partly by a small nostrum from his
purse, of wonderful and approved efficacy in purging off the ill
humours of the mind, and in restoring it to a good temper.

she then poured forth a vast pr
 
 ___________________________
 
ofusion of tenderness towards her new
lover; turned all she had said to jones, and jones himself, into
ridicule; and vowed, though he once had the possession of her person,
that none but square had ever been master of her heart.



chapter vi.

by comparing which with the former, the reader may possibly correct
some abuse which he hath formerly been guilty of in the application of
the word love.


the infidelity of molly, which jones had now discovered, would,
perhaps, have vindicated a much greater degree of resentment than he
expressed on the occasion; and if he had abandoned her directly from
that moment, very few, i believe, would have blamed him.

certain, however, it is, that he
 
 ___________________________
 
ning the violent death of one poor girl, who had either drowned
herself, or, what was rather more probable, had been drowned by him.

among other of his conquests, this fellow had triumphed over the heart
of betty seagrim. he had made love to her long before molly was grown
to be a fit object of that pastime; but had afterwards deserted her,
and applied to her sister, with whom he had almost immediate success.
now will had, in reality, the sole possession of molly‚Äôs affection,
while jones and square were almost equally sacrifices to her interest
and to her pride.

hence had grown that implacable hatred which we have before seen
raging in the mind of betty; though we did not think it necessary to
assign this cause sooner, as envy itself alone was adequate to all the
effects we have mentioned.

jones was become perfectly easy by possession of this secret with
regard to molly; but as to sophia, he was far from being in a state of
tranquillity; nay, indeed, he was under the most violent pertur
 
 ___________________________
 
hom the reader hath just
parted from at mr western‚Äôs, and who received this summons just as
sophia had left him.

the news of mr allworthy‚Äôs danger (for the servant told him he was
dying) drove all thoughts of love out of his head. he hurried
instantly into the chariot which was sent for him, and ordered the
coachman to drive with all imaginable haste; nor did the idea of
sophia, i believe, once occur to him on the way.

and now the whole family, namely, mr blifil, mr jones, mr thwackum, mr
square, and some of the servants (for such were mr allworthy‚Äôs orders)
being all assembled round his bed, the good man sat up in it, and was
beginning to speak, when blifil fell to blubbering, and began to
express very loud and bitter lamentations. upon this mr allworthy
shook him by the hand, and said, ‚Äúdo not sorrow thus, my dear nephew,
at the most ordinary of all human occurrences. when misfortunes befal
our friends we are justly grieved; for those are accidents which might
often have been avo
 
 ___________________________
 
st be happy; for the three former qualities, i admit,
make you worthy of happiness, but they are the latter only which will
put you in possession of it.

‚Äúone thousand pound i have given to you, mr thwackum; a sum i am
convinced which greatly exceeds your desires, as well as your wants.
however, you will receive it as a memorial of my friendship; and
whatever superfluities may redound to you, that piety which you so
rigidly maintain will instruct you how to dispose of them.

‚Äúa like sum, mr square, i have bequeathed to you. this, i hope, will
enable you to pursue your profession with better success than
hitherto. i have often observed with concern, that distress is more
apt to excite contempt than commiseration, especially among men of
business, with whom poverty is understood to indicate want of ability.
but the little i have been able to leave you will extricate you from
those difficulties with which you have formerly struggled; and then i
doubt not but you will meet with sufficient pr
 
 ___________________________
 

i am not able to do any business now, nor can he have any with me, in
which you are not at present more concerned than myself. besides, i
really am--i am incapable of seeing any one at present, or of any
longer attention.‚Äù he then saluted them all, saying, perhaps he should
be able to see them again, but he should be now glad to compose
himself a little, finding that he had too much exhausted his spirits
in discourse.

some of the company shed tears at their parting; and even the
philosopher square wiped his eyes, albeit unused to the melting mood.
as to mrs wilkins, she dropt her pearls as fast as the arabian trees
their medicinal gums; for this was a ceremonial which that gentlewoman
never omitted on a proper occasion.

after this mr allworthy again laid himself down on his pillow, and
endeavoured to compose himself to rest.



chapter viii.

containing matter rather natural than pleasing.


besides grief for her master, there was another source for that briny
stream which so plentifull
 
 ___________________________
 
etty story! ay, ay, those that
hide know where to find. lord forgive him! i warrant he hath many more
bastards to answer for, if the truth was known. one comfort is, they
will all be known where he is a going now.--`the servants will find
some token to remember me by.‚Äô those were the very words; i shall
never forget them, if i was to live a thousand years. ay, ay, i shall
remember you for huddling me among the servants. one would have
thought he might have mentioned my name as well as that of square; but
he is a gentleman forsooth, though he had not cloths on his back when
he came hither first. marry come up with such gentlemen! though he
hath lived here this many years, i don‚Äôt believe there is arrow a
servant in the house ever saw the colour of his money. the devil shall
wait upon such a gentleman for me.‚Äù much more of the like kind she
muttered to herself; but this taste shall suffice to the reader.

neither thwackum nor square were much better satisfied with their
legacies. though 
 
 ___________________________
 
they breathed not their resentment so loud, yet from
the discontent which appeared in their countenances, as well as from
the following dialogue, we collect that no great pleasure reigned in
their minds.

about an hour after they had left the sick-room, square met thwackum
in the hall and accosted him thus: ‚Äúwell, sir, have you heard any news
of your friend since we parted from him?‚Äù--‚Äúif you mean mr allworthy,‚Äù
 answered thwackum, ‚Äúi think you might rather give him the appellation
of your friend; for he seems to me to have deserved that title.‚Äù--‚Äúthe
title is as good on your side,‚Äù replied square, ‚Äúfor his bounty, such
as it is, hath been equal to both.‚Äù--‚Äúi should not have mentioned it
first,‚Äù cries thwackum, ‚Äúbut since yo
 
 ___________________________
 
ducation of his two boys, are services for which
some men might have expected a greater return. i would not have you
imagine i am therefore dissatisfied; for st paul hath taught me to
be content with the little i have. had the modicum been less, i
should have known my duty. but though the scriptures obliges me to
remain contented, it doth not enjoin me to shut my eyes to my own
merit, nor restrain me from seeing when i am injured by an unjust
comparison.‚Äù--‚Äúsince you provoke me,‚Äù returned square, ‚Äúthat injury is
done to me; nor did i ever imagine mr allworthy had held my friendship
so light, as to put me in balance with one who received his wages. i
know to what it is owing; it proceeds from those narrow principles
which you have been so long endeavouring to infuse into him, in
contempt of everything which is great and noble. the beauty and
loveliness of friendship is too strong for dim eyes, nor can it be
perceived by any other medium than that unerring rule of right, which
you have
 
 ___________________________
 
duly authorized to give him? he will feel the want of these
necessaries when it is too late, when he is arrived at that place
where there is wailing and gnashing of teeth. it is then he will find
in what mighty stead that heathen goddess, that virtue, which you and
all other deists of the age adore, will stand him. he will then summon
his priest, when there is none to be found, and will lament the want
of that absolution, without which no sinner can be safe.‚Äù--‚Äúif it be
so material,‚Äù says square, ‚Äúwhy don‚Äôt you present it him of your own
accord?‚Äù ‚Äúit hath no virtue,‚Äù cries thwackum, ‚Äúbut to those who have
sufficient grace to require it. but why do i talk thus to a heathen
and an unbeliever? it is you that taught him this lesson, for which
you have been well rewarded in this world, as i doubt not your
disciple will soon be in the other.‚Äù--‚Äúi know not what you mean by
reward,‚Äù said square; ‚Äúbut if you hint at that pitiful memorial of our
friendship, which he hath thou
 
 ___________________________
 
 to them with a most melancholy countenance, and acquainted them
that he brought sad news, that his mother was dead at salisbury; that
she had been seized on the road home with the gout in her head and
stomach, which had carried her off in a few hours. ‚Äúgood-lack-a-day!‚Äù
 says the doctor. ‚Äúone cannot answer for events; but i wish i had been
at hand, to have been called in. the gout is a distemper which it is
difficult to treat; yet i have been remarkably successful in it.‚Äù
 thwackum and square both condoled with mr blifil for the loss of his
mother, which the one advised him to bear like a man, and the other
like a christian. the young gentleman said he knew very well we were
all mortal, and he would endeavour to submit to his loss as well as he
could. that he could not, however, help complaining a little against
the peculiar severity of his fate, which brought the news of so great
a calamity to him by surprize, and that at a time when he hourly
expected the severest blow he was capa
 
 ___________________________
 
ble of feeling from the malice
of fortune. he said, the present occasion would put to the test those
excellent rudiments which he had learnt from mr thwackum and mr
square; and it would be entirely owing to them, if he was enabled to
survive such misfortunes.

it was now debated whether mr allworthy should be informed of the
death of his sister. this the doctor violently opposed; in which, i
believe, the whole college would agree with him: but mr blifil said,
he had received such positive and repeated orders from his uncle,
never to keep any secret from him for fear of the disquietude which it
might give him, that he durst not think of disobedience, whatever
migh
 
 ___________________________
 
e said, ‚Äúthe house was a
house of mourning, on the account of his dear mother; and if it had
pleased heaven to give him some prospect of mr allworthy‚Äôs recovery,
it would become them better to express the exultations of their hearts
in thanksgiving, than in drunkenness and riots; which were properer
methods to encrease the divine wrath, than to avert it.‚Äù thwackum, who
had swallowed more liquor than jones, but without any ill effect on
his brain, seconded the pious harangue of blifil; but square, for
reasons which the reader may probably guess, was totally silent.

wine had not so totally overpowered jones, as to prevent his
recollecting mr blifil‚Äôs loss, the moment it was mentioned. as no
person, therefore, was more ready to confess and condemn his own
errors, he offered to shake mr blifil by the hand, and begged his
pardon, saying, ‚Äúhis excessive joy for mr allworthy‚Äôs recovery had
driven every other thought out of his mind.‚Äù

blifil scornfully rejected his hand; and with muc
 
 ___________________________
 
d some mixture of the
irascible in his constitution, leaped hastily from his chair, and
catching hold of blifil‚Äôs collar, cried out, ‚Äúd--n you for a rascal,
do you insult me with the misfortune of my birth?‚Äù he accompanied
these words with such rough actions, that they soon got the better of
mr blifil‚Äôs peaceful temper; and a scuffle immediately ensued, which
might have produced mischief, had it not been prevented by the
interposition of thwackum and the physician; for the philosophy of
square rendered him superior to all emotions, and he very calmly
smoaked his pipe, as was his custom in all broils, unless when he
apprehended some danger of having it broke in his mouth.

the combatants being now prevented from executing present vengeance on
each other, betook themselves to the common resources of disappointed
rage, and vented their wrath in threats and defiance. in this kind of
conflict, fortune, which, in the personal attack, seemed to incline to
jones, was now altogether as favour
 
 ___________________________
 
ad been interrupted by it, was by no means
restored. all merriment was now at an end, and the subsequent
discourse consisted only of grave relations of matters of fact, and of
as grave observations upon them; a species of conversation, in which,
though there is much of dignity and instruction, there is but little
entertainment. as we presume therefore to convey only this last to the
reader, we shall pass by whatever was said, till the rest of the
company having by degrees dropped off, left only square and the
physician together; at which time the conversation was a little
heightened by some comments on what had happened between the two young
gentlemen; both of whom the doctor declared to be no better than
scoundrels; to which appellation the philosopher, very sagaciously
shaking his head, agreed.



chapter x.

showing the truth of many observations of ovid, and of other more
grave writers, who have proved beyond contradiction, that wine is
often the forerunner of incontinency.


jones retir
 
 ___________________________
 
woman of great art, so she soon attributed
this to extreme art in sophia. she remembered the many hints she had
given her niece concerning her being in love, and imagined the young
lady had taken this way to rally her out of her opinion, by an
overacted civility: a notion that was greatly corroborated by the
excessive gaiety with which the whole was accompanied. we cannot here
avoid remarking, that this conjecture would have been better founded
had sophia lived ten years in the air of grosvenor square, where young
ladies do learn a wonderful knack of rallying and playing with that
passion, which is a mighty serious thing in woods and groves an
hundred miles distant from london.

to say the truth, in discovering the deceit of others, it matters much
that our own art be wound up, if i may use the expression, in the same
key with theirs: for very artful men sometimes miscarry by fancying
others wiser, or, in other words, greater knaves, than they really
are. as this observation is pretty deep, 
 
 ___________________________
 
usband
he chose, he cared not at what price he purchased him.

for these reasons mr blifil was so desirous of the match that he
intended to deceive sophia, by pretending love to her; and to deceive
her father and his own uncle, by pretending he was beloved by her. in
doing this he availed himself of the piety of thwackum, who held, that
if the end proposed was religious (as surely matrimony is), it
mattered not how wicked were the means. as to other occasions, he used
to apply the philosophy of square, which taught, that the end was
immaterial, so that the means were fair and consistent with moral
rectitude. to say truth, there were few occurrences in life on which
he could not draw advantage from the precepts of one or other of those
great masters.

little deceit was indeed necessary to be practised on mr western; who
thought the inclinations of his daughter of as little consequence as
blifil himself conceived them to be; but as the sentiments of mr
allworthy were of a very different kind, 
 
 ___________________________
 
e proceeded so
far without better assurances of his daughter‚Äôs consent: ‚Äúbut he was
(says she) always of a violent, headstrong temper; and i can scarce
forgive myself for all the advice i have thrown away upon him.‚Äù

after much of this kind of conversation, which, perhaps, would not
greatly entertain the reader, was it here particularly related, mr
blifil took his leave and returned home, not highly pleased with his
disappointment: which, however, the philosophy which he had acquired
from square, and the religion infused into him by thwackum, together
with somewhat else, taught him to bear rather better than more
passionate lovers bear these kinds of evils.



chapter ix.

the escape of sophia.


it is now time to look after sophia; whom the reader, if he loves her
half so well as i do, will rejoice to find escaped from the clutches
of her passionate father, and from those of her dispassionate lover.

twelve times did the iron register of time beat on the sonorous
bell-metal, summoning
 
 ___________________________
 
 we yet live, of being _one whom nobody knows_ (a
scandal, by the bye, as old as the days of homer[*]) will always be the
envied portion of those, who have a legal title either to honour or
estate.

  [*] see the 2d odyssey, ver. 175.

from that figure, therefore, which the irish peer, who brought sophia
to town, hath already made in this history, the reader will conclude,
doubtless, it must have been an easy matter to have discovered his
house in london without knowing the particular street or square which
he inhabited, since he must have been one _whom everybody knows_. to
say the truth, so it would have been to any of those tradesmen who are
accustomed to attend the regions of the great; for the doors of the
great are generally no less easy to find than it is difficult to get
entrance into them. but jones, as well as partridge, was an entire
stranger in london; and as he happened to arrive first in a quarter of
the town, the inhabitants of which have very little intercourse with
the house
 
 ___________________________
 
holders of hanover or grosvenor-square (for he entered
through gray‚Äôs-inn-lane), so he rambled about some time before he
could even find his way to those happy mansions where fortune
segregates from the vulgar those magnanimous heroes, the descendants
of antient britons, saxons, or danes, whose ancestors, being born in
better days, by sundry kinds of merit, have entailed riches and honour
on their posterity.

jones, being at length arrived at those terrestrial elysian fields,
would now soon have discovered his lordship‚Äôs mansion
 
 ___________________________
 
uzza, from all the chairmen
present, who wisely take the best care they can to discountenance all
walking afoot by their betters. luckily, however, the gentry who
attend at the opera-house were too busy to quit their stations, and as
the lateness of the hour prevented him from meeting many of their
brethren in the street, he proceeded without molestation, in a dress,
which, at another season, would have certainly raised a mob at his
heels.

the lady was set down in a street not far from hanover-square, where
the door being presently opened, she was carried in, and the
gentleman, without any ceremony, walked in after her.

jones and his companion were now together in a very well-furnished and
well-warmed room; when the female, still speaking in her masquerade
voice, said she was surprized at her friend, who must absolutely have
forgot her appointment; at which, after venting much resentment, she
suddenly exprest some apprehension from jones, and asked him what the
world would think of their h
 
 ___________________________
 
mputed
all that had happened; and from whom, he said, to preserve so valuable
a young lady was even an act of charity.

all these arguments were well seconded by thwackum, who dwelt a little
stronger on the authority of parents than mr blifil himself had done.
he ascribed the measures which mr blifil was desirous to take to
christian motives; ‚Äúand though,‚Äù says he, ‚Äúthe good young gentleman
hath mentioned charity last, i am almost convinced it is his first and
principal consideration.‚Äù

square, possibly, had he been present, would have sung to the same
tune, though in a different key, and would have discovered much moral
fitness in the proceeding: but he was now gone to bath for the
recovery of his health.

allworthy, though not without reluctance, at last yielded to the
desires of his nephew. he said he would accompany him to london, where
he might be at liberty to use every honest endeavour to gain the lady:
‚Äúbut i declare,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúi will never give my consent to any
absol
 
 ___________________________
 
is the result
only of great learning and experience, the affectation of which, in a
young woman, is as absurd as any of the affectations of an ape. no
dictatorial sentiments, no judicial opinions, no profound criticisms.
whenever i have seen her in the company of men, she hath been all
attention, with the modesty of a learner, not the forwardness of a
teacher. you‚Äôll pardon me for it, but i once, to try her only, desired
her opinion on a point which was controverted between mr thwackum and
mr square. to which she answered, with much sweetness, `you will
pardon me, good mr allworthy; i am sure you cannot in earnest think me
capable of deciding any point in which two such gentlemen disagree.‚Äô
thwackum and square, who both alike thought themselves sure of a
favourable decision, seconded my request. she answered with the same
good humour, `i must absolutely be excused: for i will affront neither
so much as to give my judgment on his side.‚Äô indeed, she always shewed
the highest deference to
 
 ___________________________
 
frequently occur in histories and dramatic
writers, for no other reason than because the history or play draws to
a conclusion, and are justified by authority of authors; yet, though
we insist upon as much authority as any author whatever, we shall use
this power very sparingly, and never but when we are driven to it by
necessity, which we do not at present foresee will happen in this
work.

this alteration then in the mind of mr allworthy was occasioned by a
letter he had just received from mr square, and which we shall give
the reader in the beginning of the next chapter.



chapter iv.

containing two letters in very different stiles.


  ‚Äúmy worthy friend,--i informed you in my last that i was forbidden
  the use of the waters, as they were found by experience rather to
  increase than lessen the symptoms of my distemper. i must now
  acquaint you with a piece of news, which, i believe, will afflict my
  friends more than it hath afflicted me. dr harrington and dr
  brewster have infor
 
 ___________________________
 
re of serving the cause of truth, of doing right to the
  innocent, and of making all the amends in my power for a past
  offence. i hope this declaration, therefore, will have the effect
  desired, and will restore this deserving young man to your favour;
  the hearing of which, while i am yet alive, will afford the utmost
  consolation to,

                  sir,
                     your most obliged,
                          obedient humble servant,
                                  thomas square.‚Äù

the reader will, after this, scarce wonder at the revolution so
visibly appearing in mr allworthy, notwithstanding he received from
thwackum, by the same post, another letter of a very different kind,
which we shall here add, as it may possibly be the last time we shall
have occasion to mention the name of that gentleman.

  ‚Äúsir,

  ‚Äúi am not at all surprized at hearing from your worthy nephew a
  fresh instance of the villany of mr square the atheist‚Äôs young
  pupil. i shall not wo
 
 ___________________________
 
 his cup acquaintance; or who, at most, are but half his; but he
generally stands by those who are thoroughly his servants, and helps
them off in all extremities, till their bargain expires.

as a conquered rebellion strengthens a government, or as health is
more perfectly established by recovery from some diseases; so anger,
when removed, often gives new life to affection. this was the case of
mr allworthy; for blifil having wiped off the greater suspicion, the
lesser, which had been raised by square‚Äôs letter, sunk of course, and
was forgotten; and thwackum, with whom he was greatly offended, bore
alone all the reflections which square had cast on the enemies of
jones.

as for that young man, the resentment of mr allworthy began more and
more to abate towards him. he told blifil, ‚Äúhe did not only forgive
the extraordinary efforts of his good-nature, but would give him the
pleasure of following his example.‚Äù then, turning to mrs miller with a
smile which would have become an angel, he 
 
 ___________________________
 
s, backed by sophia, to settle
¬£200 a-year upon him; to which jones hath privately added a third.
upon this income he lives in one of the northern counties, about 200
miles distant from london, and lays up ¬£200 a-year out of it, in order
to purchase a seat in the next parliament from a neighbouring borough,
which he has bargained for with an attourney there. he is also lately
turned methodist, in hopes of marrying a very rich widow of that sect,
whose estate lies in that part of the kingdom.

square died soon after he writ the before-mentioned letter; and as to
thwackum, he continues at his vicarage. he hath made many fruitless
attempts to regain the confidence of allworthy, or to ingratiate
himself with jones, both of whom he flatters to their faces, and
abuses behind their backs. but in his stead, mr allworthy hath lately
taken mr abraham adams into his house, of whom sophia is grown
immoderately fond, and declares he shall have the tuition of her
children.

mrs fitzpatrick is separated 