th herself; which
invitation he very thankfully accepted; for indeed much less agreeable
company than that of mrs whitefield, and a much worse entertainment
than she had provided, would have been welcome after so long fasting
and so long a walk.

besides mr jones and the good governess of the mansion, there sat down
at table an attorney of salisbury, indeed the very same who had
brought the news of mrs blifil’s death to mr allworthy, and whose
name, which i think we did not before mention, was dowling: there was
likewise present another person, who stiled himself a lawyer, and who
lived somewhere near linlinch, in somersetshire. this fellow, i say,
stiled himself a lawyer, but was indeed a most vile petty-fogger,
without sense or knowledge of any kind; one of those who may be termed
train-bearers to the law; a sort of supernumeraries in the profession,
who are the hackneys of attorneys, and will ride more miles for
half-a-crown than a postboy.

during the time of dinner, the somersetshire la
 
 ___________________________
 
she had never seen the gentleman
before.”--“the gentleman, indeed!” replied the petty-fogger; “a pretty
gentleman, truly! why, he’s the bastard of a fellow who was hanged for
horse-stealing. he was dropt at squire allworthy’s door, where one of
the servants found him in a box so full of rain-water, that he would
certainly have been drowned, had he not been reserved for another
fate.”--“ay, ay, you need not mention it, i protest: we understand
what that fate is very well,” cries dowling, with a most facetious
grin.--“well,” continued the other, “the squire ordered him to be
taken in; for he is a timbersome man everybody knows, and was afraid
of drawing himself into a scrape; and there the bastard was bred up,
and fed, and cloathified all to the world like any gentleman; and
there he got one of the servant-maids with child, and persuaded her to
swear it to the squire himself; and afterwards he broke the arm of one
mr thwackum a clergyman, only because he reprimanded him f
 
 ___________________________
 
or following
whores; and afterwards he snapt a pistol at mr blifil behind his back;
and once, when squire allworthy was sick, he got a drum, and beat it
all over the house to prevent him from sleeping; and twenty other
pranks he hath played, for all which, about four or five days ago,
just before i left the country, the squire stripped him stark naked,
and turned him out of doors.”

“and very justly too, i protest,” cries dowling; “i would turn my own
son out of doors, if he was guilty of half as much. and pray what is
the name of this pretty gentleman?”

“the name o’ un?” answered petty-fogger; “why, he is called thomas
jones.”

“jones!” answered dowling a little eagerly; “what, mr jones that lived
at mr allworthy’s? was that the gentleman that dined with us?”--“the
very same,” said the other. “i have heard of the gentleman,” cries
dowling, “often; but i never heard any ill character o
 
 ___________________________
 
nation, and especially
this part of it, was at this time engaged, when expresses were passing
and repassing every hour of the day and night.

jones endeavoured all he could to prevail with his former guide to
escorte him to coventry; but he was inexorable. while he was arguing
with the boy in the inn-yard, a person came up to him, and saluting
him by his name, enquired how all the good family did in
somersetshire; and now jones casting his eyes upon this person,
presently discovered him to be mr dowling, the lawyer, with whom he
had dined at gloucester, and with much courtesy returned the
salutation.

dowling very earnestly pressed mr jones to go no further that night;
and backed his solicitations with many unanswerable arguments, such
as, that it was almost dark, that the roads were very dirty, and that
he would be able to travel much better by day-light, with many others
equally good, some of which jones had probably suggested to himself
before; but as they were then ineffectual, so they wer
 
 ___________________________
 
f seconding an
argument or a motion, and the great consequence this is of in all
assemblies of public debate. hence, likewise, probably it is, that in
our courts of law we often hear a learned gentleman (generally a
serjeant) repeating for an hour together what another learned
gentleman, who spoke just before him, had been saying.

instead of accounting for this, we shall proceed in our usual manner
to exemplify it in the conduct of the lad above mentioned, who
submitted to the persuasions of mr dowling, and promised once more to
admit jones into his side-saddle; but insisted on first giving the
poor creatures a good bait, saying, they had travelled a great way,
and been rid very hard. indeed this caution of the boy was needless;
for jones, notwithstanding his hurry and impatience, would have
ordered this of himself; for he by no means agreed with the opinion of
those who consider animals as mere machines, and when they bury their
spurs in the belly of their horse, imagine the spur and the hor
 
 ___________________________
 
se to
have an equal capacity of feeling pain.

while the beasts were eating their corn, or rather were supposed to
eat it (for, as the boy was taking care of himself in the kitchen, the
ostler took great care that his corn should not be consumed in the
stable), mr jones, at the earnest desire of mr dowling, accompanied
that gentleman into his room, where they sat down together over a
bottle of wine.



chapter x.

in which mr jones and mr dowling drink a bottle together.


mr dowling, pouring out a glass of wine, named the health of the good
squire allworthy; adding, “if you please, sir, we will likewise
remember his nephew and heir, the young squire: come, sir, here’s mr
blifil to you, a very pretty young gentleman; and who, i dare swear,
will hereafter make a very considerable figure in his country. i have
a borough for him myself in my eye.”

“sir,” answered jones, “i am convinced you don’t intend to affront me,
so i shall not resent it; but i promise you, 
 
 ___________________________
 
erosity of spirit, which is the sure foundation of all
that is great and noble in human nature. i saw a selfishness in him
long ago which i despised; but it is lately, very lately, that i have
found him capable of the basest and blackest designs; for, indeed, i
have at last found out, that he hath taken an advantage of the
openness of my own temper, and hath concerted the deepest project, by
a long train of wicked artifice, to work my ruin, which at last he
hath effected.”

“ay! ay!” cries dowling; “i protest, then, it is a pity such a person
should inherit the great estate of your uncle allworthy.”

“alas, sir,” cries jones, “you do me an honour to which i have no
title. it is true, indeed, his goodness once allowed me the liberty of
calling him by a much nearer name; but as this was only a voluntary
act of goodness, i can complain of no injustice when he thinks proper
to deprive me of this honour; since the loss cannot be more unmerited
than the gift originally was. i assure 
 
 ___________________________
 
ncapable of setting a true
value on his virtue, should think, in his behaviour to me, he hath
dealt hardly by a relation, they do an injustice to the best of men:
for i--but i ask your pardon, i shall trouble you with no particulars
relating to myself; only as you seemed to think me a relation of mr
allworthy, i thought proper to set you right in a matter that might
draw some censures upon him, which i promise you i would rather lose
my life than give occasion to.”

“i protest, sir,” cried dowling, “you talk very much like a man of
honour; but instead of giving me any trouble, i protest it would give
me great pleasure to know how you came to be thought a relation of mr
allworthy’s, if you are not. your horses won’t be ready this
half-hour, and as you have sufficient opportunity, i wish you would
tell me how all that happened; for i protest it seems very surprizing
that you should pass for a relation of a gentleman, without being so.”

jones, who in the compliance of his dispositi
 
 ___________________________
 
on (though not in his
prudence) a little resembled his lovely sophia, was easily prevailed
on to satisfy mr dowling’s curiosity, by relating the history of his
birth and education, which he did, like othello.

          ------even from his boyish years,
      to th’ very moment he was bad to tell:

the which to hear, dowling, like desdemona, did seriously incline;

     he swore ‘twas strange, ‘twas passing strange;
     ‘twas pitiful, ‘twas wonderous pitiful.

mr dowling was indeed very greatly affected with this relation; for he
had not divested himself of humanity by being an attorney. indeed,
nothing is more unjust than to carry our prejudices against a
profession into private life, and to borrow our idea of a man from our
opinion of his calling. habit, it is true, lessens the horror of those
actions which the profession makes necessary, and consequently
habitual; but in all other instances, nature works in men of all
professions alike; nay, perhaps, even mo
 
 ___________________________
 
place me where never summer breeze
     unbinds the glebe, or warms the trees:
     where ever-lowering clouds appear,
     and angry jove deforms th’ inclement year.

     place me beneath the burning ray,
     where rolls the rapid car of day;
     love and the nymph shall charm my toils,
     the nymph who sweetly speaks, and sweetly smiles.
                                          mr francis.

he then filled a bumper of wine, and drunk it off to the health of his
dear lalage; and, filling dowling’s glass likewise up to the brim,
insisted on his pledging him. “why, then, here’s miss lalage’s health
with all my heart,” cries dowling. “i have heard her toasted often, i
protest, though i never saw her; but they say she’s extremely
handsome.”

though the latin was not the only part of this speech which dowling
did not perfectly understand; yet there was somewhat in it that made a
very strong impression upon him. and though he endeavoured by winking,
nodding, sneering, and gri
 
 ___________________________
 
nning, to hide the impression from jones
(for we are as often ashamed of thinking right as of thinking wrong),
it is certain he secretly approved as much of his sentiments as he
understood, and really felt a very strong impulse of compassion for
him. but we may possibly take some other opportunity of commenting
upon this, especially if we should happen to meet mr dowling any more
in the course of our history. at present we are obliged to take our
leave of that gentleman a little abruptly, in imitation of mr jones;
who was no sooner informed, by partridge, that his horses were ready,
than he deposited his reckoning, wished his companion a good night,
mounted, and set forward towards coventry, though the night was dark,
and it just then began to rain very hard.



chapter xi.

the disasters which befel jones on his departure for coventry; with
the sage remarks of
 
 ___________________________
 
y offended with the effects of so noble a principle as now
actuated mrs miller; and indeed, had not this new affair inflamed his
former anger against jones, it is possible he might have been a little
softened towards him, by the report of an action which malice itself
could not have derived from an evil motive.

mr allworthy and mrs miller had been above an hour together, when
their conversation was put an end to by the arrival of blifil and
another person, which other person was no less than mr dowling, the
attorney, who was now become a great favourite with mr blifil, and
whom mr allworthy, at the desire of his nephew, had made his steward;
and had likewise recommended him to mr western, from whom the attorney
received a promise of being promoted to the same office upon the first
vacancy; and, in the meantime, was employed in transacting some
affairs which the squire then had in london in relation to a mortgage.

this was the principal affair which then brought mr dowling to town;
therefore 
 
 ___________________________
 
 loving him so much. i did not
withdraw that affection from him without thinking i had the justest
cause. believe me, mrs miller, i should be glad to find i have been
mistaken.” mrs miller was going eagerly to reply, when a servant
acquainted her that a gentleman without desired to speak with her
immediately. allworthy then enquired for his nephew, and was told that
he had been for some time in his room with the gentleman who used to
come to him, and whom mr allworthy guessing rightly to be mr dowling,
he desired presently to speak with him.

when dowling attended, allworthy put the case of the bank-notes to
him, without mentioning any name, and asked in what manner such a
person might be punished. to which dowling answered, “he thought he
might be indicted on the black act; but said, as it was a matter of
some nicety, it would be proper to go to counsel. he said he was to
attend counsel presently upon an affair of mr western’s, and if mr
allworthy pleased he would lay the case before th
 
 ___________________________
 
em.” this was agreed
to; and then mrs miller, opening the door, cried, “i ask pardon, i did
not know you had company;” but allworthy desired her to come in,
saying he had finished his business. upon which mr dowling withdrew,
and mrs miller introduced mr nightingale the younger, to return thanks
for the great kindness done him by allworthy: but she had scarce
patience to let the young gentleman finish his speech before she
interrupted him, saying, “o sir! mr nightingale brings great news
about poor mr jones: he hath been to see the wounded gentleman, who is
out of all danger of death, and, what is more, declares he fell upon
poor mr jones himself, and beat him. i am sure, sir, you would not
have mr jones
 
 ___________________________
 
ither?” says mrs miller.--“indeed i did not,”
 answered allworthy; “nor did i know he had gone on such an errand till
this moment.”--“i see it all!” said mrs miller, “upon my soul, i see
it all! no wonder they have been closeted so close lately. son
nightingale, let me beg you run for these fellows immediately----find
them out if they are above-ground. i will go myself”--“dear madam,”
 said allworthy, “be patient, and do me the favour to send a servant
upstairs to call mr dowling hither, if he be in the house, or, if not,
mr blifil.” mrs miller went out muttering something to herself, and
presently returned with an answer, “that mr dowling was gone; but that
the t’other,” as she called him, “was coming.”

allworthy was of a cooler disposition than the good woman, whose
spirits were all up in arms in the cause of her friend. he was not
however without some suspicions which were near akin to hers. when
blifil came into the room, he asked him with a very seriou
 
 ___________________________
 
s
countenance, and with a less friendly look than he had ever before
given him, “whether he knew anything of mr dowling’s having seen any
of the persons who were present at the duel between jones and another
gentleman?”

there is nothing so dangerous as a question which comes by surprize on
a man whose business it is to conceal truth, or to defend falshood.
for which reason those worthy personages, whose noble office it is to
save the lives of their fellow-creatures at the old bailey, take the
utmost care, by frequent previous examination, to divine every
question which may be asked their clients on the day 
 
 ___________________________
 
en guilty of an offence,
yet may i hope your pardon?”--“my pardon,” said allworthy, very
angrily.--“nay, sir,” answered blifil, “i knew you would be offended;
yet surely my dear uncle will forgive the effects of the most amiable
of human weaknesses. compassion for those who do not deserve it, i own
is a crime; and yet it is a crime from which you yourself are not
entirely free. i know i have been guilty of it in more than one
instance to this very person; and i will own i did send mr dowling,
not on a vain and fruitless enquiry, but to discover the witnesses,
and to endeavour to soften their evidence. this, sir, is the truth;
which, though i intended to conceal from you, i will not deny.”

“i confess,” said nightingale, “this is the light in which it appeared
to me from the gentleman’s behaviour.”

“now, madam,” said allworthy, “i believe you will once in your life
own you have entertained a wrong suspicion, and are not so angry with
my nephew as you was.”

mrs 
 
 ___________________________
 
ay, sir,” said she, “i would not
be mistaken, i did not presume to say you were guilty of any wrong.
the gentleman who came to me proposed no such matter; he only said,
taking me for mr fitzpatrick’s wife, that, if mr jones had murdered my
husband, i should be assisted with any money i wanted to carry on the
prosecution, by a very worthy gentleman, who, he said, was well
apprized what a villain i had to deal with. it was by this man i found
out who mr jones was; and this man, whose name is dowling, mr jones
tells me is your steward. i discovered his name by a very odd
accident; for he himself refused to tell it me; but partridge, who met
him at my lodgings the second time he came, knew him formerly at
salisbury.”

“and did this mr dowling,” says allworthy, with great astonishment
in his countenance, “tell you that i would assist in the
prosecution?”--“no, sir,” answered she, “i will not charge him
wrongfully. he said i should be assisted, but he mentioned no name.
yet you
 
 ___________________________
 
me, sir, if from circumstances i thought it could
be no other.”--“indeed, madam,” says allworthy, “from circumstances i
am too well convinced it was another. good heaven! by what wonderful
means is the blackest and deepest villany sometimes discovered!--shall
i beg you, madam, to stay till the person you have mentioned comes,
for i expect him every minute? nay, he may be, perhaps, already in the
house.”

allworthy then stept to the door, in order to call a servant, when in
came, not mr dowling, but the gentleman who will be seen in the next
chapter.



chapter viii.

further continuation.


the gentleman who now arrived was no other than mr western. he no
sooner saw allworthy, than, without considering in the least the
presence of mrs waters, he began to vociferate in the following
manner: “fine doings at my house! a rare kettle of fish i have
discovered at last! who the devil would be plagued with a daughter?”
 “what’s the matter, neighbour?” said allworthy. “matter enou
 
 ___________________________
 
eave, i will undertake once to argue with the young
lady.” “will you?” said western; “why that is kind now, and
neighbourly, and mayhap you will do more than i have been able to do
with her; for i promise you she hath a very good opinion of you.”
 “well, sir,” said allworthy, “if you will go home, and release the
young lady from her captivity, i will wait upon her within this
half-hour.” “but suppose,” said western, “she should run away with un
in the meantime? for lawyer dowling tells me there is no hopes of
hanging the fellow at last; for that the man is alive, and like to do
well, and that he thinks jones will be out of prison again presently.”
 “how!” said allworthy; “what, did you employ him then to enquire or to
do anything in that matter?” “not i,” answered western, “he mentioned
it to me just now of his own accord.” “just now!” cries allworthy,
“why, where did you see him then? i want much to see mr dowling.”
 “why, you may see un an 
 
 ___________________________
 
 sincere in such good intentions, you
shall want no assistance in my power to make them effectual.”

mrs waters fell now upon her knees before him, and, in a flood of
tears, made him many most passionate acknowledgments of his goodness,
which, as she truly said, savoured more of the divine than human
nature.

allworthy raised her up, and spoke in the most tender manner, making
use of every expression which his invention could suggest to comfort
her, when he was interrupted by the arrival of mr dowling, who, upon
his first entrance, seeing mrs waters, started, and appeared in some
confusion; from which he soon recovered himself as well as he could,
and then said he was in the utmost haste to attend counsel at mr
western’s lodgings; but, however, thought it his duty to call and
acquaint him with the opinion of counsel upon the case which he had
before told him, which was that the conversion of the moneys in that
case could not be questioned in a criminal cause, but that an action
of trover m
 
 ___________________________
 
ight be brought, and if it appeared to the jury to be the
moneys of plaintiff, that plaintiff would recover a verdict for the
value.

allworthy, without making any answer to this, bolted the door, and
then, advancing with a stern look to dowling, he said, “whatever be
your haste, sir, i must first receive an answer to some questions. do
you know this lady?”--“that lady, sir!” answered dowling, with great
hesitation. allworthy then, with the most solemn voice, said, “look
you, mr dowling, as you value my favour, or your continuance a moment
longer in my service, do not hesitate nor prevaricate; but answer
faithfully and truly to every question i ask.----do you know this
lady?”--“yes, sir,” said dowling, “i have seen the lady.” “where,
sir?” “at her own lodgings.”--“upon what business did you go thither,
sir; and who sent you?” “i went, sir, to enquire, sir, about mr
jones.” “and who sent you to enquire about him?” “who, sir? why, sir,
mr blifil s
 
 ___________________________
 
ossible to recollect every word.” “will
you please, madam, to assist the gentleman’s memory?” “he told me,
sir,” said mrs waters, “that if mr jones had murdered my husband, i
should be assisted by any money i wanted to carry on the prosecution,
by a very worthy gentleman, who was well apprized what a villain i had
to deal with. these, i can safely swear, were the very words he
spoke.”--“were these the words, sir?” said allworthy. “i cannot charge
my memory exactly,” cries dowling, “but i believe i did speak to that
purpose.”--“and did mr blifil order you to say so?” “i am sure, sir, i
should not have gone on my own accord, nor have willingly exceeded my
authority in matters of this kind. if i said so, i must have so
understood mr blifil’s instructions.” “look you, mr dowling,” said
allworthy; “i promise you before this lady, that whatever you have
done in this affair by mr blifil’s order i will forgive, provided you
now tell me strictly the truth; 
 
 ___________________________
 
he persons who were eye-witnesses of this fight. he said, he
feared they might be tampered with by mr jones, or some of his
friends. he said, blood required blood; and that not only all who
concealed a murderer, but those who omitted anything in their power to
bring him to justice, were sharers in his guilt. he said, he found you
was very desirous of having the villain brought to justice, though it
was not proper you should appear in it.” “he did so?” says
allworthy.--“yes, sir,” cries dowling; “i should not, i am sure, have
proceeded such lengths for the sake of any other person living but
your worship.”--“what lengths, sir?” said allworthy.--“nay, sir,”
 cries dowling, “i would not have your worship think i would, on any
account, be guilty of subornation of perjury; but there are two ways
of delivering evidence. i told them, therefore, that if any offers
should be made them on the other side, they should refuse them, and
that they might be assured they should lose not
 
 ___________________________
 
hing by being honest
men, and telling the truth. i said, we were told that mr jones had
assaulted the gentleman first, and that, if that was the truth, they
should declare it; and i did give them some hints that they should be
no losers.”--“i think you went lengths indeed,” cries
allworthy.--“nay, sir,” answered dowling, “i am sure i did not desire
them to tell an untruth;----nor should i have said what i did, unless
it had been to oblige you.”--“you would not have thought, i believe,”
 says allworthy, “to have obliged me, had you known that this mr jones
was my own nephew.”--“i am sure, sir,” answered he, “it did not become
me to take any notice of what i thought you desired to
conceal.”--“how!” cries allworthy, “and did you know it then?”--“nay,
sir,” answered dowling, “if y
 
 ___________________________
 
our worship bids me speak the truth, i am
sure i shall do it.--indeed, sir, i did know it; for they were almost
the last words which madam blifil ever spoke, which she mentioned to
me as i stood alone by her bedside, when she delivered me the letter i
brought your worship from her.”--“what letter?” cries allworthy.--“the
letter, sir,” answered dowling, “which i brought from salisbury, and
which i delivered into the hands of mr blifil.”--“o heavens!” cries
allworthy: “well, and what were the words? what did my sister say to
you?”--“she took me by the hand,” answered he, “and, as she delivered
me the letter, said, `i scarce know what i have written. tell my
brother, mr jones is his nephew--he is my son.--bless him,’ says she,
and then fell backward, as if dying away. i presently called in the
people, and she never spoke mor
 
 ___________________________
 
e to me, and died within a few minutes
afterwards.”--allworthy stood a minute silent, lifting up his eyes;
and then, turning to dowling, said, “how came you, sir, not to deliver
me this message?” “your worship,” answered he, “must remember that you
was at that time ill in bed; and, being in a violent hurry, as indeed
i always am, i delivered the letter and message to mr blifil, who told
me he would carry them both to you, which he hath since told me he
did, and that your worship, partly out of friendship to mr jones, and
partly out of regard to your sister, would never have it mentioned,
and did intend to conceal it f
 
 ___________________________
 
rom the world; and therefore, sir, if
you had not mentioned it to me first, i am certain i should never have
thought it belonged to me to say anything of the matter, either to
your worship or any other person.”

we have remarked somewhere already, that it is possible for a man to
convey a lie in the words of truth; this was the case at present; for
blifil had, in fact, told dowling what he now related, but had not
imposed upon him, nor indeed had imagined he was able so to do. in
reality, the promises which blifil had made to dowling were the
motives which had induced him to secrecy; and, as he now very plainly
saw blifil would not be able to keep them, he thought proper now to
make this confession, which the promises of forgiveness, joined to the
threats, the voice, the looks of allworthy, and the discoveries he had
made before, extorted from him, who was besides taken u
 
 ___________________________
 
nawares, and
had no time to consider of evasions.

allworthy appeared well satisfied with this relation, and, having
enjoined on dowling strict silence as to what had past, conducted that
gentleman himself to the door, lest he should see blifil, who was
returned to his chamber, where he exulted in the thoughts of his last
deceit on his uncle, and little suspected what had since passed
below-stairs.

as allworthy was returning to his room he met mrs miller in the entry,
who, with a face all pale and full of terror, said to him, “o! sir, i
find this wicked woman hath been with you, and you know all; yet do
not on this account ab
 
 ___________________________
 
th jones at upton, or perhaps, from some
other reasons, was now become so indifferent to that matter, that he
spoke highly in favour of jones to lord fellamar, took all the blame
upon himself, and said the other had behaved very much like a
gentleman and a man of honour; and upon that lord’s further enquiry
concerning mr jones, fitzpatrick told him he was nephew to a gentleman
of very great fashion and fortune, which was the account he had just
received from mrs waters after her interview with dowling.

lord fellamar now thought it behoved him to do everything in his power
to make satisfaction to a gentleman whom he had so grossly injured,
and without any consideration of rivalship (for he had now given over
all thoughts of sophia), determined to procure mr jones’s liberty,
being satisfied, as well from fitzpatrick as his surgeon, that the
wound was not mortal. he therefore prevailed with the irish peer to
accompany him to the place where jones was confined, to whom he
behaved as we have a
 
 ___________________________
 
d will you consent to ha un to-morrow
morning?” says western.--“i will be obedient to you, sir,” cries
she.--“why then to-morrow morning be the day,” cries he. “why then
to-morrow morning shall be the day, papa, since you will have it so,”
 says sophia. jones then fell upon his knees, and kissed her hand in an
agony of joy, while western began to caper and dance about the room,
presently crying out--“where the devil is allworthy? he is without
now, a talking with that d--d lawyer dowling, when he should be
minding other matters.” he then sallied out in quest of him, and very
opportunely left the lovers to enjoy a few tender minutes alone.

but he soon returned with allworthy, saying, “if you won’t believe me,
you may ask her yourself. hast nut gin thy consent, sophy, to be
married to-morrow?” “such are your commands, sir,” cries sophia, “and
i dare not be guilty of disobedience.” “i hope, madam,” cries
allworthy, “my nephew will merit so much goodness, and