me for me; but, as i was about to take a long voyage, and we
were both very young, only a little above eighteen, it was thought
most prudent by her mother to prevent our going too far at present, as
a marriage, if it was to take place, would be more convenient after my
return, when i should be, as i expected, set up in my business.
perhaps, too, she thought my expectations not so well founded as i
imagined them to be.

my chief acquaintances at this time were charles osborne, joseph
watson, and james ralph, all lovers of reading. the two first were
clerks to an eminent scrivener or conveyancer in the town, charles
brockden; the other was clerk to a merchant. watson was a pious,
sensible young man, of great integrity; the others rather more lax in
their principles of religion, particularly ralph, who, as well as
collins, had been unsettled by me, for which they both made me suffer.
osborne was sensible, candid, frank; sincere and affectionate to his
friends; but, in literary matters, too fond of c
 
 ___________________________
 
t died young. he and i had made a serious
agreement, that the one who happen'd first to die should, if possible,
make a friendly visit to the other, and acquaint him how he found
things in that separate state. but he never fulfill'd his promise.

    [35] "in one of the later editions of the _dunciad_ occur
    the following lines:

       'silence, ye wolves! while ralph to cynthia howls,
       and makes night hideous--answer him, ye owls.'

    to this the poet adds the following note:

    'james ralph, a name inserted after the first editions,
    not known till he writ a swearing-piece called _sawney_,
    very abusive of dr. swift, mr. gay, and myself.'"




vi

first visit to london


the governor, seeming to like my company, had me frequently to his
house, and his setting me up was always mention'd as a fixed thing. i
was to take with me letters recommendatory to a number of his friends,
besides the letter of credit to furnish me with the necessary money
for purchasing the press and type