 series
of political and social satires, because he was a man of unusual scope
of power and usefulness, who knew how to tell his fellow-men the
secrets of that power and that usefulness.


the story of the autobiography

the account of how franklin's _autobiography_ came to be written and
of the adventures of the original manuscript forms in itself an
interesting story. the _autobiography_ is franklin's longest work,
and yet it is only a fragment. the first part, written as a letter to
his son, william franklin, was not intended for publication; and the
composition is more informal and the narrative more personal than in
the second part, from 1730 on, which was written with a view to
publication. the entire manuscript shows little evidence of revision.
in fact, the expression is so homely and natural that his grandson,
william temple franklin, in editing the work changed some of the
phrases because he thought them inelegant and vulgar.

franklin began the story of his life while on a visit to his frie
 
 ___________________________
 
 to
time, as it shall be demanded. 5. no drivers of waggons, or persons
taking care of the hired horses, are on any account to be called upon
to do the duty of soldiers, or be otherwise employed than in
conducting or taking care of their carriages or horses. 6. all oats,
indian corn, or other forage that waggons or horses bring to the camp,
more than is necessary for the subsistence of the horses, is to be
taken for the use of the army, and a reasonable price paid for the
same.

"note.--my son, william franklin, is empowered to enter into like
contracts with any person in cumberland county.

"b. franklin."


  _"to the inhabitants of the counties of lancaster,
           york, and cumberland._

"friends and countrymen,

"being occasionally[96] at the camp at frederic a few days since, i
found the general and officers extremely exasperated on account of
their not being supplied with horses and carriages, which had been
expected from this province, as most able to furnish them; but,
through the dissensi