e governor was there; but when i went to his lodging, the secretary
came to me from him with the civillest message in the world, that he
could not then see me, being engaged in business of the utmost
importance, but should send the letters to me on board, wished me
heartily a good voyage and a speedy return, etc. i returned on board a
little puzzled, but still not doubting.

mr. andrew hamilton, a famous lawyer of philadelphia, had taken
passage in the same ship for himself and son, and with mr. denham, a
quaker merchant, and messrs. onion and russel, masters of an iron work
in maryland, had engaged the great cabin; so that ralph and i were
forced to take up with a berth in the steerage, and none on board
knowing us, were considered as ordinary persons. but mr. hamilton and
his son (it was james, since governor) return'd from newcastle to
philadelphia, the father being recall'd by a great fee to plead for a
seized ship; and, just before we sail'd, colonel french coming on
board, and showing m
 
 ___________________________
 
elf, and when you return to america, you will set up to greater
advantage."

[illustration: "so, putting the letter into my hand"]

we both of us happen'd to know, as well as the stationer, that
riddlesden, the attorney, was a very knave. he had half ruin'd miss
read's father by persuading him to be bound for him. by this letter it
appear'd there was a secret scheme on foot to the prejudice of
hamilton (suppos'd to be then coming over with us); and that keith was
concerned in it with riddlesden. denham, who was a friend of
hamilton's, thought he ought to be acquainted with it; so, when he
arriv'd in england, which was soon after, partly from resentment and
ill-will to keith and riddlesden, and partly from good-will to him, i
waited on him, and gave him the letter. he thank'd me cordially, the
information being of importance to him; and from that time he became
my friend, greatly to my advantage afterwards on many occasions.

but what shall we think of a governor's playing such pitiful tricks,
 
 ___________________________
 
aiming at the graceful and easy as well as the useful. all these
i took this occasion of exhibiting to the company, and was much
flatter'd by their admiration; and wygate, who was desirous of
becoming a master, grew more and more attach'd to me on that account,
as well as from the similarity of our studies. he at length proposed
to me traveling all over europe together, supporting ourselves
everywhere by working at our business. i was once inclined to it; but,
mentioning it to my good friend mr. denham, with whom i often spent an
hour when i had leisure, he dissuaded me from it, advising me to think
only of returning to pennsylvania, which he was now about to do.

i must record one trait of this good man's character. he had formerly
been in business at bristol, but failed in debt to a number of people,
compounded and went to america. there, by a close application to
business as a merchant, he acquired a plentiful fortune in a few
years. returning to england in the ship with me, he invited his
 
 ___________________________
 

establish me handsomely. the thing pleas'd me; for i was grown tired
of london, remembered with pleasure the happy months i had spent in
pennsylvania, and wish'd again to see it; therefore i immediately
agreed on the terms of fifty pounds a year,[49] pennsylvania money;
less, indeed, than my present gettings as a compositor, but affording
a better prospect.

    [49] about $167.

i now took leave of printing, as i thought, forever, and was daily
employed in my new business, going about with mr. denham among the
tradesmen to purchase various articles, and seeing them pack'd up,
doing errands, calling upon workmen to dispatch, etc.; and, when all
was on board, i had a few days' leisure. on one of these days, i was,
to my surprise, sent for by a great man i knew only by name, a sir
william wyndham, and i waited upon him. he had heard by some means or
other of my swimming from chelsea to blackfriars, and of my teaching
wygate and another young man to swim in a few hours. he had two sons,
about t
 
 ___________________________
 
owever, she was never happy, and
soon parted from him, refusing to cohabit with him or bear his name,
it being now said that he had another wife. he was a worthless fellow,
tho' an excellent workman, which was the temptation to her friends. he
got into debt, ran away in 1727 or 1728, went to the west indies, and
died there. keimer had got a better house, a shop well supply'd with
stationery, plenty of new types, a number of hands, tho' none good,
and seem'd to have a great deal of business.

mr. denham took a store in water-street, where we open'd our goods; i
attended the business diligently, studied accounts, and grew, in a
little time, expert at selling. we lodg'd and boarded together; he
counsell'd me as a father, having a sincere regard for me. i respected
and loved him, and we might have gone on together very happy; but, in
the beginning of february, 1726/7, when i had just pass'd my
twenty-first year, we both were taken ill. my distemper was a
pleurisy, which very nearly carried me off
 
 ___________________________
 
 was rather disappointed when i
found myself recovering, regretting, in some degree, that i must now,
some time or other, have all that disagreeable work to do over again.
i forget what his distemper was; it held him a long time, and at
length carried him off. he left me a small legacy in a nuncupative
will, as a token of his kindness for me, and he left me once more to
the wide world; for the store was taken into the care of his
executors, and my employment under him ended.

[illustration: "mr. denham took a store in water-street"]

my brother-in-law, holmes, being now at philadelphia, advised my
return to my business; and keimer tempted me, with an offer of large
wages by the year, to come and take the management of his
printing-house, that he might better attend his stationer's shop. i
had heard a bad character of him in london from his wife and her
friends, and was not fond of having any more to do with him. i tri'd
for farther employment as a merchant's clerk; but, not readily meeting
wi