over their
heads, of the twenty illustrious men who had invented the candle.

all the heads of the council turned to us as we entered. these great and
wise of the earth did not know what to think of us, and they looked upon
us with wonder and curiosity, as if we were a miracle. it is true that
our tunic was torn and stained with brown stains which had been blood.
we raised our right arm and we said:

"our greeting to you, our honored brothers of the world council of
scholars!"

then collective 0-0009, the oldest and wisest of the council, spoke and
asked:

"who are you, our brother? for you do not look like a scholar."

"our name is equality 7-2521," we answered, "and we are a street sweeper
of this city."

then it was as if a great wind had stricken the hall, for all the
scholars spoke at once, and they were angry and frightened.

"a street sweeper! a street sweeper walking in upon the world council of
scholars! it is not to be believed! it is against all the rules and all
the
 
 ___________________________
 
r of the sky!" we cried. "we give you the key to
the earth! take it, and let us be one of you, the humblest among you.
let us all work together, and harness this power, and make it ease the
toil of men. let us throw away our candles and our torches. let us flood
our cities with light. let us bring a new light to men!"

but they looked upon us, and suddenly we were afraid. for their eyes
were still, and small, and evil.

"our brothers!" we cried. "have you nothing to say to us?"

then collective 0-0009 moved forward. they moved to the table and the
others followed.

"yes," spoke collective 0-0009, "we have much to say to you."

the sound of their voices brought silence to the hall and to beat of our
heart.

"yes," said collective 0-0009, "we have much to say to a wretch who have
broken all the laws and who boast of their infamy!

"how dared you think that your mind held greater wisdom than the minds
of your brothers? and if the councils had decreed that you should be a
street swe
 
 ___________________________
 
eper, how dared you think that you could be of greater use to
men than in sweeping the streets?"

"how dared you, gutter cleaner," spoke fraternity 9-3452, "to hold
yourself as one alone and with the thoughts of the one and not of the
many?"

"you shall be burned at the stake," said democracy 4-6998.

"no, they shall be lashed," said unanimity 7-3304, "till there is
nothing left under the lashes."

"no," said collective 0-0009, "we cannot decide upon this, our brothers.
no such crime has ever been committed, and it is not for us to judge.
nor for any small council. we shall deliver this creature to the world
council itself and let their will be done."

we looked upon them and we pleaded:

"our brothers! you are right. let the will of the council be done upon
our body. we do not care. but the light? what will you do with the
light?"

collective 0-0009 looked upon us, and they smiled.

"so you think that y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou have found a new power," said collective 0-0009.
"do all your brothers think that?"

"no," we answered.

"what is not thought by all men cannot be true," said collective 0-0009.

"you have worked on this alone?" asked international 1-5537.

"many men in the homes of the scholars have had strange new ideas in the
past," said solidarity 8-1164, "but when the majority of their brother
scholars voted against them, they abandoned their ideas, as all men
must."

"this box is useless," said alliance 6-7349.

"should it be what they claim of it," said harmony 9-2642, "then it
would bring ruin to the department of candles. the candle is a great
boon to mankind, as
 
 ___________________________
 
he sun cannot rise.
it took fifty years to secure the approval of all the councils for the
candle, and to decide upon the number needed, and to re-fit the plans so
as to make candles instead of torches. this touched upon thousands and
thousands of men working in scores of states. we cannot alter the plans
again so soon."

"and if this should lighten the toil of men," said similarity 5-0306,
"then it is a great evil, for men have no cause to exist save in toiling
for other men."

then collective 0-0009 rose and pointed at our box.

"this thing," they said, "must be destroyed."

and all the others cried as one:

"it must be destroyed!"

then we leapt to the table.

we seized our box, we shoved them aside, and we ran to the window. we
turned and we looked at them for the last time, and a rage, such as it
is not fit for humans to know, choked our voice in our throat.

"you fools!" we cried. "you fools! you thrice-damned fools!"

we swung our fist through the windowpane, and we le