larder of the home of the street sweepers. we shall be sentenced to ten
years in the palace of corrective detention if it be discovered. but
this matters not. it matters only that the light is precious and we
should not waste it to write when we need it for that work which is our
crime. nothing matters save the work, our secret, our evil, our precious
work. still, we must also write, for--may the council have mercy upon
us!--we wish to speak for once to no ears but our own.

our name is equality 7-2521, as it is written on the iron bracelet
which all men wear on their left wrists with their names upon it. we are
twenty-one years old. we are six feet tall, and this is a burden, for
there are not many men who are six feet tall. ever have the teachers and
the leaders pointed to us and frowned and said:

"there is evil in your bones, equality 7-2521, for your body has grown
beyond the bodies of your brothers." but we cannot change our bones nor
our body.

we were born with a curse. it h
 
 ___________________________
 
ld ones who whisper about it in the evenings, in the home
of the useless. they whisper many strange things, of the towers which
rose to the sky, in those unmentionable times, and of the wagons which
moved without horses, and of the lights which burned without flame. but
those times were evil. and those times passed away, when men saw the
great truth which is this: that all men are one and that there is no
will save the will of all men together.

all men are good and wise. it is only we, equality 7-2521, we alone who
were born with a curse. for we are not like our brothers. and as we look
back upon our life, we see that it has ever been thus and that it has
brought us step by step to our last, supreme transgression, our crime of
crimes hidden here under the ground.

we remember the home of the infants where we lived till we were five
years old, together with all the children of the city who had been born
in the same year. the sleeping halls there were white and clean and bare
of all t
 
 ___________________________
 
 rang in the tower and we went
to our beds when it rang again. before we removed our garments, we stood
in the great sleeping hall, and we raised our right arms, and we said
all together with the three teachers at the head:

"we are nothing. mankind is all. by the grace of our brothers are we
allowed our lives. we exist through, by and for our brothers who are the
state. amen."

then we slept. the sleeping halls were white and clean and bare of all
things save one hundred beds.

we, equality 7-2521, were not happy in those years in the home of the
students. it was not that the learning was too hard for us. it was that
the learning was too easy. this is a great sin, to be born with a head
which is too quick. it is not good to be different from our brothers,
but it is evil to be superior to them. the teachers told us so, and they
frowned when they looked upon us.

so we fought against this curse. we tried to forget our lessons, but we
always remembered. we tried not to understand wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ents go into the home of
the leaders, which is the greatest house in the city, for it has three
stories. and there they study for many years, so that they may become
candidates and be elected to the city council and the state council and
the world council--by a free and general vote of all men. but we wished
not to be a leader, even though it is a great honor. we wished to be a
scholar.

so we awaited our turn in the great hall and then we heard the council
of vocations call our name: "equality 7-2521." we walked to the dais,
and our legs did not tremble, and we looked up at the council. there
were five members of the council, three of the male gender and two of
the female. their hair was white and their faces were cracked as the
clay of a dry river bed. they were old. they seemed older than the
marble of the temple of the world council. they sat before us and they
did not move. and we saw no breath to stir the folds of their white
togas. but we knew that they were alive, for a finger
 
 ___________________________
 
rs of those
times. hundreds upon hundreds of years ago men knew secrets which we
have lost. and we thought: "this is a foul place. they are damned
who touch the things of the unmentionable times." but our hand which
followed the track, as we crawled, clung to the iron as if it would not
leave it, as if the skin of our hand were thirsty and begging of the
metal some secret fluid beating in its coldness.

we returned to the earth. international 4-8818 looked upon us and
stepped back.

"equality 7-2521," they said, "your face is white."

but we could not speak and we stood looking upon them.

they backed away, as if they dared not touch us. then they smiled, but
it was not a gay smile; it was lost and pleading. but still we could not
speak. then they said:

"we shall report our find to the city council and both of us will be
rewarded."

and then we spoke. our voice was hard and there was no mercy in our
voice. we said:

"we shall not report our find to the city council. we shall
 
 ___________________________
 
 not report
it to any men."

they raised their hands to their ears, for never had they heard such
words as these.

"international 4-8818," we asked, "will you report us to the council and
see us lashed to death before your eyes?"

they stood straight all of a sudden and they answered: "rather would we
die."

"then," we said, "keep silent. this place is ours. this place belongs
to us, equality 7-2521, and to no other men on earth. and if ever we
surrender it, we shall surrender our life with it also."

then we saw that the eyes of international 4-8818 were full to the
lids with tears they dared not drop. they whispered, and their voice
trembled, so that their words lost all shape:

"the will of the council is above all things, for it is the will of
our brothers, which is holy. but if you wish it so, we shall obey you.
rather shall we be evil with you than good with all our brothers
 
 ___________________________
 
. may
the council have mercy upon both our hearts!"

then we walked away together and back to the home of the street
sweepers. and we walked in silence.

thus did it come to pass that each night, when the stars are high and
the street sweepers sit in the city theatre, we, equality 7-2521, steal
out and run through the darkness to our place. it is easy to leave the
theatre; when the candles are blown out and the actors come onto the
stage, no eyes can see us as we crawl under our seat and under the cloth
of the tent. later, it is easy to steal through the shadows and fall in
line next to international 4-8818, as the column leaves the theatre. it
is dark in the streets and there are no men about, for no men may walk
through the city when they have no mission to walk there.
 
 ___________________________
 
uld not betray us, and union 5-3992 would not understand. so
we looked straight upon the golden one, and we saw the shadows of their
lashes on their white cheeks and the sparks of sun on their lips. and we
said:

"you are beautiful, liberty 5-3000."

their face did not move and they did not avert their eyes. only their
eyes grew wider, and there was triumph in their eyes, and it was not
triumph over us, but over things we could not guess.

then they asked:

"what is your name?"

"equality 7-2521," we answered.

"you are not one of our brothers, equality 7-2521, for we do not wish
you to be."

we cannot say what they meant, for there are no words for their meaning,
but we know it without words and we knew it then.

"no," we answered, "nor are you one of our sisters."

"if you see us among scores of women, will you look upon us?"

"we shall look upon you, liberty 5-3000, if we see you among all the
women of the earth."

then they asked:

"are street sweepers sent to diff
 
 ___________________________
 
e in the home of the street sweepers. but
here, in our tunnel, we feel it no longer. the air is pure under the
ground. there is no odor of men. and these three hours give us strength
for our hours above the ground.

our body is betraying us, for the council of the home looks with
suspicion upon us. it is not good to feel too much joy nor to be glad
that our body lives. for we matter not and it must not matter to us
whether we live or die, which is to be as our brothers will it. but we,
equality 7-2521, are glad to be living. if this is a vice, then we wish
no virtue.

yet our brothers are not like us. all is not well with our brothers.
there are fraternity 2-5503, a quiet boy with wise, kind eyes, who cry
suddenly, without reason, in the midst of day or night, and their body
shakes with sobs they cannot explain. there are solidarity 9-6347, who
are a bright youth, without fear in the day; but they scream in their
sleep, and they scream: "help us! help us! help us!" into the night, in
 
 ___________________________
 
em,
and pride, a pride holier than is fit for human pride to be. and it
seemed as if these eyes were trying to tell us something through the
flames, to send into our eyes some word without sound. and it seemed as
if these eyes were begging us to gather that word and not to let it go
from us and from the earth. but the flames rose and we could not guess
the word....

what--even if we have to burn for it like the saint of the pyre--what is
the unspeakable word?




part three

we, equality 7-2521, have discovered a new power of nature. and we have
discovered it alone, and we alone are to know it.

it is said. now let us be lashed for it, if we must. the council of
scholars has said that we all know the things which exist and therefore
the things which are not known by all do not exist. but we think that
the council of scholars is blind. the secrets of this earth are not for
all men to see, but only for those who will seek them. we know, for we
have found a secret unknown to all 
 
 ___________________________
 
d was white in the glow. so the women of the
field were weary, and they tarried over their work, and they were far
from the road when we came. but the golden one stood alone at the hedge,
waiting. we stopped and we saw that their eyes, so hard and scornful to
the world, were looking at us as if they would obey any word we might
speak.

and we said:

"we have given you a name in our thoughts, liberty 5-3000."

"what is our name?" they asked.

"the golden one."

"nor do we call you equality 7-2521 when we think of you."

"what name have you given us?" they looked straight into our eyes and
they held their head high and they answered:

"the unconquered."

for a long time we could not speak. then we said:

"such thoughts as these are forbidden, golden one."

"but you think such thoughts as these and you wish us to think them."

we looked into their eyes and we could not lie.

"yes," we whispered, and they smiled, and then we said: "our dearest
one, do not obey us."

they 
 
 ___________________________
 
ome of the street sweepers.

when the council of the home questioned us, we looked upon the faces of
the council, but there was no curiosity in those faces, and no anger,
and no mercy. so when the oldest of them asked us: "where have you
been?" we thought of our glass box and of our light, and we forgot all
else. and we answered:

"we will not tell you."

the oldest did not question us further. they turned to the two youngest,
and said, and their voice was bored:

"take our brother equality 7-2521 to the palace of corrective detention.
lash them until they tell."

so we were taken to the stone room under the palace of corrective
detention. this room has no windows and it is empty save for an iron
post. two men stood by the post, naked but for leather aprons and
leather hoods over their faces. those who had brought us departed,
leaving us to the two judges who stood in a corner of the room. the
judges were small, thin men, grey and bent. they gave the signal to the
two strong hoo
 
 ___________________________
 
e of the earth did not know what to think of us, and they looked upon
us with wonder and curiosity, as if we were a miracle. it is true that
our tunic was torn and stained with brown stains which had been blood.
we raised our right arm and we said:

"our greeting to you, our honored brothers of the world council of
scholars!"

then collective 0-0009, the oldest and wisest of the council, spoke and
asked:

"who are you, our brother? for you do not look like a scholar."

"our name is equality 7-2521," we answered, "and we are a street sweeper
of this city."

then it was as if a great wind had stricken the hall, for all the
scholars spoke at once, and they were angry and frightened.

"a street sweeper! a street sweeper walking in upon the world council of
scholars! it is not to be believed! it is against all the rules and all
the laws!"

but we knew how to stop them.

"our brothers!" we said. "we matter not, nor our transgression. it
is only our brother men who matter. give no 