a house the second floor of which was illuminated by coloured lanterns.

at the foot of the stairs they heard violins playing above.

"where the deuce are you bringing me to?" said frederick.

"to see a nice girl! don't be afraid!"

the door was opened for them by a groom; and they entered the anteroom,
where paletots, mantles, and shawls were thrown together in a heap on
some chairs. a young woman in the costume of a dragoon of louis xiv.'s
reign was passing at that moment. it was mademoiselle rosanette bron,
the mistress of the place.

"well?" said arnoux.

"'tis done!" she replied.

"ah! thanks, my angel!"

and he wanted to kiss her.

"take care, now, you foolish man! you'll spoil the paint on my face!"

arnoux introduced frederick.

"step in there, monsieur; you are quite welcome!"

she drew aside a door-curtain, and cried out with a certain emphasis:

"here's my lord arnoux, girl, and a princely friend of his!"

frederick was at first dazzled by the lights. he could see nothing save
some s
 
 ___________________________
 
e
partners in the dance fell into their places.

they were about sixty in number, the women being for the most part
dressed either as village-girls or marchionesses, and the men, who were
nearly all of mature age, being got up as wagoners, 'longshoremen, or
sailors.

frederick having taken up his position close to the wall, stared at
those who were going through the quadrille in front of him.

an old beau, dressed like a venetian doge in a long gown or purple silk,
was dancing with mademoiselle rosanette, who wore a green coat, laced
breeches, and boots of soft leather with gold spurs. the pair in front
of them consisted of an albanian laden with yataghans and a swiss girl
with blue eyes and skin white as milk, who looked as plump as a quail
with her chemise-sleeves and red corset exposed to view. in order to
turn to account her hair, which fell down to her hips, a tall blonde, a
walking lady in the opera, had assumed the part of a female savage; and
over her brown swaddling-cloth she displayed
 
 ___________________________
 
ry minute losing her
partner who appeared as louis xiv., displaying an utter ignorance of the
figures and confusing the quadrille.

[footnote 9: this probably refers to the english astronomer of that
name.--translator.]

frederick, as he gazed at these people, experienced a sense of
forlornness, a feeling of uneasiness. he was still thinking of madame
arnoux and it seemed to him as if he were taking part in some plot that
was being hatched against her.

when the quadrille was over, mademoiselle rosanette accosted him. she
was slightly out of breath, and her gorget, polished like a mirror,
swelled up softly under her chin.

"and you, monsieur," said she, "don't you dance?"

frederick excused himself; he did not know how to dance.

"really! but with me? are you quite sure?" and, poising herself on one
hip, with her other knee a little drawn back, while she stroked with her
left hand the mother-of-pearl pommel of her sword, she kept staring at
him for a minute with a half-beseeching, half-teasing 
 
 ___________________________
 
ir. at last she
said "good night! then," made a pirouette, and disappeared.

frederick, dissatisfied with himself, and not well knowing what to do,
began to wander through the ball-room.

he entered the boudoir padded with pale blue silk, with bouquets of
flowers from the fields, whilst on the ceiling, in a circle of gilt
wood, cupids, emerging out of an azure sky, played over the clouds,
resembling down in appearance. this display of luxuries, which would
to-day be only trifles to persons like rosanette, dazzled him, and he
admired everything--the artificial convolvuli which adorned the surface
of the mirror, the curtains on the mantelpiece, the turkish divan, and a
sort of tent in a recess in the wall, with pink silk hangings and a
covering of white muslin overhead. furniture made of dark wood with
inlaid work of copper filled the sleeping apartment, where, on a
platform covered with swan's-down, stood the large canopied bedstead
trimmed with ostrich-feathers. pins, with heads made of preciou
 
 ___________________________
 
 yellow galloon had taken so many voyages on the backs of strolling
dentists, his wide trousers full of creases, were of so faded a red, his
turban, rolled about like an eel in the tartar fashion, was so poor in
appearance--in short, his entire costume was so wretched and made-up,
that the women did not attempt to hide their disgust. the doctor
consoled him by pronouncing eulogies on his mistress, the lady in the
dress of a 'longshorewoman. this turk was a banker's son.

between two quadrilles, rosanette advanced towards the mantelpiece,
where an obese little old man, in a maroon coat with gold buttons, had
seated himself in an armchair. in spite of his withered cheeks, which
fell over his white cravat, his hair, still fair, and curling naturally
like that of a poodle, gave him a certain frivolity of aspect.

she was listening to him with her face bent close to his. presently, she
accommodated him with a little glass of syrup; and nothing could be more
dainty than her hands under their laced sl
 
 ___________________________
 
apidity of the music, which was far too great for her, gave vent to
bursts of laughter; and he would have liked, while drinking with her in
some tavern in the "porcherons,"[10] to rumple her fichu with both
hands, as in the good old times. but the 'longshorewoman, whose light
toes barely skimmed the floor, seemed to conceal under the suppleness of
her limbs and the seriousness of her face all the refinements of modern
love, which possesses the exactitude of a science and the mobility of a
bird. rosanette was whirling with arms akimbo; her wig, in an awkward
position, bobbing over her collar, flung iris-powder around her; and, at
every turn, she was near catching hold of frederick with the ends of her
gold spurs.

[footnote 10: the "porcherons" was the name given to an old quarter of
paris famous for its taverns, situated between the rue du faubourg
montmartre and the rue de saint-lazare.--translator.]

during the closing bar of the waltz, mademoiselle vatnaz made her
appearance. she had an alge
 
 ___________________________
 
 at last delmar, thus modifying and perfecting his name, as
his celebrity increased, for he had forsaken the public-house concert
for the theatre, and had even just made his _début_ in a noisy fashion
at the ambigu in _gaspardo le pécheur_.

hussonnet, on seeing him, knitted his brows. since his play had been
rejected, he hated actors. it was impossible to conceive the vanity of
individuals of this sort, and above all of this fellow. "what a prig!
just look at him!"

after a light bow towards rosanette, delmar leaned back against the
mantelpiece; and he remained motionless with one hand over his heart,
his left foot thrust forward, his eyes raised towards heaven, with his
wreath of gilt laurels above his cowl, while he strove to put into the
expression of his face a considerable amount of poetry in order to
fascinate the ladies. they made, at some distance, a great circle around
him.

but the vatnaz, having given rosanette a prolonged embrace, came to beg
of hussonnet to revise, with a view t
 
 ___________________________
 
he man of letters promised to assist her in the preparation of the
work. then she asked him whether he could not in one of the prints to
which he had access give her friend a slight puff, and even assign to
him, later, some part. hussonnet had forgotten to take a glass of punch
on account of her.

it was arnoux who had brewed the beverage; and, followed by the comte's
groom carrying an empty tray, he offered it to the ladies with a
self-satisfied air.

when he came to pass in front of m. oudry, rosanette stopped him.

"well--and this little business?"

he coloured slightly; finally, addressing the old man:

"our fair friend tells me that you would have the kindness----"

"what of that, neighbour? i am quite at your service!"

and m. dambreuse's name was pronounced. as they were talking to one
another in low tones, frederick could only hear indistinctly; and he
made his way to the other side of the mantelpiece, where rosanette and
delmar were chatting together.

the mummer had a vulgar countenan
 
 ___________________________
 
ce, made, like the scenery of the
stage, to be viewed from a distance--coarse hands, big feet, and a heavy
jaw; and he disparaged the most distinguished actors, spoke of poets
with patronising contempt, made use of the expressions "my organ," "my
physique," "my powers," enamelling his conversation with words that were
scarcely intelligible even to himself, and for which he had quite an
affection, such as "_morbidezza_," "analogue," and "homogeneity."

rosanette listened to him with little nods of approbation. one could see
her enthusiasm bursting out under the paint on her cheeks, and a touch
of moisture passed like a veil over her bright eyes of an indefinable
colour. how could such a man as this fascinate her? frederick internally
excited himself to greater contempt for him, in order to banish,
perhaps, the species of envy which he felt with regard to him.

mademoiselle vatnaz was now with arnoux, and, while laughing from time
to time very loudly, s
 
 ___________________________
 
he cast glances towards rosanette, of whom m.
oudry did not lose sight.

then arnoux and the vatnaz disappeared. the old man began talking in a
subdued voice to rosanette.

"well, yes, 'tis settled then! leave me alone!"

and she asked frederick to go and give a look into the kitchen to see
whether arnoux happened to be there.

a battalion of glasses half-full covered the floor; and the saucepans,
the pots, the turbot-kettle, and the frying-stove were all in a state of
commotion. arnoux was giving directions to the servants, whom he
"thee'd" and "thou'd," beating up the mustard, tasting the sauces, and
larking with the housemaid.

"all right," he said; "tell the
 
 ___________________________
 
m 'tis ready! i'm going to have it served
up."

the dancing had ceased. the women came and sat down; the men were
walking about. in the centre of the drawing-room, one of the curtains
stretched over a window was swelling in the wind; and the sphinx, in
spite of the observations of everyone, exposed her sweating arms to the
current of air.

where could rosanette be? frederick went on further to find her, even
into her boudoir and her bedroom. some, in order to be alone, or to be
in pairs, had retreated into the corners. whisperings intermingled with
the shade. there were little laughs stifled under handkerchiefs, and at
the sides of women's corsages one could catch glimpses of fans quivering
with slow, gentle movements, like the beating of a wounded bird's wings.

as he entered the hot-house, he saw under the large leaves of a caladium
near the jet d'e
 
 ___________________________
 
au, delmar lying on his face on the sofa covered with
linen cloth. rosanette, seated beside him, had passed her fingers
through his hair; and they were gazing into each other's faces. at the
same moment, arnoux came in at the opposite side--that which was near
the aviary. delmar sprang to his feet; then he went out at a rapid pace,
without turning round; and even paused close to the door to gather a
hibiscus flower, with which he adorned his button-hole. rosanette hung
down her head; frederick, who caught a sight of her profile, saw that
she was in tears.

"i say! what's the matter with you?" exclaimed arnoux.

she shrugged her shoulders without replying.

"is it on account of him?" he went on.

she threw her arms round his neck, and kissing him on the forehead,
slowly:

"you know well that i will always love you, my big fellow! think no more
about it! let us go to supper!"

a copper chandelier with forty wax tapers lighted up the dining-room,
the walls 
 
 ___________________________
 
r some fine old earthenware
that was hung up there; and this crude light, falling perpendicularly,
rendered still whiter, amid the side-dishes and the fruits, a huge
turbot which occupied the centre of the tablecloth, with plates all
round filled with crayfish soup. with a rustle of garments, the women,
having arranged their skirts, their sleeves, and their scarfs, took
their seats beside one another; the men, standing up, posted themselves
at the corners. pellerin and m. oudry were placed near rosanette. arnoux
was facing her. palazot and his female companion had just gone out.

"good-bye to them!" said she. "now let us begin the attack!"

and the choir-boy, a facetious man with a big sign of the cross, said
grace.

the ladies were scandalised, and especially the fishwife, the mother of
a young girl of whom she wished to make an honest woman. neither did
arnoux like "that sort of thing," as he considered that religion ought
to be respected.

a german clock with a cock attached to it happening 
 
 ___________________________
 
 two, gave rise to a number of jokes about the cuckoo. all kinds
of talk followed--puns, anecdotes, bragging remarks, bets, lies taken
for truth, improbable assertions, a tumult of words, which soon became
dispersed in the form of chats between particular individuals. the wines
went round; the dishes succeeded each other; the doctor carved. an
orange or a cork would every now and then be flung from a distance.
people would quit their seats to go and talk to some one at another end
of the table. rosanette turned round towards delmar, who sat motionless
behind her; pellerin kept babbling; m. oudry smiled. mademoiselle vatnaz
ate, almost alone, a group of crayfish, and the shells crackled under
her long teeth. the angel, poised on the piano-stool--the only place on
which her wings permitted her to sit down--was placidly masticating
without ever stopping.

"what an appetite!" the choir-boy kept repeating in amazement, "what an
appetite!"

and the sphinx drank brandy, screamed out with her throat fu
 
 ___________________________
 
hen he conceived the idea of breaking a
plate against his head by rapping it there with a little energy. others
followed his example. the broken earthenware flew about in bits like
slates in a storm; and the 'longshorewoman exclaimed:

"don't bother yourselves about it; these cost nothing. we get a present
of them from the merchant who makes them!"

every eye was riveted on arnoux. he replied:

"ha! about the invoice--allow me!" desiring, no doubt, to pass for not
being, or for no longer being, rosanette's lover.

but two angry voices here made themselves heard:

"idiot!"

"rascal!"

"i am at your command!"

"so am i at yours!"

it was the mediæval knight and the russian postilion who were disputing,
the latter having maintained that armour dispensed with bravery, while
the other regarded this view as an insult. he desired to fight; all
interposed to prevent him, and in the midst of the uproar the captain
tried to make himself heard.

"listen to me, messieurs! one word! i have some experience,
 
 ___________________________
 
 messieurs!"

rosanette, by tapping with her knife on a glass, succeeded eventually in
restoring silence, and, addressing the knight, who had kept his helmet
on, and then the postilion, whose head was covered with a hairy cap:

"take off that saucepan of yours! and you, there, your wolf's head! are
you going to obey me, damn you? pray show respect to my epaulets! i am
your commanding officer!"

they complied, and everyone present applauded, exclaiming, "long live
the maréchale! long live the maréchale!" then she too
 
 ___________________________
 
 their shoulders,
and the paint, trickling down with the perspiration, revealed pallid
faces and red, blinking eyelids.

the maréchale, fresh as if she had come out of a bath, had rosy checks
and sparkling eyes. she flung her wig some distance away, and her hair
fell around her like a fleece, allowing none of her uniform to be seen
except her breeches, the effect thus produced being at the same time
comical and pretty.

the sphinx, whose teeth chattered as if she had the ague, wanted a
shawl.

rosanette rushed up to her own room to look for one, and, as the other
came after her, she quickly shut the door in her face.

the turk remarked, in a loud tone, that m. oudry had not been seen going
out. nobody noticed the maliciousness of this observation, so worn out
were they all.

then, while waiting for vehicles, they managed to get on their
broad-brimmed hats and cloaks. it struck seven. the angel was still in
the dining-room, seated at the table with a plate of sardines and fruit
stewed in melted
 
 ___________________________
 
had an engagement as correspondent for the provinces, had
to read through fifty-three newspapers before his breakfast. the female
savage had a rehearsal at the theatre; pellerin had to see a model; and
the choir-boy had three appointments. but the angel, attacked by the
preliminary symptoms of indigestion, was unable to rise. the mediæval
baron carried her to the cab.

"take care of her wings!" cried the 'longshorewoman through the window.

at the top of the stairs, mademoiselle vatnaz said to rosanette:

"good-bye, darling! that was a very nice evening party of yours."

then, bending close to her ear: "take care of him!"

"till better times come," returned the maréchale, in drawling tones, as
she turned her back.

arnoux and frederick returned together, just as they had come. the
dealer in faïence looked so gloomy that his companion wished to know if
he were ill.

"i? not at all!"

he bit his moustache, knitted his brows; and frederick asked him, was it
his business that annoyed him.

"by n
 
 ___________________________
 
g up for her
previous display of indifference by these simple words.

he was satisfied. nevertheless, he took a deep breath when he got out
into the open air; and, needing a less artificial environment, frederick
recalled to mind that he owed the maréchale a visit.

the door of the anteroom was open. two havanese lapdogs rushed forward.
a voice exclaimed:

"delphine! delphine! is that you, felix?"

he stood there without advancing a step. the two little dogs kept
yelping continually. at length rosanette appeared, wrapped up in a sort
of dressing-gown of white muslin trimmed with lace, and with her
stockingless feet in turkish slippers.

"ah! excuse me, monsieur! i thought it was the hairdresser. one minute;
i am coming back!"

and he was left alone in the dining-room. the venetian blinds were
closed. frederick, as he cast a glance round, was beginning to recall
the hubbub of the other night, when he noticed on the table, in the
middle of the room, a man's hat, an old felt hat, bruised, greasy,
 
 ___________________________
 
rd, every woman being noble, as if it were at the mansion of
the dambreuses. then he talked about the theatres. an extraordinary
performance was to be given that evening at the ambigu.

"shall you go?"

"faith, no! i'm staying at home."

delphine appeared. her mistress gave her a scolding for having gone out
without permission.

the other vowed that she was just "returning from market."

"well, bring me your book. you have no objection, isn't that so?"

and, reading the pass-book in a low tone, rosanette made remarks on
every item. the different sums were not added up correctly.

"hand me over four sous!"

delphine handed the amount over to her, and, when she had sent the maid
away:

"ah! holy virgin! could i be more unfortunate than i am with these
creatures?"

frederick was shocked at this complaint about servants. it recalled the
others too vividly to his mind, and established between the two houses a
kind of vexatious equality.

when delphine came back again, she drew close to the maréchal
 
 ___________________________
 
e's side in
order to whisper something in her ear.

"ah, no! i don't want her!"

delphine presented herself once more.

"madame, she insists."

"ah, what a plague! throw her out!"

at the same moment, an old lady, dressed in black, pushed forward the
door. frederick heard nothing, saw nothing. rosanette rushed into her
apartment to meet her.

when she reappeared her cheeks were flushed, and she sat down in one of
the armchairs without saying a word. a tear fell down her face; then,
turning towards the young man, softly:

"what is your christian name?"

"frederick."

"ha! federico! it doesn't annoy you when i address you in that way?"

and she gazed at him in a coaxing sort of way that was almost amorous.

all of a sudden she uttered an exclamation of delight at the sight of
mademoiselle vatnaz
 
 ___________________________
 
er _table
d'hôte_ at six o'clock sharp; and she was panting for breath, being
completely exhausted. she first took out of her pocket a gold chain in a
paper, then various objects that she had bought.

"you should know that there are in the rue joubert splendid suède gloves
at thirty-six sous. your dyer wants eight days more. as for the guipure,
i told you that they would dye it again. bugneaux has got the instalment
you paid. that's all, i think. you owe me a hundred and eighty-five
francs."

rosanette went to a drawer to get ten napoleons. neither of the pair had
any money. frederick offered some.

"i'll pay you back," said the vatnaz, as she stuffed the fifteen francs
into her handbag. "but you are a naughty boy! i don't love you any
longer--you didn't get me to dance with you even once the other evening!
ah! my dear, i came across a case of stuffed humming-birds which are
perfect loves at a shop in the quai voltaire. if i were in your place, i
would make myself a present of them. look here
 
 ___________________________
 
! what do you think of
it?"

and she exhibited an old remnant of pink silk which she had purchased at
the temple to make a mediæval doublet for delmar.

"he came to-day, didn't he?"

"no."

"that's singular."

and, after a minute's silence:

"where are you going this evening?"

"to alphonsine's," said rosanette, this being the third version given by
her as to the way in which she was going to pass the evening.

mademoiselle vatnaz went on: "and what news about the old man of the
mountain?"

but, with an abrupt wink, the maréchale bade her hold her tongue; and
she accompanied frederick out as far as the anteroom to ascertain from
him whether he would soon see arnoux.

"pray ask him to come--not before his wife, mind!"

at the top of the stairs an umbrella was placed against the wall near a
pair of gol
 
 ___________________________
 
oshes.

"vatnaz's goloshes," said rosanette. "what a foot, eh? my little friend
is rather strongly built!"

and, in a melodramatic tone, making the final letter of the word roll:

"don't tru-us-st her!"

frederick, emboldened by a confidence of this sort, tried to kiss her on
the neck.

"oh, do it! it costs nothing!"

he felt rather light-hearted as he left her, having no doubt that ere
long the maréchale would be his mistress. this desire awakened another
in him; and, in spite of the species of grudge that he owed her, he felt
a longin
 
 ___________________________
 
g to see madame arnoux.

besides, he would have to call at her house in order to execute the
commission with which he had been entrusted by rosanette.

"but now," thought he (it had just struck six), "arnoux is probably at
home."

so he put off his visit till the following day.

she was seated in the same attitude as on the former day, and was sewing
a little boy's shirt.

the child, at her feet, was playing with a wooden toy menagerie. marthe,
a short distance away, was writing.

he began by complimenting her on her children. she replied without any
exaggeration of maternal silliness.

the room had a tranquil aspect. a glow of sunshine stol
 
 ___________________________
 
h disfavour. such exhibitions corrupted the
daughters of the proletariat. then, it was noticeable that they went in
for a display of shameless luxury. therefore, he approved of the conduct
of the bavarian students who insulted lola montès. in imitation of
rousseau, he showed more esteem for the wife of a coal-porter than for
the mistress of a king.

"you don't appreciate dainties," retorted hussonnet in a majestic tone.
and he took up the championship of ladies of this class in order to
praise rosanette. then, as he happened to make an allusion to the ball
at her house and to arnoux's costume, pellerin remarked:

"people maintain that he is becoming shaky?"

the picture-dealer had just been engaged in a lawsuit with reference to
his grounds at belleville, and he was actually in a kaolin company in
lower brittany with other rogues of the same sort.

dussardier knew more about him, for his own master, m. moussinot, having
made enquiries about arnoux from the banker, oscar lefébvre, the latter
h
 
 ___________________________
 
o be the recipient of
his outpourings, he got frederick to drive him to the door.

in place of entering, he walked about on the footpath, looking up at the
windows on the second floor. suddenly the curtains parted.

"ha! bravo! père oudry is no longer there! good evening!"

frederick did not know what to think now.

from this day forth, arnoux was still more cordial than before; he
invited the young man to dine with his mistress; and ere long frederick
frequented both houses at the same time.

rosanette's abode furnished him with amusement. he used to call there of
an evening on his way back from the club or the play. he would take a
cup of tea there, or play a game of loto. on sundays they played
charades; rosanette, more noisy than the rest, made herself conspicuous
by funny tricks, such as running on all-fours or muffling her head in a
cotton cap. in order to watch the passers-by through the window, she had
a hat of waxed leather; she smoked chibouks; she sang tyrolese airs. in
the afternoo
 
 ___________________________
 
 different
strains of music in his life, the one playful, passionate, diverting,
the other grave and almost religious, and vibrating both at the same
time, they always increased in volume and gradually blended with one
another; for if madame arnoux happened merely to touch him with her
finger, the image of the other immediately presented itself to him as an
object of desire, because from that quarter a better opportunity was
thrown in his way, and, when his heart happened to be touched while in
rosanette's company, he was immediately reminded of the woman for whom
he felt such a consuming passion.

this confusion was, in some measure, due to a similarity which existed
between the interiors of the two houses. one of the trunks which was
formerly to be seen in the boulevard montmartre now adorned rosanette's
dining-room. the same courses were served up for dinner in both places,
and even the same velvet cap was to be found trailing over the
easy-chairs; then, a heap of little presents--screens, b
 
 ___________________________
 
an excellent joke that it was a custom of his at the cold baths to put
into the waiters' collection-box a breeches' button instead of a
ten-sous piece--and this did not prevent the maréchale from loving him.

one day, however, she said, while talking about him:

"ah! he's making himself a nuisance to me, at last! i've had enough of
him! faith, so much the better--i'll find another instead!"

frederick believed that the other had already been found, and that his
name was m. oudry.

"well," said rosanette, "what does that signify?"

then, in a voice choked with rising tears:

"i ask very little from him, however, and he won't give me that."

he had even promised a fourth of his profits in the famous kaolin mines.
no profit made its appearance any more than the cashmere with which he
had been luring her on for the last six months.

frederick immediately thought of making her a present. arnoux might
regard it as a lesson for himself, and be annoyed at it.

for all that, he was good-natured, his wi
 
 ___________________________
 
ed to see him.

but they squabbled over the emoluments. frederick interposed, and, at
the end of a week, succeeded in getting them to come to an agreement.

but as the works were situated at creil, sénécal could not assist him in
any way. this thought alone was enough to make his courage flag, as if
he had met with some misfortune. his notion was that the more arnoux
would be kept apart from his wife the better would be his own chance
with her. then he proceeded to make repeated apologies for rosanette.
he referred to all the wrongs she had sustained at the other's hands,
referred to the vague threats which she had uttered a few days before,
and even spoke about the cashmere without concealing the fact that she
had accused arnoux of avarice.

arnoux, nettled at the word (and, furthermore, feeling some uneasiness),
brought rosanette the cashmere, but scolded her for having made any
complaint to frederick. when she told him that she had reminded him a
hundred times of his promise, he pretended 
 
 ___________________________
 
eir comradeship was
an impediment to any outpouring of serious feeling. at last, when she
said one day, in reply to his amorous whispers, that she would not take
another woman's leavings, he answered.

"what other woman?"

"ah! yes, go and meet madame arnoux again!"

for frederick used to talk about her often. arnoux, on his side, had the
same mania. at last she lost patience at always hearing this woman's
praises sung, and her insinuation was a kind of revenge.

frederick resented it. however, rosanette was beginning to excite his
love to an unusual degree. sometimes, assuming the attitude of a woman
of experience, she spoke ill of love with a sceptical smile that made
him feel inclined to box her ears. a quarter of an hour afterwards, it
was the only thing of any consequence in the world, and, with her arms
crossed over her breast, as if she were clasping some one close to her:
"oh, yes, 'tis good! 'tis good!" and her eyelids would quiver in a kind
of rapturous swoon. it was impossible to und
 
 ___________________________
 
lined the invitation. on one
occasion, she accepted it, but did not come.

a machiavellian idea arose in his brain.

having heard from dussardier about pellerin's complaints against
himself, he thought of giving the artist an order to paint the
maréchale's portrait, a life-sized portrait, which would necessitate a
good number of sittings. he would not fail to be present at all of them.
the habitual incorrectness of the painter would facilitate their private
conversations. so then he would urge rosanette to get the picture
executed in order to make a present of her face to her dear arnoux. she
consented, for she saw herself in the midst of the grand salon in the
most prominent position with a crowd of people staring at her picture,
and the newspapers would all talk about it, which at once would set her
afloat.

as for pellerin, he eagerly snatched at the offer. this portrait ought
to place him in the position of a great man; it ought to be a
masterpiece. he passed in review in his memory all th
 
 ___________________________
 
nd which would make the accessories glitter.

"suppose i were to put on her," he thought, "a pink silk dress with an
oriental bournous? oh, no! the bournous is only a rascally thing! or
suppose, rather, i were to make her wear blue velvet with a grey
background, richly coloured? we might likewise give her a white guipure
collar with a black fan and a scarlet curtain behind." and thus, seeking
for ideas, he enlarged his conception, and regarded it with admiration.

he felt his heart beating when rosanette, accompanied by frederick,
called at his house for the first sitting. he placed her standing up on
a sort of platform in the midst of the apartment, and, finding fault
with the light and expressing regret at the loss of his former studio,
he first made her lean on her elbow against a pedestal, then sit down in
an armchair, and, drawing away from her and coming near her again by
turns in order to adjust with a fillip the folds of her dress, he
watched her with eyelids half-closed, and appealed t
 
 ___________________________
 
lliant splashes, as it were, in
such a way as to direct one's glance towards the tip of her foot, for
she would be standing on the last step but one in a natural position, as
if in the act of moving under the glow of the broad sunlight.

he went to look for a picture-case, which he laid on the platform to
represent the step. then he arranged as accessories, on a stool by way
of balustrade, his pea-jacket, a buckler, a sardine-box, a bundle of
pens, and a knife; and when he had flung in front of rosanette a dozen
big sous, he made her assume the attitude he required.

"just try to imagine that these things are riches, magnificent presents.
the head a little on one side! perfect! and don't stir! this majestic
posture exactly suits your style of beauty."

she wore a plaid dress and carried a big muff, and only kept from
laughing outright by an effort of self-control.

"as regards the head-dress, we will mingle with it a circle of pearls.
it always produces a striking effect with red hair."

the ma
 
 ___________________________
 
le."

he began to sketch the position of the masses; and he was so much
preoccupied with the great artists of the renaissance that he kept
talking about them persistently. for a whole hour he went on musing
aloud on those splendid lives, full of genius, glory, and sumptuous
displays, with triumphal entries into the cities, and galas by
torchlight among half-naked women, beautiful as goddesses.

"you were made to live in those days. a creature of your calibre would
have deserved a monseigneur."

rosanette thought the compliments he paid her very pretty. the day was
fixed for the next sitting. frederick took it on himself to bring the
accessories.

as the heat of the stove had stupefied her a little, they went home on
foot through the rue du bac, and reached the pont royal.

it was fine weather, piercingly bright and warm. some windows of houses
in the city shone in the distance, like plates of gold, whilst behind
them at the right the turrets of nôtre dame showed their outlines in
black against
 
 ___________________________
 
 the blue sky, softly bathed at the horizon in grey
vapours.

the wind began to swell; and rosanette, having declared that she felt
hungry, they entered the "patisserie anglaise."

young women with their children stood eating in front of the marble
buffet, where plates of little cakes had glass covers pressed down on
them. rosanette swallowed two cream-tarts. the powdered sugar formed
moustaches at the sides of her mouth. from time to time, in order to
wipe it, she drew out her handkerchief from her muff, and her face,
under her green silk hood, resembled a full-blown rose in the midst of
its leaves.

they resumed their walk. in the rue de la paix she stood before a
goldsmith's shop to look at a bracelet. frederick wished to make her a
present of it.

"no!" said she; "keep your money!"

he was hurt by these words.

"what's
 
 ___________________________
 
h the ducky? we are melancholy?"

and, the conversation having been renewed, he began making the same
protestations of love to her as usual.

"you know well 'tis impossible!"

"why?"

"ah! because----"

they went on side by side, she leaning on his arm, and the flounces of
her gown kept flapping against his legs. then, he recalled to mind one
winter twilight when on the same footpath madame arnoux walked thus by
his side, and he became so much absorbed in this recollection that he no
longer saw rosanette, and did not bestow a thought upon her.

she kept looking straight before her in a careless fashion, lagging a
little, like a lazy child. it was the hour when people had just come
back from their promenade, and equipages were making their way at a
quick trot over the hard pavement.

pellerin's flatteries having probably recurred to her mind, she heaved a
sigh.

"ah! there are some lucky women in the world. decidedly, i was made for
a rich man!"

he replied, with a certain brutality in his tone:
 
 ___________________________
 
n fact an appointment for the
very same day.

he waited until nine o'clock, and then hurried to her house.

some one who had been going up the stairs before him shut the door. he
rang the bell; delphine came out and told him that "madame" was not
there.

frederick persisted, begging of her to admit him. he had something of a
very serious nature to communicate to her; only a word would suffice. at
length, the hundred-sous-piece argument proved successful, and the maid
let him into the anteroom.

rosanette appeared. she was in a negligée, with her hair loose, and,
shaking her head, she waved her arms when she was some paces away from
him to indicate that she could not receive him now.

frederick descended the stairs slowly. this caprice was worse than any
of the others she had indulged in. he could not understand it at all.

in front of the porter's lodge mademoiselle vatnaz stopped him.

"has she received you?"

"no."

"you've been put out?"

"how do you know that?"

"'tis quite plain. but come
 
 ___________________________
 
 woman for a hussy! what do i care about him
after all? he is becoming ugly. i hate him! if i met him, mind you, i'd
spit in his face." she spat out as she uttered the words.

"yes, this is what i think about him now. and arnoux, eh? isn't it
abominable? he has forgiven her so often! you can't conceive the
sacrifices he has made for her. she ought to kiss his feet! he is so
generous, so good!"

frederick was delighted at hearing delmar disparaged. he had taken sides
with arnoux. this perfidy on rosanette's part seemed to him an abnormal
and inexcusable thing; and, infected with this elderly spinster's
emotion, he felt a sort of tenderness towards her. suddenly he found
himself in front of arnoux's door. mademoiselle vatnaz, without his
attention having been drawn to it, had led him down towards the rue
poissonnière.

"here we are!" said she. "as for me, i can't go up; but you, surely
there is nothing to prevent you?"

"from doing what?"

"from telling him everything, faith!"

frederick, as if 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to go there.

she replied "yes," in the same voiceless fashion; and this mute exchange
of thoughts between them was, as it were, an assent--the preliminary
step in adultery.

arnoux was just taking off his coat to go to bed.

"well, how is she going on?"

"oh! better," said frederick; "this will pass off."

but arnoux was in an anxious state of mind.

"you don't know her; she has got hysterical now! idiot of a clerk! this
is what comes of being too good. if i had not given that cursed shawl to
rosanette!"

"don't regret having done so a bit. nobody could be more grateful to you
than she is."

"do you really think so?"

frederick had not a doubt of it. the best proof of it was her dismissal
of père oudry.

"ah! poor little thing!"

and in the excess of his emotion, arnoux wanted to rush off to her
forthwith.

"'tisn't worth while. i am calling to see her. she is unwell."

"all the more reason for my going."

he quickly put on his coat again, and took up his candlestick. frederick
cursed his ow
 
 ___________________________
 
ound that he was bound to protect her, and that an occasion
might present itself for being of service to her.

eight days after the ball, he had paid a visit to m. dambreuse. the
financier had offered him twenty shares in a coal-mining speculation;
frederick did not go back there again. deslauriers had written letters
to him, which he left unanswered. pellerin had invited him to go and see
the portrait; he always put it off. he gave way, however, to cisy's
persistent appeals to be introduced to rosanette.

she received him very nicely, but without springing on his neck as she
used to do formerly. his comrade was delighted at being received by a
woman of easy virtue, and above all at having a chat with an actor.
delmar was there when he called. a drama in which he appeared as a
peasant lecturing louis xiv. and prophesying the events of '89 had made
him so conspicuous, that the same part was continually assigned to him;
and now his function consisted of attacks on the monarchs of all
nations. as 
 
 ___________________________
 
on against the pompadour--this was the most
beautiful bit of acting! the brats of the street used to wait at the
door leading to the side-scenes in order to see him; and his biography,
sold between the acts, described him as taking care of his aged mother,
reading the bible, assisting the poor, in fact, under the aspect of a
saint vincent de paul together with a dash of brutus and mirabeau.
people spoke of him as "our delmar." he had a mission; he became another
christ.

all this had fascinated rosanette; and she had got rid of père oudry,
without caring one jot about consequences, as she was not of a covetous
disposition.

arnoux, who knew her, had taken advantage of the state of affairs for
some time past to spend very little money on her. m. roque had appeared
on the scene, and all three of them carefully avoided anything like a
candid explanation. then, fancying that she had got rid of the other
solely on his account, arnoux increased her allowance, for she was
living at a very expensive r
 
 ___________________________
 
ux. "where is the disgrace of passing
for her lover? i am really so myself. would you not be flattered at
being in that position?"

had she spoken? was this a hint? frederick hastened to reply:

"no! not at all! on the contrary!"

"well, what then?"

"yes, 'tis true; it makes no difference so far as that's concerned."

arnoux next asked: "and why don't you call there oftener?"

frederick promised that he would make it his business to go there again.

"ah! i forgot! you ought, when talking about rosanette, to let out in
some way to my wife that you are her lover. i can't suggest how you can
best do it, but you'll find out that. i ask this of you as a special
favour--eh?"

the young man's only answer was an equivocal grimace. this calumny had
undone him. he even called on her that evening, and swore that arnoux's
accusation was false.

"is that really so?"

he appeared to be speaking sincerely, and, when she had taken a long
breath of relief, she said to him:

"i believe you," with a beautiful sm
 
 ___________________________
 
ile. then she hung down her head,
and, without looking at him:

"besides, nobody has any claim on you!"

so then she had divined nothing; and she despised him, seeing that she
did not think he could love her well enough to remain faithful to her!
frederick, forgetting his overtures while with the other, looked on the
permission accorded to him as an insult to himself.

after this she suggested that he ought now and then to pay rosanette a
visit, to get a little glimpse of what she was like.

arnoux presently made his appearance, and, five minutes later, wished to
carry him off to rosanette's abode.

the situation was becoming intolerable.

his attention was diverted by a letter from a notary, who was going to
send him fifteen thousand francs the following day; and, in order to
make up for his neglect of deslauriers, he went forthwith to tell him
this good news.

the advocate was lodging in the rue des trois-maries, on the fift
 
 ___________________________
 
me up to frederick, and, taking him aside:

"be honest. have you got the amount? yes or no?"

"well, then, no," said frederick; "i've lost it."

"ah! and in what way?"

"at play."

deslauriers, without saying a single word in reply, made a very low bow,
and went away. arnoux had taken advantage of the opportunity to light a
cigar in a tobacconist's shop. when he came back, he wanted to know from
frederick "who was that young man?"

"oh! nobody--a friend."

then, three minutes later, in front of rosanette's door:

"come on up," said arnoux; "she'll be glad to see you. what a savage you
are just now!"

a gas-lamp, which was directly opposite, threw its light on him; and,
with his cigar between his white teeth and his air of contentment, there
was something intolerable about him.

"ha! now that i think of it, my notary has been at your place this
morning about that mortgage-registry business. 'tis my wife reminded me
about it."

"a wife with brains!" returned frederick automatically.

"i believe y
 
 ___________________________
 
re did it come from?"

"oh! i've had it a long time," said the maréchale.

the young man did not challenge this hypocritical answer in any way. he
preferred to profit by the circumstance. and, still keeping hold of the
wrist, he pressed his lips on it between the glove and the cuff.

"stop! people will see us!"

"pooh! what does it signify?"

after passing by the place de la concorde, they drove along the quai de
la conférence and the quai de billy, where might be noticed a cedar in a
garden. rosanette believed that lebanon was situated in china; she
laughed herself at her own ignorance, and asked frederick to give her
lessons in geography. then, leaving the trocadéro at the right, they
crossed the pont de jéna, and drew up at length in the middle of the
champ de mars, near some other vehicles already drawn up in the
hippodrome.

the grass hillocks were covered with common people. some spectators
might be seen on the balcony of the military school; and the two
pavilions outside the weighing
 
 ___________________________
 
ropes. in the immense oval described by this passage, cocoanut-sellers
were shaking their rattles, others were selling programmes of the races,
others were hawking cigars, with loud cries. on every side there was a
great murmur. the municipal guards passed to and fro. a bell, hung from
a post covered with figures, began ringing. five horses appeared, and
the spectators in the galleries resumed their seats.

meanwhile, big clouds touched with their winding outlines the tops of
the elms opposite. rosanette was afraid that it was going to rain.

"i have umbrellas," said frederick, "and everything that we need to
afford ourselves diversion," he added, lifting up the chest, in which
there was a stock of provisions in a basket.

"bravo! we understand each other!"

"and we'll understand each other still better, shall we not?"

"that may be," she said, colouring.

the jockeys, in silk jackets, were trying to draw up their horses in
order, and were holding them back with both hands. somebody lowered a
r
 
 ___________________________
 
ain whether filly or tibi should take the
lead; then tom pouce appeared in front. but clubstick, who had been in
the rear since the start, came up with the others and outstripped them,
so that he was the first to reach the winning-post, beating sir charles
by two lengths. it was a surprise. there was a shout of applause; the
planks shook with the stamping of feet.

"we are amusing ourselves," said the maréchale. "i love you, darling!"

frederick no longer doubted that his happiness was secure. rosanette's
last words were a confirmation of it.

a hundred paces away from him, in a four-wheeled cabriolet, a lady could
be seen. she stretched her head out of the carriage-door, and then
quickly drew it in again. this movement was repeated several times.
frederick could not distinguish her face. he had a strong suspicion,
however, that it was madame arnoux. and yet this seemed impossible! why
should she have come there?

he stepped out of his own vehicle on the pretence of strolling into the
weighing
 
 ___________________________
 
-room.

"you are not very gallant!" said rosanette.

he paid no heed to her, and went on. the four-wheeled cabriolet, turning
back, broke into a trot.

frederick at the same moment, found himself button-holed by cisy.

"good-morrow, my dear boy! how are you going on? hussonnet is over
there! are you listening to me?"

frederick tried to shake him off in order to get up with the
four-wheeled cabriolet. the maréchale beckoned to him to come round to
her. cisy perceived her, and obstinately persisted in bidding her
good-day.

since the terminatio
 
 ___________________________
 
ses of champagne while the clock was striking the midnight
hour, offered to make a bet with the maréchale, softly caressed her two
lapdogs; and, leaning against the carriage-door on one elbow, he kept
talking nonsense, with the handle of his walking-stick in his mouth, his
legs wide apart, and his back stretched out. frederick, standing beside
him, was smoking, while endeavouring to make out what had become of the
cabriolet.

the bell having rung, cisy took himself off, to the great delight of
rosanette, who said he had been boring her to death.

the second race had nothing special about it; neither had the third,
save that a man was thrown over the shaft of a cart while it was taking
place. the fourth, in which eight horses contested the city stakes, was
more interesting.

the spectators in the gallery had clambered to the top of their seats.
the others, standing up in the vehicles, followed with opera-glasses in
their hands the movements of the jockeys. they could be seen starting
out like r
 
 ___________________________
 
es wore cynical smiles above their
cravats, as if they were laughing at him. at length he gave a tap in
the hand of the oldest of them, and made his way towards the maréchale.

she was eating, with an affectation of gluttony, a slice of _pâté de
foie gras_. frederick, in order to make himself agreeable to her,
followed her example, with a bottle of wine on his knees.

the four-wheeled cabriolet reappeared. it _was_ madame arnoux! her face
was startlingly pale.

"give me some champagne," said rosanette.

and, lifting up her glass, full to the brim as high as possible, she
exclaimed:

"look over there! look at my protector's wife, one of the virtuous
women!"

there was a great burst of laughter all round her; and the cabriolet
disappeared from view. frederick tugged impatiently at her dress, and
was on the point of flying into a passion. but cisy was there, in the
same attitude as before, and, with increased assurance, he invited
rosanette to dine with him that very evening.

"impossible!" she
 
 ___________________________
 
!" said frederick.

"we like to be alone better--don't we?" said the maréchale, as she
placed her hand in his.

then there swept past him with a glitter of copper and steel a
magnificent landau to which were yoked four horses driven in the daumont
style by two jockeys in velvet vests with gold fringes. madame dambreuse
was by her husband's side, and martinon was on the other seat facing
them. all three of them gazed at frederick in astonishment.

"they have recognised me!" said he to himself.

rosanette wished to stop in order to get a better view of the people
driving away from the course. madame arnoux might again make her
appearance! he called out to the postilion:

"go on! go on! forward!" and the berlin dashed towards the
champs-élysées in the midst of the other vehicles--calashes, britzkas,
wurths, tandems, tilburies, dog-carts, tilted carts with leather
curtains, in which workmen in a jovial mood were singing, or one-horse
chaises driven by fathers of families. in victorias crammed wi
 
 ___________________________
 
s' feet let their legs both hang
down. large broughams, which had their seats lined with cloth, carried
dowagers fast asleep, or else a splendid machine passed with a seat as
simple and coquettish as a dandy's black coat.

the shower grew heavier. umbrellas, parasols, and mackintoshes were put
into requisition. people cried out at some distance away: "good-day!"
"are you quite well?" "yes!" "no!" "bye-bye!"--and the faces succeeded
each other with the rapidity of chinese shadows.

frederick and rosanette did not say a word to each other, feeling a sort
of dizziness at seeing all these wheels continually revolving close to
them.

at times, the rows of carriages, too closely pressed together, stopped
all at the same time in several lines. then they remained side by side,
and their occupants scanned one another. over the sides of panels
adorned with coats-of-arms indifferent glances were cast on the crowd.
eyes full of envy gleamed from the interiors of hackney-coaches.
depreciatory smiles respond
 
 ___________________________
 
e minister of foreign
affairs a group of boobies had taken up their posts on the steps.

when it had got up as high as the chinese baths, as there were holes in
the pavement, the berlin slackened its pace. a man in a hazel-coloured
paletot was walking on the edge of the footpath. a splash, spurting out
from under the springs, showed itself on his back. the man turned round
in a rage. frederick grew pale; he had recognised deslauriers.

at the door of the café anglais he sent away the carriage. rosanette had
gone in before him while he was paying the postilion.

he found her subsequently on the stairs chatting with a gentleman.
frederick took her arm; but in the lobby a second gentleman stopped her.

"go on," said she; "i am at your service."

and he entered the private room alone. through the two open windows
people could be seen at the casements of the other houses opposite.
large watery masses were quivering on the pavement as it began to dry,
and a magnolia, placed on the side of a balcony,
 
 ___________________________
 
ed with imitations of actors. sainville was specially his
model.

[footnote 12: this pun of hussonnet turns on the double sense of the
word "castille," which not only means a place in spain, but also an
altercation.--translator.]

frederick was quite bored by these quibbles. in an outburst of
impatience he pushed his foot under the table, and pressed it on one of
the little dogs.

thereupon both animals began barking in a horrible fashion.

"you ought to get them sent home!" said he, abruptly.

rosanette did not know anyone to whom she could intrust them.

then, he turned round to the bohemian:

"look here, hussonnet; sacrifice yourself!"

"oh! yes, my boy! that would be a very obliging act!"

hussonnet set off, without even requiring to have an appeal made to him.

in what way could they repay him for his kindness? frederick did not
bestow a thought on it. he was even beginning to rejoice at finding
himself alone with her, when a waiter entered.

"madame, somebody is asking for you!"

"what! a
 
 ___________________________
 
gain?"

"however, i must see who it is," said rosanette.

he was thirsting for her; he wanted her. this disappearance seemed to
him an act of prevarication, almost a piece of rudeness. what, then,
did she mean? was it not enough to have insulted madame arnoux? so much
for the latter, all the same! now he hated all women; and he felt the
tears choking him, for his love had been misunderstood and his desire
eluded.

the maréchale returned, and presented cisy to him.

"i have invited monsieur. i have done right, have i not?"

"how is that! oh! certain
 
 ___________________________
 
one, according to the vicomte.

"oh! no. never!"

"yes, indeed; i assure you!"

"ha! you see!"

the look with which she accompanied these words meant: "this is a rich
man--pay attention to what he says!"

meantime, the door was opening every moment; the waiters kept shouting;
and on an infernal piano in the adjoining room some one was strumming a
waltz. then the races led to a discussion about horsemanship and the two
rival systems. cisy was upholding baucher and frederick the comte d'aure
when rosanette shrugged her shoulders:

"enough--my god!--he is a better judge of these things than you
are--come now!"

she kept nibbling at a pomegranate, with her elbow resting on the table.
the wax-candles of the candelabrum in front of her were flickering in
the wind. this white light penetrated her skin with mother-of-pearl
tones, gave a pink hue to her lids, and made her eyeballs glitter. the
red colour of the fruit blended with the purple of her lips; her thin
nostrils heaved; and there was about her 