orehead, antimony at the edges of her eyes, with a kind
of paletot made of black cashmere falling over a petticoat of sparkling
colour, with stripes of silver; and in her hand she held a tambourine.

behind her back came a tall fellow in the classical costume of dante,
who happened to be--she now made no concealment any longer about it--the
ex-singer of the alhambra, and who, though his name was auguste
delamare, had first called himself anténor delamarre, then delmas, then
belmar, and at last delmar, thus modifying and perfecting his name, as
his celebrity increased, for he had forsaken the public-house concert
for the theatre, and had even just made his _début_ in a noisy fashion
at the ambigu in _gaspardo le pécheur_.

hussonnet, on seeing him, knitted his brows. since his play had been
rejected, he hated actors. it was impossible to conceive the vanity of
individuals of this sort, and above all of this fellow. "what a prig!
just look at him!"

after a light bow towards rosanette, delm
 
 ___________________________
 
isfied air.

when he came to pass in front of m. oudry, rosanette stopped him.

"well--and this little business?"

he coloured slightly; finally, addressing the old man:

"our fair friend tells me that you would have the kindness----"

"what of that, neighbour? i am quite at your service!"

and m. dambreuse's name was pronounced. as they were talking to one
another in low tones, frederick could only hear indistinctly; and he
made his way to the other side of the mantelpiece, where rosanette and
delmar were chatting together.

the mummer had a vulgar countenance, made, like the scenery of the
stage, to be viewed from a distance--coarse hands, big feet, and a heavy
jaw; and he disparaged the most distinguished actors, spoke of poets
with patronising contempt, made use of the expressions "my organ," "my
physique," "my powers," enamelling his conversation with words that were
scarcely intelligible even to himself, and for which he had quite an
affection, such as "_morbidezza_," "analogue," and "
 
 ___________________________
 
 frederick went on further to find her, even
into her boudoir and her bedroom. some, in order to be alone, or to be
in pairs, had retreated into the corners. whisperings intermingled with
the shade. there were little laughs stifled under handkerchiefs, and at
the sides of women's corsages one could catch glimpses of fans quivering
with slow, gentle movements, like the beating of a wounded bird's wings.

as he entered the hot-house, he saw under the large leaves of a caladium
near the jet d'eau, delmar lying on his face on the sofa covered with
linen cloth. rosanette, seated beside him, had passed her fingers
through his hair; and they were gazing into each other's faces. at the
same moment, arnoux came in at the opposite side--that which was near
the aviary. delmar sprang to his feet; then he went out at a rapid pace,
without turning round; and even paused close to the door to gather a
hibiscus flower, with which he adorned his button-hole. rosanette hung
down her head; frederick, who caught
 
 ___________________________
 
jokes about the cuckoo. all kinds
of talk followed--puns, anecdotes, bragging remarks, bets, lies taken
for truth, improbable assertions, a tumult of words, which soon became
dispersed in the form of chats between particular individuals. the wines
went round; the dishes succeeded each other; the doctor carved. an
orange or a cork would every now and then be flung from a distance.
people would quit their seats to go and talk to some one at another end
of the table. rosanette turned round towards delmar, who sat motionless
behind her; pellerin kept babbling; m. oudry smiled. mademoiselle vatnaz
ate, almost alone, a group of crayfish, and the shells crackled under
her long teeth. the angel, poised on the piano-stool--the only place on
which her wings permitted her to sit down--was placidly masticating
without ever stopping.

"what an appetite!" the choir-boy kept repeating in amazement, "what an
appetite!"

and the sphinx drank brandy, screamed out with her throat full, and
wriggled like a demo
 
 ___________________________
 
stuffed the fifteen francs
into her handbag. "but you are a naughty boy! i don't love you any
longer--you didn't get me to dance with you even once the other evening!
ah! my dear, i came across a case of stuffed humming-birds which are
perfect loves at a shop in the quai voltaire. if i were in your place, i
would make myself a present of them. look here! what do you think of
it?"

and she exhibited an old remnant of pink silk which she had purchased at
the temple to make a mediæval doublet for delmar.

"he came to-day, didn't he?"

"no."

"that's singular."

and, after a minute's silence:

"where are you going this evening?"

"to alphonsine's," said rosanette, this being the third version given by
her as to the way in which she was going to pass the evening.

mademoiselle vatnaz went on: "and what news about the old man of the
mountain?"

but, with an abrupt wink, the maréchale bade her hold her tongue; and
she accompanied frederick out as far as the anteroom to ascertain from
him whether 
 
 ___________________________
 
 the fact that she
had accused arnoux of avarice.

arnoux, nettled at the word (and, furthermore, feeling some uneasiness),
brought rosanette the cashmere, but scolded her for having made any
complaint to frederick. when she told him that she had reminded him a
hundred times of his promise, he pretended that, owing to pressure of
business, he had forgotten all about it.

the next day frederick presented himself at her abode, and found the
maréchale still in bed, though it was two o'clock, with delmar beside
her finishing a _pâté de foie gras_ at a little round table. before he
had advanced many paces, she broke out into a cry of delight, saying: "i
have him! i have him!" then she seized him by the ears, kissed him on
the forehead, thanked him effusively, "thee'd" and "thou'd" him, and
even wanted to make him sit down on the bed. her fine eyes, full of
tender emotion, were sparkling with pleasure. there was a smile on her
humid mouth. her two round arms emerged through the sleeveless openi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng
of her night-dress, and, from time to time, he could feel through the
cambric the well-rounded outlines of her form.

[illustration: then she seized him by the ears and kissed him.]

all this time delmar kept rolling his eyeballs about.

"but really, my dear, my own pet..."

it was the same way on the occasion when he saw her next. as soon as
frederick entered, she sat up on a cushion in order to embrace him with
more ease, called him a darling, a "dearie," put a flower in his
button-hole, and settled his cravat. these delicate attentions were
redoubled when delmar happened to be there. were they advances on her
part? so it seemed to frederick.

as for deceiving a friend, arnoux, in his place, 
 
 ___________________________
 
price was worse than any
of the others she had indulged in. he could not understand it at all.

in front of the porter's lodge mademoiselle vatnaz stopped him.

"has she received you?"

"no."

"you've been put out?"

"how do you know that?"

"'tis quite plain. but come on; let us go away. i am suffocating!"

she made him accompany her along the street; she panted for breath; he
could feel her thin arm trembling on his own. suddenly, she broke out:

"ah! the wretch!"

"who, pray?"

"why, he--he--delmar!"

this revelation humiliated frederick. he next asked:

"are you quite sure of it?"

"why, when i tell you i followed him!" exclaimed the vatnaz. "i saw him
going in! now do you understand? i ought to have expected it for that
matter--'twas i, in my stupidity, that introduced him to her. and if you
only knew all; my god! why, i picked him up, supported him, clothed him!
and then all the paragraphs i got into the newspapers about him! i loved
him like a mother!"

then, with a sneer:

"ha! monsi
 
 ___________________________
 
done such an infamous thing! men don't,
as a rule, leave a superior woman for a hussy! what do i care about him
after all? he is becoming ugly. i hate him! if i met him, mind you, i'd
spit in his face." she spat out as she uttered the words.

"yes, this is what i think about him now. and arnoux, eh? isn't it
abominable? he has forgiven her so often! you can't conceive the
sacrifices he has made for her. she ought to kiss his feet! he is so
generous, so good!"

frederick was delighted at hearing delmar disparaged. he had taken sides
with arnoux. this perfidy on rosanette's part seemed to him an abnormal
and inexcusable thing; and, infected with this elderly spinster's
emotion, he felt a sort of tenderness towards her. suddenly he found
himself in front of arnoux's door. mademoiselle vatnaz, without his
attention having been drawn to it, had led him down towards the rue
poissonnière.

"here we are!" said she. "as for me, i can't go up; but you, surely
there is nothing to prevent you?"

"from 
 
 ___________________________
 
she said after a pause.

he raised his eyes towards the second floor. madame arnoux's lamp was
burning. in fact there was nothing to prevent him from going up.

"i am going to wait for you here. go on, then!"

this direction had the effect of chilling him, and he said:

"i shall be a long time up there; you would do better to return home. i
will call on you to-morrow."

"no, no!" replied the vatnaz, stamping with her foot. "take him with
you! bring him there! let him catch them together!"

"but delmar will no longer be there."

she hung down her head.

"yes; that's true, perhaps."

and she remained without speaking in the middle of the street, with
vehicles all around her; then, fixing on him her wild-cat's eyes:

"i may rely on you, may i not? there is now a sacred bond between us. do
what you say, then; we'll talk about it to-morrow."

frederick, in passing through the lobby, heard two voices responding to
one another.

madame arnoux's voice was saying:

"don't lie! don't lie, pray!"

he w
 
 ___________________________
 
 a coal-mining speculation;
frederick did not go back there again. deslauriers had written letters
to him, which he left unanswered. pellerin had invited him to go and see
the portrait; he always put it off. he gave way, however, to cisy's
persistent appeals to be introduced to rosanette.

she received him very nicely, but without springing on his neck as she
used to do formerly. his comrade was delighted at being received by a
woman of easy virtue, and above all at having a chat with an actor.
delmar was there when he called. a drama in which he appeared as a
peasant lecturing louis xiv. and prophesying the events of '89 had made
him so conspicuous, that the same part was continually assigned to him;
and now his function consisted of attacks on the monarchs of all
nations. as an english brewer, he inveighed against charles i.; as a
student at salamanca, he cursed philip ii.; or, as a sensitive father,
he expressed indignation against the pompadour--this was the most
beautiful bit of acting!
 
 ___________________________
 
 the brats of the street used to wait at the
door leading to the side-scenes in order to see him; and his biography,
sold between the acts, described him as taking care of his aged mother,
reading the bible, assisting the poor, in fact, under the aspect of a
saint vincent de paul together with a dash of brutus and mirabeau.
people spoke of him as "our delmar." he had a mission; he became another
christ.

all this had fascinated rosanette; and she had got rid of père oudry,
without caring one jot about consequences, as she was not of a covetous
disposition.

arnoux, who knew her, had taken advantage of the state of affairs for
some time past to spend very little money on her. m. roque had appeared
on the scene, and all three of them carefully avoided anything like a
candid explanation. then, fancying that she had got rid of the other
solely on his 
 
 ___________________________
 
he maréchale appeared satisfied with his attentions. then,
as soon as she had seated herself, she asked him whether he had been
lately at the arnouxs'.

"not for the past month," said frederick.

"as for me, i met him the day before yesterday. he would have even come
to-day, but he has all sorts of troubles--another lawsuit--i don't know
what. what a queer man!"

frederick added with an air of indifference:

"now that i think of it, do you still see--what's that his name
is?--that ex-vocalist--delmar?"

she replied dryly:

"no; that's all over."

so it was clear that there had been a rupture between them. frederick
derived some hope from this circumstance.

they descended the quartier bréda at an easy pace. as it happened to be
sunday, the streets were deserted, and some citizens' faces presented
themselves at the windows. the carriage went on more rapidly. the noise
of wheels made the passers-by turn round; the leather of the hood, which
had slid down, was glittering. the man-servant doub