had cried in her anxiety to go in the trap to meet him.

"who, pray, is mademoiselle louise?"

"monsieur roque's little girl, you know."

"ah! i had forgotten," rejoined frederick, carelessly.

meanwhile, the two horses could keep up the pace no longer. they were
both getting lame; and nine o'clock struck at st. laurent's when he
arrived at the parade in front of his mother's house.

this house of large dimensions, with a garden looking out on the open
country, added to the social importance of madame moreau, who was the
most respected lady in the district.

she came of an old family of nobles, of which the male line was now
extinct. her husband, a plebeian whom her parents forced her to marry,
met his death by a sword-thrust, during her pregnancy, leaving her an
estate much encumbered. she received visitors three times a week, and
from time to time, gave a fashionable dinner. but the number of wax
candles was calculated beforehand, and she looked forward with some
impatience to the payment of her 
 
 ___________________________
 
rents. these pecuniary embarrassments,
concealed as if there were some guilt attached to them, imparted a
certain gravity to her character. nevertheless, she displayed no
prudery, no sourness, in the practice of her peculiar virtue. her most
trifling charities seemed munificent alms. she was consulted about the
selection of servants, the education of young girls, and the art of
making preserves, and monseigneur used to stay at her house on the
occasion of his episcopal visitations.

madame moreau cherished a lofty ambition for her son. through a sort of
prudence grounded on the expectation of favours, she did not care to
hear blame cast on the government. he would need patronage at the start;
then, with its aid, he might become a councillor of state, an
ambassador, a minister. his triumphs at the college of sens warranted
this proud anticipation; he had carried off there the prize of honour.

when he entered the drawing-room, all present arose with a great racket;
he was embraced; and t
 
 ___________________________
 
he chairs, large and small, were drawn up in a big
semi-circle around the fireplace. m. gamblin immediately asked him what
was his opinion about madame lafarge. this case, the rage of the period,
did not fail to lead to a violent discussion. madame moreau stopped it,
to the regret, however, of m. gamblin. he deemed it serviceable to the
young man in his character of a future lawyer, and, nettled at what had
occurred, he left the drawing-room.

nothing should have caused surprise on the part of a friend of père
roque! the reference to père roque led them to talk of m. dambreuse, who
had just become the owner of the demesne of la fortelle. but the
tax-collector had drawn frederick aside to know what he thought of m.
guizot's latest work. they we
 
 ___________________________
 
bout his private affairs, and madame benoît went cleverly to work with
that end in view by inquiring about his uncle. how was that worthy
relative? they no longer heard from him. had he not a distant cousin in
america?

the cook announced that monsieur's soup was served. the guests
discreetly retired. then, as soon as they were alone in the dining-room,
his mother said to him in a low tone:

"well?"

the old man had received him in a very cordial manner, but without
disclosing his intentions.

madame moreau sighed.

"where is she now?" was his thought.

the diligence was rolling along the road, and, wrapped up in the shawl,
no doubt, she was leaning against the cloth of the coupé, her beautiful
head nodding asleep.

he and his mother were just going up to their apartments when a waiter
from the swan of the cross brought him a note.

"what is that, pray?"

"it is deslauriers, who wants me," said he.

"ha! your chum!" said madame moreau, with a contemptuous sneer.
"certainly it is a nice hour to se
 
 ___________________________
 
brooklets;
then they would pass through the boulevards overshadowed by the old city
walls. the deserted streets rang under their tread. the grating flew
back; they ascended the stairs; and they felt as sad as if they had had
a great debauch.

the proctor maintained that they mutually cried up each other.
nevertheless, if frederick worked his way up to the higher forms, it was
through the exhortations of his friend; and, during the vacation in
1837, he brought deslauriers to his mother's house.

madame moreau disliked the young man. he had a terrible appetite. he was
fond of making republican speeches. to crown all, she got it into her
head that he had been the means of leading her son into improper
places. their relations towards each other were watched. this only made
their friendship grow stronger, and they bade one another adieu with
heartfelt pangs when, in the following year, deslauriers left the
college in order to study law in paris.

frederick anxiously looked forward to the time when they 
 
 ___________________________
 
peak
afforded a glimpse of a sharp nose.

"monsieur roque?" said frederick.

"the very man!" returned the voice.

this resident in the locality explained his presence by stating that he
had come back to inspect the wolf-traps in his garden near the
water-side.

"and so you are back again in the old spot? very good! i ascertained the
fact through my little girl. your health is good, i hope? you are not
going away again?"

then he left them, repelled, probably, by frederick's chilling
reception.

madame moreau, indeed, was not on visiting terms with him. père roque
lived in peculiar relations with his servant-girl, and was held in very
slight esteem, although he was the vice-president at elections, and m.
dambreuse's manager.

"the banker who resides in the rue d'anjou," observed deslauriers. "do
you know what you ought to do, my fine fellow?"

isidore once more interrupted. his orders were positive not to go back
without frederick. madame would be getting uneasy at his absence.

"well, well, he wil
 
 ___________________________
 
way near the hôtel-dieu, and after a long
embrace, the two friends parted.




chapter iii.

sentiment and passion.


two months later, frederick, having debarked one morning in the rue
coq-héron, immediately thought of paying his great visit.

chance came to his aid. père roque had brought him a roll of papers and
requested him to deliver them up himself to m. dambreuse; and the worthy
man accompanied the package with an open letter of introduction in
behalf of his young fellow-countryman.

madame moreau appeared surprised at this proceeding. frederick concealed
the delight that it gave him.

m. dambreuse's real name was the count d'ambreuse; but since 1825,
gradually abandoning his title of nobility and his party, he had turned
his attention to business; and with his ears open in every office, his
hand in every enterprise, on the watch for every opportunity, as subtle
as a greek and as laborious as a native of auvergne, he had amassed a
fortune which might be called considerable. furthermore, 
 
 ___________________________
 
to them by name)
had been rejected at their examinations. but he calculated on presenting
himself again in the month of november. now, having no time to lose, he
would not go home this year; and he asked, in addition to the quarterly
allowance, for two hundred and fifty francs, to get coached in law by a
private tutor, which would be of great assistance to him; and he threw
around the entire epistle a garland of regrets, condolences, expressions
of endearment, and protestations of filial love.

madame moreau, who had been expecting him the following day, was doubly
grieved. she threw a veil over her son's misadventure, and in answer
told him to "come all the same." frederick would not give way, and the
result was a falling out between them. however, at the end of the week,
he received the amount of the quarter's allowance together with the sum
required for the payment of the private tutor, which helped to pay for
a pair of pearl-grey trousers, a white felt hat, and a gold-headed
switch. when he had
 
 ___________________________
 
sence of refinement, and in which ingenuous souls trace the
expression of instantaneous sympathy.

they would expect to see him as soon as he returned. m. dambreuse told
him to give his kind remembrances to père roque.

frederick, when he reached his lodgings, did not fail to inform
deslauriers of their hospitable invitation.

"grand!" was the clerk's reply; "and don't let your mamma get round you!
come back without delay!"

on the day after his arrival, as soon as they had finished breakfast,
madame moreau brought her son out into the garden.

she said she was happy to see him in a profession, for they were not as
rich as people imagined. the land brought in little; the people who
farmed it paid badly. she had even been compelled to sell her carriage.
finally, she placed their situation in its true colours before him.

during the first embarrassments which followed the death of her late
husband, m. roque, a man of great cunning, had made her loans of money
which had been renewed, and left long un
 
 ___________________________
 
d her
shoulders, slightly gilded by the sun, to be seen. her short white
petticoat was spotted with the stains made by sweets; and there was, so
to speak, the grace of a young wild animal about her entire person, at
the same time, nervous and thin. apparently, the presence of a stranger
astonished her, for she had stopped abruptly with her watering-pot in
her hand darting glances at him with her large bright eyes, which were
of a limpid greenish-blue colour.

"that is m. roque's daughter," said madame moreau. "he has just married
his servant and legitimised the child that he had by her."




chapter vi.

blighted hopes.


ruined, stripped of everything, undermined!

he remained seated on the bench, as if stunned by a shock. he cursed
fate; he would have liked to beat somebody; and, to intensify his
despair, he felt a kind of outrage, a sense of disgrace, weighing down
upon him; for frederick had been under the impression that the fortune
coming to him through his father would mount up one day to an
 
 ___________________________
 
 by it to sympathetic tenderness. so, after all, this
catastrophe was a piece of good fortune; like those earthquakes which
unveil treasures, it had revealed to him the hidden wealth of his
nature. but there was only one place in the world where this could be
turned to account--paris; for to his mind, art, science, and love (those
three faces of god, as pellerin would have said) were associated
exclusively with the capital. that evening, he informed his mother of
his intention to go back there. madame moreau was surprised and
indignant. she regarded it as a foolish and absurd course. it would be
better to follow her advice, namely, to remain near her in an office.
frederick shrugged his shoulders, "come now"--looking on this proposal
as an insult to himself.

thereupon, the good lady adopted another plan. in a tender voice broken
by sobs she began to dwell on her solitude, her old age, and the
sacrifices she had made for him. now that she was more unhappy than
ever, he was abandoning her. then, all
 
 ___________________________
 
s mother called him to consult him about a plantation in the garden.

this garden was, after the fashion of an english park, cut in the middle
by a stick fence; and the half of it belonged to père roque, who had
another for vegetables on the bank of the river. the two neighbours,
having fallen out, abstained from making their appearance there at the
same hour. but since frederick's return, the old gentleman used to walk
about there more frequently, and was not stinted in his courtesies
towards madame moreau's son. he pitied the young man for having to live
in a country town. one day he told him that madame dambreuse had been
anxious to hear from him. on another occasion he expatiated on the
custom of champagne, where the stomach conferred nobility.

"at that time you would have been a lord, since your mother's name was
de fouvens. and 'tis all very well to talk--never mind! there's
something in a name. after all," he added, with a sly glance at
frederick, "that depends on the keeper of the seals."
 
 ___________________________
 
," said frederick.

"no, lift me up!"

he stooped over the hedge, and raising her off the ground with his
hands, kissed her on both cheeks; then he put her back on her own side
by a similar process; and this performance was repeated on the next
occasions when they found themselves together.

without more reserve than a child of four, as soon as she heard her
friend coming, she sprang forward to meet him, or else, hiding behind a
tree, she began yelping like a dog to frighten him.

one day, when madame moreau had gone out, he brought her up to his own
room. she opened all the scent-bottles, and pomaded her hair
plentifully; then, without the slightest embarrassment, she lay down on
the bed, where she remained stretched out at full length, wide awake.

"i fancy myself your wife," she said to him.

next day he found her all in tears. she confessed that she had been
"weeping for her sins;" and, when he wished to know what they were, she
hung down her head, and answered:

"ask me no more!"

the time for
 
 ___________________________
 
iming:

"the spot! the spot!" her teeth chattered, she shivered, and, fixing
terrified glances on her right hand, she kept rubbing it, saying:

"always a spot!"

at last a doctor was brought, who directed that she should be kept free
from violent emotions.

the townsfolk saw in this only an unfavourable prognostic for her
morals. it was said that "young moreau" wished to make an actress of her
later.

soon another event became the subject of discussion--namely, the arrival
of uncle barthélemy. madame moreau gave up her sleeping-apartment to
him, and was so gracious as to serve up meat to him on fast-days.

the old man was not very agreeable. he was perpetually making
comparisons between havre and nogent, the air of which he considered
heavy, the bread bad, the streets ill-paved, the food indifferent, and
the inhabitants very lazy. "how wretched trade is with you in this
place!" he blamed his deceased brother for his extravagance, pointing
out by way of contrast that he had himself accumulated an i
 
 ___________________________
 
ncome of
twenty-seven thousand livres a year. at last, he left at the end of the
week, and on the footboard of the carriage gave utterance to these by no
means reassuring words:

"i am always very glad to know that you are in a good position."

"you will get nothing," said madame moreau as they re-entered the
dining-room.

he had come only at her urgent request, and for eight days she had been
seeking, on her part, for an opening--only too clearly perhaps. she
repented now of having done so, and remained seated in her armchair with
her head bent down and her lips tightly pressed together. frederick sat
opposite, staring at her; and they were both silent, as they had been
five years before on his return home by the montereau steamboat. this
coincidence, which presented itself e
 
 ___________________________
 

offered to drive frederick there.

"you have no need of an invitation as long as you are with me. don't be
afraid!"

frederick felt inclined to accept this offer. but how would he explain
his fixed sojourn at nogent? he had not a proper summer suit. finally,
what would his mother say? he accordingly decided not to go.

from that time, their neighbour exhibited less friendliness. louise was
growing tall; madame éléonore fell dangerously ill; and the intimacy
broke off, to the great delight of madame moreau, who feared lest her
son's prospects of being settled in life might be affected by
association with such people.

she was thinking of purchasing for him the registrarship of the court of
justice. frederick raised no particular objection to this scheme. he now
accompanied her to mass; in the evening he took a hand in a game of "all
fours." he became accustomed to provincial habits of life, and allowed
himself to slide into them; and even his love had assumed a character of
mournful sweetness, a 
 
 ___________________________
 
rippling sound of their kisses. and every day this was
renewed indefinitely. he would receive them in his own house: the
dining-room would be furnished in red leather; the boudoir in yellow
silk; sofas everywhere! and such a variety of whatnots, china vases, and
carpets! these images came in so tumultuous a fashion into his mind that
he felt his head turning round. then he thought of his mother; and he
descended the stairs with the letter in his hand.

[footnote 5: about £1,350.--translator.]

madame moreau made an effort to control her emotion, but could not keep
herself from swooning. frederick caught her in his arms and kissed her
on the forehead.

"dear mother, you can now buy back your carriage--laugh then! shed no
more tears! be happy!"

[illustration: laugh then! shed no more tears! be happy!]

ten minutes later the news had travelled as far as the faubourgs. then
m. benoist, m. gamblin, m. chambion, and other friends hurried towards
the house. frederick got away for a minute in order to wr
 
 ___________________________
 
ite to
deslauriers. then other visitors turned up. the afternoon passed in
congratulations. they had forgotten all about "roque's wife," who,
however, was declared to be "very low."

when they were alone, the same evening, madame moreau said to her son
that she would advise him to set up as an advocate at troyes. as he was
better known in his own part of the country than in any other, he might
more easily find there a profitable connection.

"ah, it is too hard!" exclaimed frederick. he had scarcely grasped his
good fortune in his hands when he longed to carry it to madame arnoux.
he announced his express determination to live in paris.

"and what are you going to do there?"

"nothing!"

madame moreau, astonished at his manner
 
 ___________________________
 
, asked what he intended to
become.

"a minister," was frederick's reply. and he declared that he was not at
all joking, that he meant to plunge at once into diplomacy, and that his
studies and his instincts impelled him in that direction. he would first
enter the council of state under m. dambreuse's patronage.

"so then, you know him?"

"oh, yes--through m. roque."

"that is singular," said madame moreau. he had awakened in her heart her
former dreams of ambition. she internally abandoned herself to them, and
said no more about other matters.

if he had yielded to his impatience, frederick would have started that
very instant. next morning every seat in the diligence had been engaged;
and so he kept eating out his heart till seven o'clock in the evening.

they had sat down to dinner when three prolonged tolls of the
church-bell fell on their ears; and the housemaid, coming in, informed
them tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t madame éléonore had just died.

this death, after all, was not a misfortune for anyone, not even for her
child. the young girl would only find it all the better for herself
afterwards.

as the two houses were close to one another, a great coming and going
and a clatter of tongues could be heard; and the idea of this corpse
being so near them threw a certain funereal gloom over their parting.
madame moreau wiped her eyes two or three times. frederick felt his
heart oppressed.

when the meal was over, catherine stopped him between two doors.
mademoiselle had peremptorily expressed a wish to see him. she was
waiting for him in the garden. he went out there, strode over the hedge,
and knocking more or less against the trees, directed his steps towards
m. roque's house. lights were glittering through a window in the second
story then a form appeared in the midst of the darkness, and a voice
whispered