hen, who could tell? thereupon a wave of blood rushed up to his
face; his temples throbbed; he cracked his whip, shook the reins, and
set the horses going at such a pace that the old coachman repeatedly
exclaimed:

"easy! easy now, or they'll get broken-winded!"

gradually frederick calmed down, and he listened to what the man was
saying. monsieur's return was impatiently awaited. mademoiselle louise
had cried in her anxiety to go in the trap to meet him.

"who, pray, is mademoiselle louise?"

"monsieur roque's little girl, you know."

"ah! i had forgotten," rejoined frederick, carelessly.

meanwhile, the two horses could keep up the pace no longer. they were
both getting lame; and nine o'clock struck at st. laurent's when he
arrived at the parade in front of his mother's house.

this house of large dimensions, with a garden looking out on the open
country, added to the social importance of madame moreau, who was the
most respected lady in the district.

she came of an old family of nobles, of which
 
 ___________________________
 
, i give that up! besides, if i should ever find
her, she will repel me. i belong to the race of the disinherited, and i
shall be extinguished with a treasure that will be of paste or of
diamond--i know not which."

somebody's shadow fell across the road, and at the same time they heard
these words:

"excuse me, gentlemen!"

the person who had uttered them was a little man attired in an ample
brown frock-coat, and with a cap on his head which under its peak
afforded a glimpse of a sharp nose.

"monsieur roque?" said frederick.

"the very man!" returned the voice.

this resident in the locality explained his presence by stating that he
had come back to inspect the wolf-traps in his garden near the
water-side.

"and so you are back again in the old spot? very good! i ascertained the
fact through my little girl. your health is good, i hope? you are not
going away again?"

then he left them, repelled, probably, by frederick's chilling
reception.

madame moreau, indeed, was not on visiting terms with him