o the rescue
of their comrade. the terrible shop-assistant was so powerfully built
that it took four of them at least to get the better of him. two of them
shook him, while keeping a grip on his collar; two others dragged his
arms; a fifth gave him digs of the knee in the ribs; and all of them
called him "brigand," "assassin," "rioter." with his breast bare, and
his clothes in rags, he protested that he was innocent; he could not, in
cold blood, look at a child receiving a beating.

"my name is dussardier. i'm employed at messieurs valincart brothers'
lace and fancy warehouse, in the rue de cléry. where's my case? i want
my case!"

he kept repeating:

"dussardier, rue de cléry. my case!"

however, he became quiet, and, with a stoical air, allowed himself to be
led towards the guard-house in the rue descartes. a flood of people came
rushing after him. frederick and the young man with the moustaches
walked immediately behind, full of admiration for the shopman, and
indignant at the violence of p
 
 ___________________________
 
ower.

as they advanced, the crowd became less thick.

the policemen from time to time turned round, with threatening looks;
and the rowdies, no longer having anything to do, and the spectators not
having anything to look at, all drifted away by degrees. the passers-by,
who met the procession, as they came along, stared at dussardier, and in
loud tones, gave vent to abusive remarks about him. one old woman, at
her own door, bawled out that he had stolen a loaf of bread from her.
this unjust accusation increased the wrath of the two friends. at
length, they reached the guard-house. only about twenty persons were
now left in the attenuated crowd, and the sight of the soldiers was
enough to disperse them.

frederick and his companion boldly asked to have the man who had just
been imprisoned delivered up. the sentinel threatene
 
 ___________________________
 
d, if they
persisted, to ram them into jail too. they said they required to see the
commander of the guard-house, and stated their names, and the fact that
they were law-students, declaring that the prisoner was one also.

they were ushered into a room perfectly bare, in which, amid an
atmosphere of smoke, four benches might be seen lining the
roughly-plastered walls. at the lower end there was an open wicket. then
appeared the sturdy face of dussardier, who, with his hair all tousled,
his honest little eyes, and his broad snout, suggested to one's mind in
a confused sort of way the physiognomy of a good dog.

"don't you recognise us?" said hussonnet.

this was the name of the young man with the moustaches.

"why----" stammered dussardier.

"don't play the fool any further," returned the other. "we know that you
are, just like ourselves, a law-student."

in spite of their winks, dussardier failed to understand. he appeared to
be collecting his
 
 ___________________________
 
 thoughts; then, suddenly:

"has my case been found?"

frederick raised his eyes, feeling much discouraged.

hussonnet, however, said promptly:

"ha! your case, in which you keep your notes of lectures? yes, yes, make
your mind easy about it!"

they made further pantomimic signs with redoubled energy, till
dussardier at last realised that they had come to help him; and he held
his tongue, fearing that he might compromise them. besides, he
experienced a kind of shamefacedness at seeing himself raised to the
social rank of student, and to an equality with those young men who had
such white hands.

"do you wish to send any message to anyone?" asked frederick.

"no, thanks, to nobody."

"but your family?"

he lowered his head without replying; the poor fellow was a bastard. the
two friends stood quite astonishe
 
 ___________________________
 
he fragments of it into his hand, the nails of which were covered
with blood, and with his chin sunk on his chest, his pupils fixed and
dilated, he contemplated this wreck of the thing that had yielded him
such delight with a glance of unutterable sadness.

"suppose we give him some cigars, eh?" said hussonnet in a whisper,
making a gesture as if he were reaching them out.

frederick had already laid down a cigar-holder, filled, on the edge of
the wicket.

"pray take this. good-bye! cheer up!"

dussardier flung himself on the two hands that were held out towards
him. he pressed them frantically, his voice choked with sobs.

"what? for me!--for me!"

the two friends tore themselves away from the effusive display of
gratitude which he made, and went off to lunch together at the café
tabourey, in front of the luxembourg.

while cutting up the beefsteak, hussonnet informed his companion that he
did work for the fashion journals, and manufactured catchwords for
_l'art industriel_.

"at jacques arnou
 
 ___________________________
 
 tall young man, attired in a
frock-coat, too short in the wrists, and with a look of embarrassment in
his face. it was the young fellow whom they had gone to release from
the guard-house the year before.

as he had not been able to restore the box of lace which he had lost in
the scuffle, his employer had accused him of theft, and threatened to
prosecute him. he was now a clerk in a wagon-office. hussonnet had come
across him that morning at the corner of the street, and brought him
along, for dussardier, in a spirit of gratitude, had expressed a wish to
see "the other."

he stretched out towards frederick the cigar-holder, still full, which
he had religiously preserved, in the hope of being able to give it back.
the young men invited him to pay them a second visit; and he was not
slow in doing so.

they all had sympathies in common. at first, their hatred of the
government reached the height of an unquestionable dogma. martinon alone
attempted to defend louis philippe. they overwhelmed him wit
 
 ___________________________
 
 dark
eyes----"

"oh! we know all about that," cried hussonnet. "enough of andalusian
beauties on the lawn. those things are out of date; no thank you! for
the fact is, honour bright! a fast woman is more amusing than the venus
of milo. let us be gallic, in heaven's name, and after the regency
style, if we can!

    'flow, generous wines; ladies, deign to smile!'[2]

[footnote 2: _coules, bons vins; femmes, deignez sourire._]

we must pass from the dark to the fair. is that your opinion, father
dussardier?"

dussardier did not reply. they all pressed him to ascertain what his
tastes were.

"well," said he, colouring, "for my part, i would like to love the same
one always!"

this was said in such a way that there was a moment of silence, some of
them being surprised at this candour, and others finding in his words,
perhaps, the secret yearning of their souls.

sénécal placed his glass of beer on the mantelpiece, and declared
dogmatically that, as prostitution was tyrannical and marriage immoral
 
 ___________________________
 
is was a place for public balls recently opened at the top of the
champs-elysées, which had gone down owing to a display of licentiousness
somewhat ruder than is usual in establishments of the kind.)

"that's a place where there seems to be good fun. you can take your
friends, if you like. i can even pass in regimbart for you."

frederick did not think fit to ask the citizen to go. deslauriers
deprived himself of the pleasure of sénécal's society. they took only
hussonnet and cisy along with dussardier; and the same hackney-coach set
the group of five down at the entrance of the alhambra.

two moorish galleries extended on the right and on the left, parallel to
one another. the wall of a house opposite occupied the entire backguard;
and the fourth side (that in which the restaurant was) represented a
gothic cloister with stained-glass windows. a sort of chinese roof
screened the platform reserved for the musicians. the ground was covered
all over with asphalt; the venetian lanterns fastened t
 
 ___________________________
 
ad entitled "the albanian girl's brother."

[footnote 4: _ah! j'ai l'y ri, j'ai l'y ri. dans ce gueusard de paris!_]

the words recalled to frederick those which had been sung by the man in
rags between the paddle-boxes of the steamboat. his eyes involuntarily
attached themselves to the hem of the dress spread out before him.

after each couplet there was a long pause, and the blowing of the wind
through the trees resembled the sound of the waves.

mademoiselle vatnaz blushed the moment she saw dussardier. she soon
rose, and stretching out her hand towards him:

"you do not remember me, monsieur auguste?"

"how do you know her?" asked frederick.

"we have been in the same house," he replied.

cisy pulled him by the sleeve; they went out; and, scarcely had they
disappeared, when madame vatnaz began to pronounce a eulogy on his
character. she even went so far as to add that he possessed "the genius
of the heart."

then they chatted about delmas, admitting that as a mimic he might be a
success on t
 
 ___________________________
 
d away. a cloud of gunpowder floated into the air.
frederick and deslauriers were walking step by step through the midst of
the crowd, when they happened to see something that made them suddenly
stop: martinon was in the act of paying some money at the place where
umbrellas were left; and he was accompanying a woman of fifty,
plain-looking, magnificently dressed, and of problematic social rank.

"that sly dog," said deslauriers, "is not so simple as we imagine. but
where in the world is cisy?"

dussardier pointed out to them the smoking-divan, where they perceived
the knightly youth, with a bowl of punch before him, and a pink hat by
his side, to keep him company. hussonnet, who had been away for the past
few minutes, reappeared at the same moment.

a young girl was leaning on his arm, and addressing him in a loud voice
as "my little cat."

"oh! no!" said he to her--"not in public! call me rather 'vicomte.' that
gives you a cavalier style--louis xiii. and dainty boots--the sort of
thing i like! 
 
 ___________________________
 
yes, my good friends, one of the old _régime_!--nice,
isn't she?"--and he chucked her by the chin--"salute these gentlemen!
they are all the sons of peers of france. i keep company with them in
order that they may get an appointment for me as an ambassador."

"how insane you are!" sighed mademoiselle vatnaz. she asked dussardier
to see her as far as her own door.

arnoux watched them going off; then, turning towards frederick:

"did you like the vatnaz? at any rate, you're not quite frank about
these affairs. i believe you keep your amours hidden."

frederick, turning pale, swore that he kept nothing hidden.

"can it be possible you don't know what it is to have a mistress?" said
arnoux.

frederick felt a longing to mention a woman's name at random. but the
story might be repeated to her. so he replied that as a matter
 
 ___________________________
 
o were convinced that he had been indulging a little too freely.

he resumed his walk. but, as he was exceedingly hungry, and as all the
restaurants were closed, he went to get a "snack" at a tavern by the
fish-markets; after which, thinking it too soon to go in yet, he kept
sauntering about the hôtel de ville till a quarter past eight.

deslauriers had long since got rid of his wench; and he was writing at
the table in the middle of his room. about four o'clock, m. de cisy came
in.

thanks to dussardier, he had enjoyed the society of a lady the night
before; and he had even accompanied her home in the carriage with her
husband to the very threshold of their house, where she had given him an
assignation. he parted with her without even knowing her name.

"and what do you propose that i should do in that way?" said frederick.

thereupon the young gentleman began to cudgel his brains to think of a
suitable woman; he mentioned mademoiselle vatnaz, the andalusian, and
all the rest. at length, with 
 
 ___________________________
 
ade the young
man open his eyes in speechless astonishment.

the picture-dealer added, with an air of simplicity:

"what's the name, by-the-by, of that young fellow, your friend?"

"deslauriers," said frederick quickly.

and, in order to repair the injustice which he felt he had done to his
comrade, he praised him as one who possessed remarkable ability.

"ah! indeed? but he doesn't look such a fine fellow as the other--the
clerk in the wagon-office."

frederick bestowed a mental imprecation on dussardier. she would now be
taking it for granted that he associated with the common herd.

then they began to talk about the ornamentation of the capital--the new
districts of the city--and the worthy oudry happened to refer to m.
dambreuse as one of the big speculators.

frederick, taking advantage of the opportunity to make a good figure,
said he was acquainted with that gentleman. but pellerin launched into a
harangue against shopkeepers--he saw no difference between them, whether
they were sellers o
 
 ___________________________
 
s holidays, he conceived the idea of getting up a picnic to bring to a
close their saturday reunions.

he displayed the utmost gaiety on the occasion. madame arnoux was now
with her mother at chartres. but he would soon come across her again,
and would end by being her lover.

deslauriers, admitted the same day to the young advocates' pleading
rehearsals at orsay, had made a speech which was greatly applauded.
although he was sober, he drank a little more wine than was good for
him, and said to dussardier at dessert:

"you are an honest fellow!--and, when i'm a rich man, i'll make you my
manager."

all were in a state of delight. cisy was not going to finish his
law-course. martinon intended to remain during the period before his
admission to the bar in the provinces, where he would be nominated a
deputy-magistrate. pellerin was devoting himself to the production of a
large picture representing "the genius of the revolution." hussonnet
was, in the following week, about to read for the director o
 
 ___________________________
 
delight
at merely living; he had to restrain himself to keep from singing. he
wanted to burst out, to do generous deeds, and to give alms. he looked
around him to see if there were anyone near whom he could relieve. no
wretch happened to be passing by; and his desire for self-devotion
evaporated, for he was not a man to go out of his way to find
opportunities for benevolence.

then he remembered his friends. the first of whom he thought was
hussonnet, the second, pellerin. the lowly position of dussardier
naturally called for consideration. as for cisy, he was glad to let that
young aristocrat get a slight glimpse as to the extent of his fortune.
he wrote accordingly to all four to come to a housewarming the following
sunday at eleven o'clock sharp; and he told deslauriers to bring
sénécal.

the tutor had been dismissed from the third boarding-school in which he
had been employed for not having given his consent to the distribution
of prizes--a custom which he looked upon as dangerous to equal
 
 ___________________________
 
, however, forced him to go to frederick's reunion.

they found their friend in his bedroom. spring-roller blinds and double
curtains, venetian mirrors--nothing was wanting there. frederick, in a
velvet vest, was lying back on an easy-chair, smoking cigarettes of
turkish tobacco.

sénécal wore the gloomy look of a bigot arriving in the midst of a
pleasure-party.

deslauriers gave him a single comprehensive glance; then, with a very
low bow:

"monseigneur, allow me to pay my respects to you!"

dussardier leaped on his neck. "so you are a rich man now. ah! upon my
soul, so much the better!"

cisy made his appearance with crape on his hat. since the death of his
grandmother, he was in the enjoyment of a considerable fortune, and was
less bent on amusing himself than on being distinguished from
others--not being the same as everyone else--in short, on "having the
proper stamp." this was his favourite phrase.

however, it was now midday, and they were all yawning.

frederick was waiting for some on
 
 ___________________________
 
 bile in abundance. finally he
took his glass in his right hand, raised it, and with his other arm
akimbo, and his eyes flashing:

"i drink to the utter destruction of the existing order of things--that
is to say, of everything included in the words privilege, monopoly,
regulation, hierarchy, authority, state!"--and in a louder voice--"which
i would like to smash as i do this!" dashing on the table the beautiful
wine-glass, which broke into a thousand pieces.

they all applauded, and especially dussardier.

the spectacle of injustices made his heart leap up with indignation.
everything that wore a beard claimed his sympathy. he was one of those
persons who fling themselves under vehicles to relieve the horses who
have fallen. his erudition was limited to two works, one entitled
_crimes of kings_, and the other _mysteries of the vatican_. he had
listened to the advocate with open-mouthed delight. at length, unable to
stand it any longer:

"for my part, the thing i blame louis philippe for is aban
 
 ___________________________
 
t appreciate dainties," retorted hussonnet in a majestic tone.
and he took up the championship of ladies of this class in order to
praise rosanette. then, as he happened to make an allusion to the ball
at her house and to arnoux's costume, pellerin remarked:

"people maintain that he is becoming shaky?"

the picture-dealer had just been engaged in a lawsuit with reference to
his grounds at belleville, and he was actually in a kaolin company in
lower brittany with other rogues of the same sort.

dussardier knew more about him, for his own master, m. moussinot, having
made enquiries about arnoux from the banker, oscar lefébvre, the latter
had said in reply that he considered him by no means solvent, as he knew
about bills of his that had been renewed.

the dessert was over; they passed into the drawing-room, which was hung,
like that of the maréchale, in yellow damask in the style of louis xvi.

pellerin found fault with frederick for not having chosen in preference
the neo-greek style; sénéca
 
 ___________________________
 
ng about the stage.

"why, then," said sénécal, "have you not got the volumes of the
working-men poets?"

and m. de cisy, who devoted his attention to literature, was astonished
at not seeing on frederick's table some of those new physiological
studies--the physiology of the smoker, of the angler, of the man
employed at the barrier.

they went on irritating him to such an extent that he felt a longing to
shove them out by the shoulders.

"but they are making me quite stupid!" and then he drew dussardier
aside, and wished to know whether he could do him any service.

the honest fellow was moved. he answered that his post of cashier
entirely sufficed for his wants.

after that, frederick led deslauriers into his own apartment, and,
taking out of his escritoire two thousand francs:

"look here, old boy, put this money in your pocket. 'tis the balance of
my old debts to you."

"but--what about the journal?" said the advocate. "you are, of course,
aware that i spoke about it to hussonnet."

and, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
en frederick replied that he was "a little short of cash just
now," the other smiled in a sinister fashion.

after the liqueurs they drank beer, and after the beer, grog; and then
they lighted their pipes once more. at last they left, at five o'clock
in the evening, and they were walking along at each others' side without
speaking, when dussardier broke the silence by saying that frederick had
entertained them in excellent style. they all agreed with him on that
point.

then hussonnet remarked that his luncheon was too heavy. sénécal found
fault with the trivial character of his household arrangements. cisy
took the same view. it was absolutely devoid of the "proper stamp."

"for my part, i think," said pellerin, "he might have had the grace to
give me an order for a picture."

deslauriers held his tongue, as he had the bank-notes that
 
 ___________________________
 
 had been
given to him in his breeches' pocket.

frederick was left by himself. he was thinking about his friends, and it
seemed to him as if a huge ditch surrounded with shade separated him
from them. he had nevertheless held out his hand to them, and they had
not responded to the sincerity of his heart.

he recalled to mind what pellerin and dussardier had said about arnoux.
undoubtedly it must be an invention, a calumny? but why? and he had a
vision of madame arnoux, ruined, weeping, selling her furniture. this
idea tormented him all night long. next day he presented himself at her
house.

at a loss to find any way of communicating to her what he had heard, he
asked her, as if in casual conversation, whether arnoux still held
possession of his building grounds at belleville.

"yes, he has them still."

"he is now, i believe, a shareholder in
 
 ___________________________
 
for a moment between two doors in order
to say in a subdued voice, "i'm engaged--for the evening;" or else he
found her surrounded by a dozen persons; and when they were alone, so
many impediments presented themselves one after the other, that one
would have sworn there was a bet to keep matters from going any further.
he invited her to dinner; as a rule, she declined the invitation. on one
occasion, she accepted it, but did not come.

a machiavellian idea arose in his brain.

having heard from dussardier about pellerin's complaints against
himself, he thought of giving the artist an order to paint the
maréchale's portrait, a life-sized portrait, which would necessitate a
good number of sittings. he would not fail to be present at all of them.
the habitual incorrectness of the painter would facilitate their private
conversations. so then he would urge rosanette to get the picture
executed in order to make a present of her face to her dear arnoux. she
consented, for she saw herself in the midst 