
the door near the sofa flew open, and a tall, thin woman entered with
abrupt movements, which made all the trinkets of her watch rattle under
her black taffeta gown.

it was the woman of whom frederick had caught a glimpse last summer at
the palais-royal. some of those present, addressing her by name, shook
hands with her. hussonnet had at last managed to extract from his
employer the sum of fifty francs. the clock struck seven.

all rose to go.

arnoux told pellerin to remain, and accompanied mademoiselle vatnaz into
the dressing-room.

frederick could not hear what they said; they spoke in whispers.
however, the woman's voice was raised:

"i have been waiting ever since the job was done, six months ago."

there was a long silence, and then mademoiselle vatnaz reappeared.
arnoux had again promised her something.

"oh! oh! later, we shall see!"

"good-bye! happy man," said she, as she was going out.

arnoux quickly re-entered the dressing-room, rubbed some cosmetic over
his moustaches, raised his braces
 
 ___________________________
 
eois" overflowed in sarcasms, marked by a
superb lyricism, and he had such religious reverence for the masters
that it raised him almost to their level.

but why had he never spoken about madame arnoux? as for her son, at one
time he called pellerin a decent fellow, at other times a charlatan.
frederick was waiting for some disclosures on his part.

one day, while turning over one of the portfolios in the studio, he
thought he could trace in the portrait of a female bohemian some
resemblance to mademoiselle vatnaz; and, as he felt interested in this
lady, he desired to know what was her exact social position.

she had been, as far as pellerin could ascertain, originally a
schoolmistress in the provinces. she now gave lessons in paris, and
tried to write for the small journals.

according to frederick, one would imagine from her manners with arnoux
that she was his mistress.

"pshaw! he has others!"

then, turning away his face, which reddened with shame as he realised
the baseness of the suggestion, the 
 
 ___________________________
 
g down her head: being well aware of the by no means
lavish habits of her friend, she was afraid of having to pay for any
refreshments he ordered. when, at length, she let the word "money" slip
from her, cisy offered five napoleons--all he had in his purse; and so
it was settled that the thing should come off.

but frederick was absent. he fancied that he had recognised the voice of
arnoux, and got a glimpse of a woman's hat; and accordingly he hastened
towards an arbour which was not far off.

mademoiselle vatnaz was alone there with arnoux.

"excuse me! i am in the way?"

"not in the least!" returned the picture-merchant.

frederick, from the closing words of their conversation, understood that
arnoux had come to the alhambra to talk over a pressing matter of
business with mademoiselle vatnaz; and it was evident that he was not
completely reassured, for he said to her, with some uneasiness in his
manner:

"you are quite sure?"

"perfectly certain! you are loved. ah! what a man you are!"

and she assume
 
 ___________________________
 
uickly handed to him and he moaned forth a
ballad entitled "the albanian girl's brother."

[footnote 4: _ah! j'ai l'y ri, j'ai l'y ri. dans ce gueusard de paris!_]

the words recalled to frederick those which had been sung by the man in
rags between the paddle-boxes of the steamboat. his eyes involuntarily
attached themselves to the hem of the dress spread out before him.

after each couplet there was a long pause, and the blowing of the wind
through the trees resembled the sound of the waves.

mademoiselle vatnaz blushed the moment she saw dussardier. she soon
rose, and stretching out her hand towards him:

"you do not remember me, monsieur auguste?"

"how do you know her?" asked frederick.

"we have been in the same house," he replied.

cisy pulled him by the sleeve; they went out; and, scarcely had they
disappeared, when madame vatnaz began to pronounce a eulogy on his
character. she even went so far as to add that he possessed "the genius
of the heart."

then they chatted about delmas, admitting that
 
 ___________________________
 
 addressing him in a loud voice
as "my little cat."

"oh! no!" said he to her--"not in public! call me rather 'vicomte.' that
gives you a cavalier style--louis xiii. and dainty boots--the sort of
thing i like! yes, my good friends, one of the old _régime_!--nice,
isn't she?"--and he chucked her by the chin--"salute these gentlemen!
they are all the sons of peers of france. i keep company with them in
order that they may get an appointment for me as an ambassador."

"how insane you are!" sighed mademoiselle vatnaz. she asked dussardier
to see her as far as her own door.

arnoux watched them going off; then, turning towards frederick:

"did you like the vatnaz? at any rate, you're not quite frank about
these affairs. i believe you keep your amours hidden."

frederick, turning pale, swore that he kept nothing hidden.

"can it be possible you don't know what it is to have a mistress?" said
arnoux.

frederick felt a longing to mention a woman's name at random. but the
story might be repeated to her. so he re
 
 ___________________________
 
his room. about four o'clock, m. de cisy came
in.

thanks to dussardier, he had enjoyed the society of a lady the night
before; and he had even accompanied her home in the carriage with her
husband to the very threshold of their house, where she had given him an
assignation. he parted with her without even knowing her name.

"and what do you propose that i should do in that way?" said frederick.

thereupon the young gentleman began to cudgel his brains to think of a
suitable woman; he mentioned mademoiselle vatnaz, the andalusian, and
all the rest. at length, with much circumlocution, he stated the object
of his visit. relying on the discretion of his friend, he came to aid
him in taking an important step, after which he might definitely regard
himself as a man; and frederick showed no reluctance. he told the story
to deslauriers without relating the facts with reference to himself
personally.

the clerk was of opinion that he was now going on very well. this
respect for his advice increased his good hum
 
 ___________________________
 
m to let nobody see him delivering it.

forty minutes afterwards, he found himself at saint-cloud. the house,
which was about a hundred paces farther away than the bridge, stood
half-way up the hill. the garden-walls were hidden by two rows of
linden-trees, and a wide lawn descended to the bank of the river. the
railed entrance before the door was open, and frederick went in.

arnoux, stretched on the grass, was playing with a litter of kittens.
this amusement appeared to absorb him completely. mademoiselle vatnaz's
letter drew him out of his sleepy idleness.

"the deuce! the deuce!--this is a bore! she is right, though; i must
go."

then, having stuck the missive into his pocket, he showed the young man
through the grounds with manifest delight. he pointed out
everything--the stable, the cart-house, the kitchen. the drawing-room
was at the right, on the side facing paris, and looked out on a floored
arbour, covered over with clematis. but presently a few harmonious notes
burst forth above their heads: m
 
 ___________________________
 
 about a ruysdaél, for which arnoux expected a big sum, and
pellerin asked him if it were true that the celebrated saul mathias from
london had come over during the past month to make him an offer of
twenty-three thousand francs for it.

"'tis a positive fact!" and turning towards frederick: "that was the
very same gentleman i brought with me a few days ago to the alhambra,
much against my will, i assure you, for these english are by no means
amusing companions."

frederick, who suspected that mademoiselle vatnaz's letter contained
some reference to an intrigue, was amazed at the facility with which my
lord arnoux found a way of passing it off as a perfectly honourable
transaction; but his new lie, which was quite needless, made the young
man open his eyes in speechless astonishment.

the picture-dealer added, with an air of simplicity:

"what's the name, by-the-by, of that young fellow, your friend?"

"deslauriers," said frederick quickly.

and, in order to repair the injustice which he felt he had don
 
 ___________________________
 
itude of a science and the mobility of a
bird. rosanette was whirling with arms akimbo; her wig, in an awkward
position, bobbing over her collar, flung iris-powder around her; and, at
every turn, she was near catching hold of frederick with the ends of her
gold spurs.

[footnote 10: the "porcherons" was the name given to an old quarter of
paris famous for its taverns, situated between the rue du faubourg
montmartre and the rue de saint-lazare.--translator.]

during the closing bar of the waltz, mademoiselle vatnaz made her
appearance. she had an algerian handkerchief on her head, a number of
piastres on her forehead, antimony at the edges of her eyes, with a kind
of paletot made of black cashmere falling over a petticoat of sparkling
colour, with stripes of silver; and in her hand she held a tambourine.

behind her back came a tall fellow in the classical costume of dante,
who happened to be--she now made no concealment any longer about it--the
ex-singer of the alhambra, and who, though his name was augu
 
 ___________________________
 
 he had quite an
affection, such as "_morbidezza_," "analogue," and "homogeneity."

rosanette listened to him with little nods of approbation. one could see
her enthusiasm bursting out under the paint on her cheeks, and a touch
of moisture passed like a veil over her bright eyes of an indefinable
colour. how could such a man as this fascinate her? frederick internally
excited himself to greater contempt for him, in order to banish,
perhaps, the species of envy which he felt with regard to him.

mademoiselle vatnaz was now with arnoux, and, while laughing from time
to time very loudly, she cast glances towards rosanette, of whom m.
oudry did not lose sight.

then arnoux and the vatnaz disappeared. the old man began talking in a
subdued voice to rosanette.

"well, yes, 'tis settled then! leave me alone!"

and she asked frederick to go and give a look into the kitchen to see
whether arnoux happened to be there.

a battalion of glasses half-full covered the floor; and the saucepans,
the pots, the turbot-kett
 
 ___________________________
 
marks, bets, lies taken
for truth, improbable assertions, a tumult of words, which soon became
dispersed in the form of chats between particular individuals. the wines
went round; the dishes succeeded each other; the doctor carved. an
orange or a cork would every now and then be flung from a distance.
people would quit their seats to go and talk to some one at another end
of the table. rosanette turned round towards delmar, who sat motionless
behind her; pellerin kept babbling; m. oudry smiled. mademoiselle vatnaz
ate, almost alone, a group of crayfish, and the shells crackled under
her long teeth. the angel, poised on the piano-stool--the only place on
which her wings permitted her to sit down--was placidly masticating
without ever stopping.

"what an appetite!" the choir-boy kept repeating in amazement, "what an
appetite!"

and the sphinx drank brandy, screamed out with her throat full, and
wriggled like a demon. suddenly her jaws swelled, and no longer being
able to keep down the blood which rushed to
 
 ___________________________
 
r departure.
hussonnet, who had an engagement as correspondent for the provinces, had
to read through fifty-three newspapers before his breakfast. the female
savage had a rehearsal at the theatre; pellerin had to see a model; and
the choir-boy had three appointments. but the angel, attacked by the
preliminary symptoms of indigestion, was unable to rise. the mediæval
baron carried her to the cab.

"take care of her wings!" cried the 'longshorewoman through the window.

at the top of the stairs, mademoiselle vatnaz said to rosanette:

"good-bye, darling! that was a very nice evening party of yours."

then, bending close to her ear: "take care of him!"

"till better times come," returned the maréchale, in drawling tones, as
she turned her back.

arnoux and frederick returned together, just as they had come. the
dealer in faïence looked so gloomy that his companion wished to know if
he were ill.

"i? not at all!"

he bit his moustache, knitted his brows; and frederick asked him, was it
his business that a
 
 ___________________________
 
 nothing. rosanette rushed into her
apartment to meet her.

when she reappeared her cheeks were flushed, and she sat down in one of
the armchairs without saying a word. a tear fell down her face; then,
turning towards the young man, softly:

"what is your christian name?"

"frederick."

"ha! federico! it doesn't annoy you when i address you in that way?"

and she gazed at him in a coaxing sort of way that was almost amorous.

all of a sudden she uttered an exclamation of delight at the sight of
mademoiselle vatnaz.

the lady-artist had no time to lose before presiding at her _table
d'hôte_ at six o'clock sharp; and she was panting for breath, being
completely exhausted. she first took out of her pocket a gold chain in a
paper, then various objects that she had bought.

"you should know that there are in the rue joubert splendid suède gloves
at thirty-six sous. your dyer wants eight days more. as for the guipure,
i told you that they would dye it again. bugneaux has got the instalment
you paid. that's a
 
 ___________________________
 
 voltaire. if i were in your place, i
would make myself a present of them. look here! what do you think of
it?"

and she exhibited an old remnant of pink silk which she had purchased at
the temple to make a mediæval doublet for delmar.

"he came to-day, didn't he?"

"no."

"that's singular."

and, after a minute's silence:

"where are you going this evening?"

"to alphonsine's," said rosanette, this being the third version given by
her as to the way in which she was going to pass the evening.

mademoiselle vatnaz went on: "and what news about the old man of the
mountain?"

but, with an abrupt wink, the maréchale bade her hold her tongue; and
she accompanied frederick out as far as the anteroom to ascertain from
him whether he would soon see arnoux.

"pray ask him to come--not before his wife, mind!"

at the top of the stairs an umbrella was placed against the wall near a
pair of goloshes.

"vatnaz's goloshes," said rosanette. "what a foot, eh? my little friend
is rather strongly built!"

and, in a melo
 
 ___________________________
 
r; only a word would suffice. at
length, the hundred-sous-piece argument proved successful, and the maid
let him into the anteroom.

rosanette appeared. she was in a negligée, with her hair loose, and,
shaking her head, she waved her arms when she was some paces away from
him to indicate that she could not receive him now.

frederick descended the stairs slowly. this caprice was worse than any
of the others she had indulged in. he could not understand it at all.

in front of the porter's lodge mademoiselle vatnaz stopped him.

"has she received you?"

"no."

"you've been put out?"

"how do you know that?"

"'tis quite plain. but come on; let us go away. i am suffocating!"

she made him accompany her along the street; she panted for breath; he
could feel her thin arm trembling on his own. suddenly, she broke out:

"ah! the wretch!"

"who, pray?"

"why, he--he--delmar!"

this revelation humiliated frederick. he next asked:

"are you quite sure of it?"

"why, when i tell you i followed him!" exclaimed the 
 
 ___________________________
 
now. and arnoux, eh? isn't it
abominable? he has forgiven her so often! you can't conceive the
sacrifices he has made for her. she ought to kiss his feet! he is so
generous, so good!"

frederick was delighted at hearing delmar disparaged. he had taken sides
with arnoux. this perfidy on rosanette's part seemed to him an abnormal
and inexcusable thing; and, infected with this elderly spinster's
emotion, he felt a sort of tenderness towards her. suddenly he found
himself in front of arnoux's door. mademoiselle vatnaz, without his
attention having been drawn to it, had led him down towards the rue
poissonnière.

"here we are!" said she. "as for me, i can't go up; but you, surely
there is nothing to prevent you?"

"from doing what?"

"from telling him everything, faith!"

frederick, as if waking up with a start, saw the baseness towards which
she was urging him.

"well?" she said after a pause.

he raised his eyes towards the second floor. madame arnoux's lamp was
burning. in fact there was nothing to preven