rough the little room near the sofa.
arnoux had just opened the portière leading into it to get a
pocket-handkerchief, and frédéric had seen a wash-stand at the far end
of the apartment.

but at this point a kind of muttering sound came from the corner of the
chimney-piece; it was caused by the personage who sat in the armchair
reading the newspaper. he was a man of five feet nine inches in height,
with rather heavy eyelashes, a head of grey hair, and an imposing
appearance; and his name was regimbart.

"what's the matter now, citizen?" said arnoux.

"another fresh piece of rascality on the part of government!"

the thing that he was referring to was the dismissal of a schoolmaster.

pellerin again took up his parallel between michael angelo and
shakespeare. dittmer was taking himself off when arnoux pulled him back
in order to put two bank notes into his hand. thereupon hussonnet said,
considering this an opportune time:

"couldn't you give me an advance, my dear master----?"

but arnoux ha
 
 ___________________________
 
gentleman of affectedly grave demeanour,
who wore whiskers and displayed a white tie round his neck and the cross
of the legion of honour over his breast.

with his elbow resting on the window-fastening, he kept talking to him
for a long time in honeyed tones. at last he burst out:

"ah! well, i am not bothered with brokers, count."

the nobleman gave way, and arnoux paid him down twenty-five louis. as
soon as he had gone out:

"what a plague these big lords are!"

"a lot of wretches!" muttered regimbart.

as it grew later, arnoux was much more busily occupied. he classified
articles, tore open letters, set out accounts in a row; at the sound of
hammering in the warehouse he went out to look after the packing; then
he went back to his ordinary work; and, while he kept his steel pen
running over the paper, he indulged in sharp witticisms. he had an
invitation to dine with his lawyer that evening, and was starting next
day for belgium.

the others chatted about the topics of the day--cherubini's 
 
 ___________________________
 
ffice of the art journal became more marked
than before.

the big letters which formed the name of arnoux on the marble plate
above the shop seemed to him quite peculiar and pregnant with
significance, like some sacred writing. the wide footpath, by its
descent, facilitated his approach; the door almost turned of its own
accord; and the handle, smooth to the touch, gave him the sensation of
friendly and, as it were, intelligent fingers clasping his.
unconsciously, he became quite as punctual as regimbart.

every day regimbart seated himself in the chimney corner, in his
armchair, got hold of the _national_, and kept possession of it,
expressing his thoughts by exclamations or by shrugs of the
shoulders. from time to time he would wipe his forehead with his
pocket-handkerchief, rolled up in a ball, which he usually stuck in
between two buttons of his green frock-coat. he had trousers with
wrinkles, bluchers, and a long cravat; and his hat, with its turned-up
brim, made him easily recognised, at 
 
 ___________________________
 
g home to his wife, he
preferred to dine alone in a little café in the rue gaillon, where he
desired them to serve up to him "household dishes, natural things."
finally, he made his way to another billiard-room, and remained there
till midnight, in fact, till one o'clock in the morning, up till the
last moment, when, the gas being put out and the window-shutters
fastened, the master of the establishment, worn out, begged of him to
go.

and it was not the love of drinking that attracted citizen regimbart to
these places, but the inveterate habit of talking politics at such
resorts. with advancing age, he had lost his vivacity, and now exhibited
only a silent moroseness. one would have said, judging from the gravity
of his countenence, that he was turning over in his mind the affairs of
the whole world. nothing, however, came from it; and nobody, even
amongst his own friends, knew him to have any occupation, although he
gave himself out as being up to his eyes in business.

arnoux appeared to ha
 
 ___________________________
 
ve a very great esteem for him. one day he said to
frederick:

"he knows a lot, i assure you. he is an able man."

on another occasion regimbart spread over his desk papers relating to
the kaolin mines in brittany. arnoux referred to his own experience on
the subject.

frederick showed himself more ceremonious towards regimbart, going so
far as to invite him from time to time to take a glass of absinthe; and,
although he considered him a stupid man, he often remained a full hour
in his company solely because he was jacques arnoux's friend.

after pushing forward some contemporary masters in the early portions of
their career, the picture-dealer, a man of progressive ideas, had tried,
while clinging to his artistic ways, to extend his pecuniary profits.
his object was to emancipate the fine arts, to get the sublime at 
 
 ___________________________
 
s around him was suddenly withdrawn. that which
had seemed to him to be diffused vaguely through the place had now
vanished--or, rather, it had never been there. he experienced an
infinite amazement, and, as it were, the painful sensation of having
been betrayed.

arnoux, while rummaging about in his drawer, began to smile. was he
laughing at him? the clerk laid down a bundle of moist papers on the
table.

"ha! the placards," exclaimed the picture-dealer. "i am not ready to
dine this evening."

regimbart took up his hat.

"what, are you leaving me?"

"seven o'clock," said regimbart.

frederick followed him.

at the corner of the rue montmartre, he turned round. he glanced towards
the windows of the first floor, and he laughed internally with self-pity
as he recalled to mind with what love he had so often contemplated them.
where, then, did she reside? how was he to meet her now? once more
around the object of his desire a solitude opened more immense than
ever!

"are you coming to take it?" ask
 
 ___________________________
 
ed regimbart.

"to take what?"

"the absinthe."

and, yielding to his importunities, frederick allowed himself to be led
towards the bordelais smoking-divan. whilst his companion, leaning on
his elbow, was staring at the decanter, he was turning his eyes to the
right and to the left. but he caught a glimpse of pellerin's profile on
the footpath outside; the painter gave a quick tap at the window-pane,
and he had scarcely sat down when regimbart asked him why they no longer
saw him at the office of _l'art industriel_.

"may i perish before ever i go back there again. the fellow is a brute,
a mere tradesman, a wretch, a downright rogue!"

these insulting words harmonised with frederick's present angry mood.
nevertheless, he was wounded, for it seemed to him that they hit at
madame arnoux more or less.

"why, what has he done to you?" said regimbart.

pellerin stamped with his foot on the ground, and his only response was
an energetic pu
 
 ___________________________
 
 made a dash for the
shop-door, and passed out through it, as he imagined, for the last time
in his life. madame arnoux herself had been lowered by the vulgarity of
her husband.

during the same week he got a letter from deslauriers, informing him
that the clerk would be in paris on the following thursday. then he
flung himself back violently on this affection as one of a more solid
and lofty character. a man of this sort was worth all the women in the
world. he would no longer have any need of regimbart, of pellerin, of
hussonnet, of anyone! in order to provide his friend with as comfortable
lodgings as possible, he bought an iron bedstead and a second armchair,
and stripped off some of his own bed-covering to garnish this one
properly. on thursday morning he was dressing himself to go to meet
deslauriers when there was a ring at the door.

arnoux entered.

"just one word. yesterday i got a lovely trout from geneva. we expect
you by-and-by--at seven o'clock sharp. the address is the rue de
cho
 
 ___________________________
 
ree other ladies with her; the next
time it was in the afternoon, and mademoiselle marthe's writing-master
came on the scene. besides, the men whom madame arnoux received were
not very punctilious about paying visits. for the sake of prudence he
deemed it better not to call again.

but he did not fail to present himself regularly at the office of _l'art
industriel_ every wednesday in order to get an invitation to the
thursday dinners, and he remained there after all the others, even
longer than regimbart, up to the last moment, pretending to be looking
at an engraving or to be running his eye through a newspaper. at last
arnoux would say to him, "shall you be disengaged to-morrow evening?"
and, before the sentence was finished, he would give an affirmative
answer. arnoux appeared to have taken a fancy to him. he showed him how
to become a good judge of wines, how to make hot punch, and how to
prepare a woodcock ragoût. frederick followed his advice with docility,
feeling an attachment to every
 
 ___________________________
 
o wait for him below in the
street.

one evening, after his departure, when there was a fall of snow, sénécal
began to complain about his having a coachman. he declaimed against
kid-gloved exquisites and against the jockey club. he had more respect
for a workman than for these fine gentlemen.

"for my part, anyhow, i work for my livelihood! i am a poor man!"

"that's quite evident," said frederick, at length, losing patience.

the tutor conceived a grudge against him for this remark.

but, as regimbart said he knew sénécal pretty well, frederick, wishing
to be civil to a friend of the arnoux, asked him to come to the
saturday meetings; and the two patriots were glad to be brought together
in this way.

however, they took opposite views of things.

sénécal--who had a skull of the angular type--fixed his attention merely
on systems, whereas regimbart, on the contrary, saw in facts nothing but
facts. the thing that chiefly troubled him was the rhine frontier. he
claimed to be an authority on
 
 ___________________________
 
manner was not much more gracious. whenever
speculative ideas had reached a certain elevation, he would mutter: "oh!
no utopias, no dreams!" on the subject of art (though he used to visit
the studios, where he occasionally out of complaisance gave a lesson in
fencing) his opinions were not remarkable for their excellence. he
compared the style of m. marast to that of voltaire, and mademoiselle
vatnaz to madame de staël, on account of an ode on poland in which
"there was some spirit." in short, regimbart bored everyone, and
especially deslauriers, for the citizen was a friend of the arnoux
family. now the clerk was most anxious to visit those people in the hope
that he might there make the acquaintance of some persons who would be
an advantage to him.

"when are you going to take me there with you?" he would say. arnoux was
either overburdened with business, or else starting on a journey. then
it was not worth while, as the dinners were coming to an end.

if he had been called on to risk his li
 
 ___________________________
 
covered that the picture-dealer was not a very intellectual type of
man. arnoux might, however, take notice of his chilling manner; and now
frederick deemed it advisable to pay back, in a small measure, his
polite attentions.

so, being anxious to do things on a good scale, the young man sold all
his new clothes to a second-hand clothes-dealer for the sum of eighty
francs, and having increased it with a hundred more francs which he had
left, he called at arnoux's house to bring him out to dine. regimbart
happened to be there, and all three of them set forth for les trois
frères provençaux.

the citizen began by taking off his surtout, and, knowing that the two
others would defer to his gastronomic tastes, drew up the _menu_. but in
vain did he make his way to the kitchen to speak himself to the _chef_,
go down to the cellar, with every corner of which he was familiar, and
send for the master of the establishment, to whom he gave "a blowing
up." he was not satisfied with the dishes, the wines,
 
 ___________________________
 
 or the attendance.
at each new dish, at each fresh bottle, as soon as he had swallowed the
first mouthful, the first draught, he threw down his fork or pushed his
glass some distance away from him; then, leaning on his elbows on the
tablecloth, and stretching out his arms, he declared in a loud tone that
he could no longer dine in paris! finally, not knowing what to put into
his mouth, regimbart ordered kidney-beans dressed with oil, "quite
plain," which, though only a partial success, slightly appeased him.
then he had a talk with the waiter all about the latter's predecessors
at the "provençaux":--"what had become of antoine? and a fellow named
eugène? and théodore, the little fellow who always used to attend down
stairs? there was much finer fare in those days, and burgundy vintages
the like of which they would never see again."

then there was a discussion as to the value of gro
 
 ___________________________
 
und in the suburbs,
arnoux having speculated in that way, and looked on it as a safe thing.
in the meantime, however, he would lie out of the interest on his money.
as he did not want to sell out at any price, regimbart would find out
some one to whom he could let the ground; and so these two gentlemen
proceeded at the close of the dessert to make calculations with a lead
pencil.

they went out to get coffee in the smoking-divan on the ground-floor in
the passage du saumon. frederick had to remain on his legs while
interminable games of billiards were being played, drenched in
innumerable glasses of beer; and he lingered on there till midnight
without knowing why, through want of energy, through sheer
senseles
 
 ___________________________
 
ah! one lost, four found instead! we console
ourselves for virtuous women with the other sort. would you like me to
introduce you to some women? you have only to come to the alhambra."

(this was a place for public balls recently opened at the top of the
champs-elysées, which had gone down owing to a display of licentiousness
somewhat ruder than is usual in establishments of the kind.)

"that's a place where there seems to be good fun. you can take your
friends, if you like. i can even pass in regimbart for you."

frederick did not think fit to ask the citizen to go. deslauriers
deprived himself of the pleasure of sénécal's society. they took only
hussonnet and cisy along with dussardier; and the same hackney-coach set
the group of five down at the entrance of the alhambra.

two moorish galleries extended on the right and on the left, parallel to
one another. the wall of a house opposite occupied the entire backguard;
and the fourth side (that in which the restaurant was) represented a
gothi
 
 ___________________________
 
 hands, and thus moved for some time
around the table with his legs in the air. this performance, worthy of
a street-urchin, did not get rid of sénécal's frowns. he had just been
dismissed from the boarding-school, in which he had been a teacher, for
having given a whipping to an aristocrat's son. his straitened
circumstances had got worse in consequence: he laid the blame of this on
the inequalities of society, and cursed the wealthy. he poured out his
grievances into the sympathetic ears of regimbart, who had become every
day more and more disillusioned, saddened, and disgusted. the citizen
had now turned his attention towards questions arising out of the
budget, and blamed the court party for the loss of millions in algeria.

as he could not sleep without having paid a visit to the alexandre
smoking-divan, he disappeared at eleven o'clock. the rest went away some
time afterwards; and frederick, as he was parting with hussonnet,
learned that madame arnoux was to have come back the night bef
 
 ___________________________
 
was closed for the day, and was told to come back again next
morning.

then he called at all the picture-dealers' shops that he could discover,
and enquired whether they could give him any information as to arnoux's
whereabouts. the only answer he got was that m. arnoux was no longer in
the trade.

at last, discouraged, weary, sickened, he returned to his hotel, and
went to bed. just as he was stretching himself between the sheets, an
idea flashed upon him which made him leap up with delight:

"regimbart! what an idiot i was not to think of him before!"

next morning, at seven o'clock, he arrived in the rue nôtre dame des
victoires, in front of a dram-shop, where regimbart was in the habit of
drinking white wine. it was not yet open. he walked about the
neighbourhood, and at the end of about half-an-hour, presented himself
at the place once more. regimbart had left it.

frederick rushed out into the street. he fancied that he could even
notice regimbart's hat some distance away. a hearse and s
 
 ___________________________
 
ay, the
vision had disappeared.

fortunately, he recalled to mind that the citizen breakfasted every day
at eleven o'clock sharp, at a little restaurant in the place gaillon.
all he had to do was to wait patiently till then; and, after sauntering
about from the bourse to the madeleine, and from the madeleine to the
gymnase, so long that it seemed as if it would never come to an end,
frederick, just as the clocks were striking eleven, entered the
restaurant in the rue gaillon, certain of finding regimbart there.

"don't know!" said the restaurant-keeper, in an unceremonious tone.

frederick persisted: the man replied:

"i have no longer any acquaintance with him, monsieur"--and, as he
spoke, he raised his eyebrows majestically and shook his head in a
mysterious fashion.

but, in their last interview, the citizen had referred to the alexandre
smoking-divan. frederick swallowed a cake, jumped into a cab, and asked
the driver whether there happened to be anywhere on the heights of
sainte-geneviève
 
 ___________________________
 
 a certain café alexandre. the cabman drove him to the
rue des francs bourgeois saint-michel, where there was an establishment
of that name, and in answer to his question:

"m. regimbart, if you please?" the keeper of the café said with an
unusually gracious smile:

"we have not seen him as yet, monsieur," while he directed towards his
wife, who sat behind the counter, a look of intelligence. and the next
moment, turning towards the clock:

"but he'll be here, i hope, in ten minutes, or at most a quarter of an
hour. celestin, hurry with the newspapers! what would monsieur like to
take?"

though he did not want to take anything, frederick swallowed a glass of
rum, then a glass 
 
 ___________________________
 
en at the right; after that at the left; and he remained in the middle
of the bench with his arms stretched out. but a cat, daintily pressing
down the velvet at the back of the seat, startled him by giving a sudden
spring, in order to lick up the spots of syrup on the tray; and the
child of the house, an insufferable brat of four, played noisily with a
rattle on the bar steps. his mother, a pale-faced little woman, with
decayed teeth, was smiling in a stupid sort of way. what in the world
could regimbart be doing? frederick waited for him in an exceedingly
miserable frame of mind.

the rain clattered like hail on the covering of the cab. through the
opening in the muslin curtain he could see the poor horse in the street
more motionless than a horse made of wood. the stream of water, becoming
enormous, trickled down between two spokes of the wheels, and the
coachman was nodding drowsily with the horsecloth wrapped round him for
protection, but fearing lest his fare might give him the slip, he op
 
 ___________________________
 
s thoughts,
talked politics, holding forth at some length. he even carried civility
so far as to propose a game of dominoes.

at length when it was half-past four, frederick, who had been there
since about twelve, sprang to his feet, and declared that he would not
wait any longer.

"i can't understand it at all myself," replied the café-keeper, in a
tone of straightforwardness. "this is the first time that m. ledoux has
failed to come!"

"what! monsieur ledoux?"

"why, yes, monsieur!"

"i said regimbart," exclaimed frederick, exasperated.

"ah! a thousand pardons! you are making a mistake! madame alexandre, did
not monsieur say m. ledoux?"

and, questioning the waiter: "you heard him yourself, just as i did?"

no doubt, to pay his master off for old scores, the waiter contented
himself with smiling.

frederick drove back to the boulevards, indignant at having his time
wasted, raging against the citizen, but craving for his presence as if
for that of a god, and firmly resolved to drag him forth
 
 ___________________________
 
dingly got rid of it.
his ideas were in a state of confusion. then all the names of the cafés
which he had heard pronounced by that idiot burst forth at the same time
from his memory like the thousand pieces of an exhibition of
fireworks--the café gascard, the café grimbert, the café halbout, the
bordelais smoking-divan, the havanais, the havrais, the boeuf à la
mode, the brasserie allemande, and the mère morel; and he made his way
to all of them in succession. but in one he was told that regimbart had
just gone out; in another, that he might perhaps call at a later hour;
in a third, that they had not seen him for six months; and, in another
place, that he had the day before ordered a leg of mutton for saturday.
finally, at vautier's dining-rooms, frederick, on opening the door,
knocked against the waiter.

"do you know m. regimbart?"

"what, monsieur! do i know him? 'tis i who have the honour of attending
on him. he's upstairs--he is just finishing his dinner!"

and, with a napkin under 
 
 ___________________________
 
his arm, the master of the establishment
himself accosted him:

"you're asking him for m. regimbart, monsieur? he was here a moment
ago."

frederick gave vent to an oath, but the proprietor of the dining-rooms
stated that he would find the gentleman as a matter of certainty at
bouttevilain's.

"i assure you, on my honour, he left a little earlier than usual, for he
had a business appointment with some gentlemen. but you'll find him, i
tell you again, at bouttevilain's, in the rue saint-martin, no. 92, the
second row of steps at the left, at the end of the courtyard--first
floor--door to the r
 
 ___________________________
 
ight!"

at last, he saw regimbart, in a cloud of tobacco-smoke, by himself, at
the lower end of the refreshment-room, near the billiard-table, with a
glass of beer in front of him, and his chin lowered in a thoughtful
attitude.

"ah! i have been a long time searching for you!"

without rising, regimbart extended towards him only two fingers, and, as
if he had seen frederick the day before, he gave utterance to a number
of commonplace remarks about the opening of the session.

frederick interrupted him, saying in the most natural tone he could
assume:

"is arnoux going on well?"

the reply was a long time coming, as regimbart was gargling the liquor
in his throat:

"yes, not badly."

"where is he living now?"

"why, in the rue paradis poissonnière," the citizen returned with
astonishment.

"wh
 
 ___________________________
 
t
call again. when he did not dine with them, he posted himself about nine
o'clock at the corner of the street, and, as soon as arnoux had slammed
the hall-door behind him, frederick quickly ascended the two flights of
stairs, and asked the servant-girl in an ingenuous fashion:

"is monsieur in?"

then he would exhibit surprise at finding that arnoux was gone out.

the latter frequently came back unexpectedly. then frederick had to
accompany him to the little café in the rue sainte-anne, which regimbart
now frequented.

the citizen began by giving vent to some fresh grievance which he had
against the crown. then they would chat, pouring out friendly abuse on
one another, for the earthenware manufacturer took regimbart for a
thinker of a high order, and, vexed at seeing him neglecting so many
chances of winning distinction, teased the citizen about his laziness.
it seemed to regimbart that arnoux was a man full of heart and
imagination, but decidedly of lax morals, and therefore he was quite
un
 
 ___________________________
 
ceremonious towards a personage he respected so little, refusing even
to dine at his house on the ground that "such formality was a bore."

sometimes, at the moment of parting, arnoux would be seized with hunger.
he found it necessary to order an omelet or some roasted apples; and, as
there was never anything to eat in the establishment, he sent out for
something. they waited. regimbart did not leave, and ended by consenting
in a grumbling fashion to have something himself. he was nevertheless
gloomy, for he remained for hours seated before a half-filled glass. as
providence did not regulate things in harmony with his ideas, he was
becoming a hypochondriac, no longer cared even to read the newspapers,
and at the mere mention of england's name began to bellow with rage. on
one occasion, referring to a waiter who attended on him carelessly, he
exclaimed:

"have we not enough of 
 
 ___________________________
 
lly see our friend martinon?"

"he will be here this evening," said the young girl in a lively tone.

"ha! so you know him?" said her aunt, fixing on her a freezing look.

at that moment one of the men-servants, bending forward, whispered in
her ear.

"your dressmaker, mademoiselle--miss john!"

and the governess, in obedience to this summons, left the room along
with her pupil.

m. dambreuse, annoyed at the disarrangement of the chairs by this
movement, asked what was the matter.

"'tis madame regimbart."

"wait a moment! regimbart! i know that name. i have come across his
signature."

frederick at length broached the question. arnoux deserved some
consideration; he was even going, for the sole purpose of fulfilling his
engagements, to sell a house belonging to his wife.

"she is considered very pretty," said madame dambreuse.

the banker added, with a display of good-nature:

"are you on friendly terms with them--on intimate terms?"

frederick, without giving an explicit reply, said that he w