t that
they were law-students, declaring that the prisoner was one also.

they were ushered into a room perfectly bare, in which, amid an
atmosphere of smoke, four benches might be seen lining the
roughly-plastered walls. at the lower end there was an open wicket. then
appeared the sturdy face of dussardier, who, with his hair all tousled,
his honest little eyes, and his broad snout, suggested to one's mind in
a confused sort of way the physiognomy of a good dog.

"don't you recognise us?" said hussonnet.

this was the name of the young man with the moustaches.

"why----" stammered dussardier.

"don't play the fool any further," returned the other. "we know that you
are, just like ourselves, a law-student."

in spite of their winks, dussardier failed to understand. he appeared to
be collecting his thoughts; then, suddenly:

"has my case been found?"

frederick raised his eyes, feeling much discouraged.

hussonnet, however, said promptly:

"ha! your case, in which you keep your notes of lectures
 
 ___________________________
 
ind of sheath of chamois, to smoke it as slowly as
possible, without ever letting it lie on any cold stone substance, and
to hang it up every evening over the head of his bed. and now he shook
out the fragments of it into his hand, the nails of which were covered
with blood, and with his chin sunk on his chest, his pupils fixed and
dilated, he contemplated this wreck of the thing that had yielded him
such delight with a glance of unutterable sadness.

"suppose we give him some cigars, eh?" said hussonnet in a whisper,
making a gesture as if he were reaching them out.

frederick had already laid down a cigar-holder, filled, on the edge of
the wicket.

"pray take this. good-bye! cheer up!"

dussardier flung himself on the two hands that were held out towards
him. he pressed them frantically, his voice choked with sobs.

"what? for me!--for me!"

the two friends tore themselves away from the effusive display of
gratitude which he made, and went off to lunch together at the café
tabourey, in front
 
 ___________________________
 
 of the luxembourg.

while cutting up the beefsteak, hussonnet informed his companion that he
did work for the fashion journals, and manufactured catchwords for
_l'art industriel_.

"at jacques arnoux's establishment?" said frederick.

"do you know him?"

"yes!--no!--that is to say, i have seen him--i have met him."

he carelessly asked hussonnet if he sometimes saw arnoux's wife.

"from time to time," the bohemian replied.

frederick did not venture to follow up his enquiries. this man
henceforth would fill up a large space in his life. he paid the
lunch-bill without any protest on the other's part.

there was a bond of mutual sympathy between them; they gave one another
their respective addresses, and hussonnet cordially invited frederick to
accompany him to the rue de fleurus.

they had reached the middle of the garden, when arnoux's
 
 ___________________________
 
 clerk, holding
his breath, twisted his features into a hideous grimace, and began to
crow like a cock. thereupon all the cocks in the vicinity responded
with prolonged "cock-a-doodle-doos."

"it is a signal," explained hussonnet.

they stopped close to the théàtre bobino, in front of a house to which
they had to find their way through an alley. in the skylight of a
garret, between the nasturtiums and the sweet peas, a young woman showed
herself, bare-headed, in her stays, her two arms resting on the edge of
the roof-gutter.

"good-morrow, my angel! good-morrow, ducky!" said hussonnet, sending her
kisses.

he made the barrier fly open with a kick, and disappeared.

frederick waited for him all the week. he did not ven
 
 ___________________________
 
ture to call at
hussonnet's residence, lest it might look as if he were in a hurry to
get a lunch in return for the one he had paid for. but he sought the
clerk all over the latin quarter. he came across him one evening, and
brought him to his apartment on the quai napoléon.

they had a long chat, and unbosomed themselves to each other. hussonnet
yearned after the glory and the gains of the theatre. he collaborated in
the writing of vaudevilles which were not accepted, "had heaps of
plans," could turn a couplet; he sang out for frederick a few of the
verses he had composed. then, noticing on one of the shelves a volume of
hugo and another of lamartine, he broke out into sarcastic criticisms of
the romantic school. these poets had neither good sense nor correctness,
and, above all, were not french! he plumed himself on his knowledge of
t
 
 ___________________________
 

severity, that academic taste which persons of playful disposition
exhibit when they are discussing serious art.

frederick was wounded in his predilections, and he felt a desire to cut
the discussion short. why not take the risk at once of uttering the word
on which his happiness depended? he asked this literary youth whether it
would be possible to get an introduction into the arnoux's house through
his agency.

the thing was declared to be quite easy, and they fixed upon the
following day.

hussonnet failed to keep the appointment, and on three subsequent
occasions he did not turn up. one saturday, about four o'clock, he made
his appearance. but, taking advantage of the cab into which they had
got, he drew up in front of the théàtre français to get a box-ticket,
got down at a tailor's shop, then at a dressmaker's, and wrote notes in
the door-keeper's lodge. at last they came to the boulevard montmartre.
frederick passed through the shop, and went up the staircase. arnoux
recognised him t
 
 ___________________________
 
tapers, supported it, one at each side. at the right
near a cardboard chest of drawers, a man, seated in an armchair, was
reading the newspaper, with his hat on. the walls were hidden from view
beneath the array of prints and pictures, precious engravings or
sketches by contemporary masters, adorned with dedications testifying
the most sincere affection for jacques arnoux.

"you're getting on well all this time?" said he, turning round to
frederick.

and, without waiting for an answer, he asked hussonnet in a low tone:

"what is your friend's name?" then, raising his voice:

"take a cigar out of the box on the cardboard stand."

the office of _l'art industriel_, situated in a central position in
paris, was a convenient place of resort, a neutral ground wherein
rivalries elbowed each other familiarly. on this day might be seen there
anténor braive, who painted portraits of kings; jules burrieu, who by
his sketches was beginning to popularise the wars in algeria; the
caricaturist sombary, the sc
 
 ___________________________
 
 vourdat, and others. and not a single
one of them corresponded with the student's preconceived ideas. their
manners were simple, their talk free and easy. the mystic lovarias told
an obscene story; and the inventor of oriental landscape, the famous
dittmer, wore a knitted shirt under his waistcoat, and went home in the
omnibus.

the first topic that came on the carpet was the case of a girl named
apollonie, formerly a model, whom burrieu alleged that he had seen on
the boulevard in a carriage. hussonnet explained this metamorphosis
through the succession of persons who had loved her.

"how well this sly dog knows the girls of paris!" said arnoux.

"after you, if there are any of them left, sire," replied the bohemian,
with a military salute, in imitation of the grenadier offering his flask
to napoléon.

then they talked about some pictures in which apollonie had sat for the
female figures. they criticised their absent brethren, expressing
astonishment at the sums paid for their works; and the
 
 ___________________________
 
inches in height,
with rather heavy eyelashes, a head of grey hair, and an imposing
appearance; and his name was regimbart.

"what's the matter now, citizen?" said arnoux.

"another fresh piece of rascality on the part of government!"

the thing that he was referring to was the dismissal of a schoolmaster.

pellerin again took up his parallel between michael angelo and
shakespeare. dittmer was taking himself off when arnoux pulled him back
in order to put two bank notes into his hand. thereupon hussonnet said,
considering this an opportune time:

"couldn't you give me an advance, my dear master----?"

but arnoux had resumed his seat, and was administering a severe
reprimand to an old man of mean aspect, who wore a pair of blue
spectacles.

"ha! a nice fellow you are, père isaac! here are three works cried down,
destroyed! everybody is laughing at me! people know what they are now!
what do you want me to do with them? i'll have to send them off to
california--or to the devil! hold your tongue!"
 
 ___________________________
 
g was so much stuffed up
that one could scarcely move; and the light of the rose-coloured
wax-tapers was obscured in the smoke of their cigars, like the sun's
rays in a fog.

the door near the sofa flew open, and a tall, thin woman entered with
abrupt movements, which made all the trinkets of her watch rattle under
her black taffeta gown.

it was the woman of whom frederick had caught a glimpse last summer at
the palais-royal. some of those present, addressing her by name, shook
hands with her. hussonnet had at last managed to extract from his
employer the sum of fifty francs. the clock struck seven.

all rose to go.

arnoux told pellerin to remain, and accompanied mademoiselle vatnaz into
the dressing-room.

frederick could not hear what they said; they spoke in whispers.
however, the woman's voice was raised:

"i have been waiting ever since the job was done, six months ago."

there was a long silence, and then mademoiselle vatnaz reappeared.
arnoux had again promised her something.

"oh! oh!
 
 ___________________________
 
o
unbosom himself, ingenuously told his friends about certain indelicate
acts of which he had been guilty. once, in order to annoy a member of
his own trade who inaugurated another art journal with a big banquet, he
asked frederick to write, under his own eyes, a little before the hour
fixed for the entertainment, letters to the guests recalling the
invitations.

"this impugns nobody's honour, do you understand?"

and the young man did not dare to refuse the service.

next day, on entering with hussonnet m. arnoux's office, frederick saw
through the door (the one opening on the staircase) the hem of a lady's
dress disappearing.

"a thousand pardons!" said hussonnet. "if i had known that there were
women----"

"oh! as for that one, she is my own," replied arnoux. "she just came in
to pay me a visit as she was passing."

"you don't say so!" said frederick.

"why, yes; she is going back home again."

the charm of the things around him was suddenly withdrawn. that which
had seemed to him to be diff
 
 ___________________________
 
oor, and passed out through it, as he imagined, for the last time
in his life. madame arnoux herself had been lowered by the vulgarity of
her husband.

during the same week he got a letter from deslauriers, informing him
that the clerk would be in paris on the following thursday. then he
flung himself back violently on this affection as one of a more solid
and lofty character. a man of this sort was worth all the women in the
world. he would no longer have any need of regimbart, of pellerin, of
hussonnet, of anyone! in order to provide his friend with as comfortable
lodgings as possible, he bought an iron bedstead and a second armchair,
and stripped off some of his own bed-covering to garnish this one
properly. on thursday morning he was dressing himself to go to meet
deslauriers when there was a ring at the door.

arnoux entered.

"just one word. yesterday i got a lovely trout from geneva. we expect
you by-and-by--at seven o'clock sharp. the address is the rue de
choiseul 24 _bis_. don't forge
 
 ___________________________
 
he
was enveloped in shadow, the young man could at first distinguish only
her head. she wore a black velvet gown, and in her hair she had fastened
a long algerian cap, in a red silk net, which coiling round her comb,
fell over her left shoulder.

arnoux introduced frederick.

"oh! i remember monsieur perfectly well," she responded.

then the guests arrived, nearly all at the same time--dittmer, lovarias,
burrieu, the composer rosenwald, the poet théophile lorris, two art
critics, colleagues of hussonnet, a paper manufacturer, and in the rear
the illustrious pierre paul meinsius, the last representative of the
grand school of painting, who blithely carried along with his glory his
forty-five years and his big paunch.

when they were passing into the dining-room, madame arnoux took his arm.
a chair had been left vacant for pellerin. arnoux, though he took
advantage of him, was fond of him. besides, he was afraid of his
terrible tongue, so much so, that, in order to soften him, he had given
a por
 
 ___________________________
 
urement of eatables, he paid court to
mail-coach drivers, and was in league with the cooks of great houses,
who communicated to him the secrets of rare sauces.

but frederick was particularly amused by the conversation. his taste for
travelling was tickled by dittmer, who talked about the east; he
gratified his curiosity about theatrical matters by listening to
rosenwald's chat about the opera; and the atrocious existence of bohemia
assumed for him a droll aspect when seen through the gaiety of
hussonnet, who related, in a picturesque fashion, how he had spent an
entire winter with no food except dutch cheese. then, a discussion
between lovarias and burrieu about the florentine school gave him new
ideas with regard to masterpieces, widened his horizon, and he found
difficulty in restraining his enthusiasm when pellerin exclaimed:

"don't bother me with your hideous reality! what does it mean--reality?
some see things black, others blue--the multitude sees them
brute-fashion. there is nothing le
 
 ___________________________
 
down again, cast forth one higher still, and, after a silence, finished
with an organ-point.

rosenwald did not leave the piano. he continued playing, to amuse
himself. from time to time a guest stole away. at eleven o'clock, as the
last of them were going off, arnoux went out along with pellerin, under
the pretext of seeing him home. he was one of those people who say that
they are ill when they do not "take a turn" after dinner. madame arnoux
had made her way towards the anteroom. dittmer and hussonnet bowed to
her. she stretched out her hand to them. she did the same to frederick;
and he felt, as it were, something penetrating every particle of his
skin.

he quitted his friends. he wished to be alone. his heart was
overflowing. why had she offered him her hand? was it a thoughtless
act, or an encouragement? "come now! i am mad!" besides, what did it
matter, when he could now visit her entirely at his ease, live in the
very atmosphere she breathed?

the streets were deserted. now and then a h
 
 ___________________________
 
d the idea of bringing together,
once a week, those whom they both recognised as friends.

they came on saturday about nine o'clock. the three algerine curtains
were carefully drawn. the lamp and four wax-lights were burning. in the
middle of the table the tobacco-pot, filled with pipes, displayed itself
between the beer-bottles, the tea-pot, a flagon of rum, and some fancy
biscuits.

they discussed the immortality of the soul, and drew comparisons between
the different professors.

one evening hussonnet introduced a tall young man, attired in a
frock-coat, too short in the wrists, and with a look of embarrassment in
his face. it was the young fellow whom they had gone to release from
the guard-house the year before.

as he had not been able to restore the box of lace which he had lost in
the scuffle, his employer had accused him of theft, and threatened to
prosecute him. he was now a clerk in a wagon-office. hussonnet had come
across him that morning at the corner of the street, and brought hi
 
 ___________________________
 
d did
you take his wife by the waist between the two doors, _sicut decet_?"

hereupon the conversation turned on women. pellerin would not admit that
there were beautiful women (he preferred tigers); besides the human
female was an inferior creature in the æsthetic hierarchy.

"what fascinates you is just the very thing that degrades her as an
idea; i mean her breasts, her hair----"

"nevertheless," urged frederick, "long black hair and large dark
eyes----"

"oh! we know all about that," cried hussonnet. "enough of andalusian
beauties on the lawn. those things are out of date; no thank you! for
the fact is, honour bright! a fast woman is more amusing than the venus
of milo. let us be gallic, in heaven's name, and after the regency
style, if we can!

    'flow, generous wines; ladies, deign to smile!'[2]

[footnote 2: _coules, bons vins; femmes, deignez sourire._]

we must pass from the dark to the fair. is that your opinion, father
dussardier?"

dussardier did not reply. they all pressed him t
 
 ___________________________
 
de, many
bits of the system of criminal investigation, and a part of the civil
code, with the annotations of m. poncelet. the night before, deslauriers
made him run through the whole course, a process which did not finish
till morning, and, in order to take advantage of even the last quarter
of an hour, continued questioning him while they walked along the
footpath together.

as several examinations were taking place at the same time, there were
many persons in the precincts, and amongst others hussonnet and cisy:
young men never failed to come and watch these ordeals when the fortunes
of their comrades were at stake.

frederick put on the traditional black gown; then, followed by the
throng, with three other students, he entered a spacious apartment, into
which the light penetrated through uncurtained windows, and which was
garnished with benches ranged along the walls. in the centre, leather
chairs were drawn round a table adorned with a green cover. this
separated the candidates from the exa
 
 ___________________________
 
ch were answered in a doubtful fashion, he passed on at
last to the fourth. this wretched beginning made frederick lose his
head. deslauriers, who was facing him amongst the spectators, made a
sign to him to indicate that it was not a hopeless case yet; and at the
second batch of questions, dealing with the criminal law, he came out
tolerably well. but, after the third, with reference to the "mystic
will," the examiner having remained impassive the whole time, his mental
distress redoubled; for hussonnet brought his hands together as if to
applaud, whilst deslauriers liberally indulged in shrugs of the
shoulders. finally, the moment was reached when it was necessary to be
examined on procedure. the professor, displeased at listening to
theories opposed to his own, asked him in a churlish tone:

"and so this is your view, monsieur? how do you reconcile the principle
of article 1351 of the civil code with this application by a third party
to set aside a judgment by default?"

frederick had a grea
 
 ___________________________
 
 summary jurisdiction, then nodded his head
by way of approval. the examination was over. frederick retired into the
vestibule.

while an usher was taking off his gown, to draw it over some other
person immediately afterwards, his friends gathered around him, and
succeeded in fairly bothering him with their conflicting opinions as to
the result of his examination. presently the announcement was made in a
sonorous voice at the entrance of the hall: "the third was--put off!"

"sent packing!" said hussonnet. "let us go away!"

in front of the door-keeper's lodge they met martinon, flushed, excited,
with a smile on his face and the halo of victory around his brow. he had
just passed his final examination without any impediment. all he had now
to do was the thesis. before a fortnight he would be a licentiate. his
family enjoyed the acquaintance of a minister; "a beautiful career" was
opening before him.

"all the same, this puts you into a mess," said deslauriers.

there is nothing so humiliating as
 
 ___________________________
 
 to see blockheads succeed in
undertakings in which we fail. frederick, filled with vexation, replied
that he did not care a straw about the matter. he had higher
pretensions; and as hussonnet made a show of leaving, frederick took him
aside, and said to him:

"not a word about this to them, mind!"

it was easy to keep it secret, since arnoux was starting the next
morning for germany.

when he came back in the evening the clerk found his friend singularly
altered: he danced about and whistled; and the other was astonished at
this capricious change of mood. frederick declared that he did not
intend to go home to his mother, as he meant to spend his holidays
working.

at the news of ar
 
 ___________________________
 
llen embarrassment.

"hallo! what the deuce brings you here? come in!"

he led frederick, not into the boudoir or into the bedroom, but into the
dining-room, where on the table could be seen a bottle of champagne and
two glasses; and, in an abrupt tone:

"there is something you want to ask me, my dear friend?"

"no! nothing! nothing!" stammered the young man, trying to think of some
excuse for his visit. at length, he said to arnoux that he had called to
know whether they had heard from him, as hussonnet had announced that he
had gone to germany.

"not at all!" returned arnoux. "what a feather-headed fellow that is to
take everything in the wrong way!"

in order to conceal his agitation, frederick kept walking from right to
left in the dining-room. happening to come into contact with a chair, he
knocked down a parasol which had been laid across it, and the ivory
handle got broken.

"good heavens!" he exclaimed. "how sorry i am for having broken madame
arnoux's parasol!"

at this remark, the pic
 
 ___________________________
 
to come to the alhambra."

(this was a place for public balls recently opened at the top of the
champs-elysées, which had gone down owing to a display of licentiousness
somewhat ruder than is usual in establishments of the kind.)

"that's a place where there seems to be good fun. you can take your
friends, if you like. i can even pass in regimbart for you."

frederick did not think fit to ask the citizen to go. deslauriers
deprived himself of the pleasure of sénécal's society. they took only
hussonnet and cisy along with dussardier; and the same hackney-coach set
the group of five down at the entrance of the alhambra.

two moorish galleries extended on the right and on the left, parallel to
one another. the wall of a house opposite occupied the entire backguard;
and the fourth side (that in which the restaurant was) represented a
gothic cloister with stained-glass windows. a sort of chinese roof
screened the platform reserved for the musicians. the ground was covered
all over with asphalt; t
 
 ___________________________
 
, men from south america, and three
orientals in tarbooshes. lorettes, grisettes, and girls of the town had
come there in the hope of finding a protector, a lover, a gold coin, or
simply for the pleasure of dancing; and their dresses, with tunics of
water-green, cherry-red, or violet, swept along, fluttered between the
ebony-trees and the lilacs. nearly all the men's clothes were of striped
material; some of them had white trousers, in spite of the coolness of
the evening. the gas was lighted.

hussonnet was acquainted with a number of the women through his
connection with the fashion-journals and the smaller theatres. he sent
them kisses with the tips of his fingers, and from time to time he
quitted his friends to go and chat with them.

deslauriers felt jealous of these playful familiarities. he accosted in
a cynical manner a tall, fair-haired girl, in a nankeen costume. after
looking at him with a certain air of sullenness, she said:

"no! i wouldn't trust you, my good fellow!" and turned on
 
 ___________________________
 
 were still promenading up and down. the young aristocrat
kept ogling the girls, and, in spite of the clerk's exhortations, did
not venture to talk to them, having an idea in his head that in the
resorts of these women there was always "a man hidden in the cupboard
with a pistol who would come out of it and force you to sign a bill of
exchange."

they came back and joined frederick. deslauriers had stopped dancing;
and they were all asking themselves how they were to finish up the
evening, when hussonnet exclaimed:

"look! here's the marquise d'amaëgui!"

the person referred to was a pale woman with a _retroussé_ nose, mittens
up to her elbows, and big black earrings hanging down her cheeks, like
two dog's ears. hussonnet said to her:

"we ought to organise a little fête at your house--a sort of oriental
rout. try to collect some of your friends here for these french
cavaliers. well, what is annoying you? are you going to wait for your
hidalgo?"

the andalusian hung down her head: being well
 
 ___________________________
 
at made them suddenly
stop: martinon was in the act of paying some money at the place where
umbrellas were left; and he was accompanying a woman of fifty,
plain-looking, magnificently dressed, and of problematic social rank.

"that sly dog," said deslauriers, "is not so simple as we imagine. but
where in the world is cisy?"

dussardier pointed out to them the smoking-divan, where they perceived
the knightly youth, with a bowl of punch before him, and a pink hat by
his side, to keep him company. hussonnet, who had been away for the past
few minutes, reappeared at the same moment.

a young girl was leaning on his arm, and addressing him in a loud voice
as "my little cat."

"oh! no!" said he to her--"not in public! call me rather 'vicomte.' that
gives you a cavalier style--louis xiii. and dainty boots--the sort of
thing i like! yes, my good friends, one of the old _régime_!--nice,
isn't she?"--and he chucked her by the chin--"salute these gentlemen!
they are all the sons of peers of france. i kee
 
 ___________________________
 
ot have cared for a love affair of this sort.

meanwhile, whenever they set forth arm-in-arm to visit pinson's or
barillot's circulating library, he experienced a feeling of singular
depression. frederick did not realise how much pain he had made
deslauriers endure for the past year, while brushing his nails before
going out to dine in the rue de choiseul!

one evening, when from the commanding position in which his balcony
stood, he had just been watching them as they went out together, he saw
hussonnet, some distance off, on the pont d'arcole. the bohemian began
calling him by making signals towards him, and, when frederick had
descended the five flights of stairs:

"here is the thing--it is next saturday, the 24th, madame arnoux's
feast-day."

"how is that, when her name is marie?"

"and angèle also--no matter! they will entertain their guests at their
country-house at saint-cloud. i was told to give you due notice about
it. you'll find a vehicle at the magazine-office at three o'clock. so

 
 ___________________________
 
 draw just above her stockings a wirework of gold.

those who had been invited arrived. with the exception of maître
lefaucheur, an advocate, they were the same guests who came to the
thursday dinners. each of them had brought some present--dittmer a
syrian scarf, rosenwald a scrap-book of ballads, burieu a water-colour
painting, sombary one of his own caricatures, and pellerin a
charcoal-drawing, representing a kind of dance of death, a hideous
fantasy, the execution of which was rather poor. hussonnet dispensed
with the formality of a present.

frederick was waiting to offer his, after the others.

she thanked him very much for it. thereupon, he said:

"why, 'tis almost a debt. i have been so much annoyed----"

"at what, pray?" she returned. "i don't understand."

"come! dinner is waiting!" said arnoux, catching hold of his arm; then
in a whisper: "you are not very knowing, certainly!"

nothing could well be prettier than the dining-room, painted in
water-green. at one end, a nymph of stone 
 
 ___________________________
 
to scream with terror. they all got spoiled, and arnoux paid
for them.

he next took it into his head to go out for a sail in the cutter.

one side of the horizon was beginning to assume a pale aspect, while on
the other side a wide strip of orange colour showed itself in the sky,
deepening into purple at the summits of the hills, which were steeped in
shadow. madame arnoux seated herself on a big stone with this glittering
splendour at her back. the other ladies sauntered about here and there.
hussonnet, at the lower end of the river's bank, went making ducks and
drakes over the water.

arnoux presently returned, followed by a weather-beaten long boat, into
which, in spite of the most prudent remonstrances, he packed his
guests. the boat got upset, and they had to go ashore again.

by this time wax-tapers were burning in the drawing-room, all hung with
chintz, and with branched candlesticks of crystal fixed close to the
walls. mère oudry was sleeping comfortably in an armchair, and the
others
 
 ___________________________
 
 mental reservation, without any hope of his love being
returned, unconditionally; and in those silent transports, which were
like outbursts of gratitude, he would fain have covered her forehead
with a rain of kisses. however, an inspiration from within carried him
beyond himself--he felt moved by a longing for self-sacrifice, an
imperative impulse towards immediate self-devotion, and all the stronger
from the fact that he could not gratify it.

he did not leave along with the rest. neither did hussonnet. they were
to go back in the carriage; and the vehicle was waiting just in front of
the steps when arnoux rushed down and hurried into the garden to gather
some flowers there. then the bouquet having been tied round with a
thread, as the stems fell down unevenly, he searched in his pocket,
which was full of papers, took out a piece at random, wrapped them up,
completed his handiwork with the aid of a strong pin, and then offered
it to his wife with a certain amount of tenderness.

"look here, m
 
 ___________________________
 
ing out her pretty brown tresses, kissed
her softly on the forehead.

"you are good!" said madame arnoux.

"why?"

"because you are fond of children."

"not all!"

he said no more, but he let his left hand hang down her side wide open,
fancying that she would follow his example perhaps, and that he would
find her palm touching his. then he felt ashamed and withdrew it. they
soon reached the paved street. the carriage went on more quickly; the
number of gas-lights vastly increased--it was paris. hussonnet, in front
of the lumber-room, jumped down from his seat. frederick waited till
they were in the courtyard before alighting; then he lay in ambush at
the corner of the rue de choiseul, and saw arnoux slowly making his way
back to the boulevards.

next morning he began working as hard as ever he could.

he saw himself in an assize court, on a winter's evening, at the close
of the advocates' speeches, when the jurymen are looking pale, and when
the panting audience make the partitions of the præt
 
 ___________________________
 
drank a little more wine than was good for
him, and said to dussardier at dessert:

"you are an honest fellow!--and, when i'm a rich man, i'll make you my
manager."

all were in a state of delight. cisy was not going to finish his
law-course. martinon intended to remain during the period before his
admission to the bar in the provinces, where he would be nominated a
deputy-magistrate. pellerin was devoting himself to the production of a
large picture representing "the genius of the revolution." hussonnet
was, in the following week, about to read for the director of public
amusements the scheme of a play, and had no doubt as to its success:

"as for the framework of the drama, they may leave that to me! as for
the passions, i have knocked about enough to understand them thoroughly;
and as for witticisms, they're entirely in my line!"

he gave a spring, fell on his two hands, and thus moved for some time
around the table with his legs in the air. this performance, worthy of
a street-urchin, did n
 
 ___________________________
 
lthy. he poured out his
grievances into the sympathetic ears of regimbart, who had become every
day more and more disillusioned, saddened, and disgusted. the citizen
had now turned his attention towards questions arising out of the
budget, and blamed the court party for the loss of millions in algeria.

as he could not sleep without having paid a visit to the alexandre
smoking-divan, he disappeared at eleven o'clock. the rest went away some
time afterwards; and frederick, as he was parting with hussonnet,
learned that madame arnoux was to have come back the night before.

he accordingly went to the coach-office to change his time for starting
to the next day; and, at about six o'clock in the evening, presented
himself at her house. her return, the door keeper said, had been put off
for a week. frederick dined alone, and then lounged about the
boulevards.

rosy clouds, scarf-like in form, stretched beyond the roofs; the
shop-tents were beginning to be taken away; water-carts were letting a
showe
 
 ___________________________
 
 went into a café, and, while at breakfast, consulted the
commercial directory. there were three hundred arnoux in it, but no
jacques arnoux. where, then, were they living? pellerin ought to know.

he made his way to the very top of the faubourg poissonnière, to the
artist's studio. as the door had neither a bell nor a knocker, he rapped
loudly on it with his knuckles, and then called out--shouted. but the
only response was the echo of his voice from the empty house.

after this he thought of hussonnet; but where could he discover a man of
that sort? on one occasion he had waited on hussonnet when the latter
was paying a visit to his mistress's house in the rue de fleurus.
frederick had just reached the rue de fleurus when he became conscious
of the fact that he did not even know the lady's name.

he had recourse to the prefecture of police. he wandered from staircase
to staircase, from office to office. he found that the intelligence
department was closed for the day, and was told to come ba
 
 ___________________________
 
eve in that?" said frederick.

"be sure of it!" he replied. "this sort of thing cannot last. there is
too much suffering. when i see into the wretchedness of men like
sénécal----"

"always sénécal!" thought frederick.

"but, at all events, tell me the news? are you still in love with madame
arnoux? is it all over--eh?"

frederick, not knowing what answer to give him, closed his eyes and hung
down his head.

with regard to arnoux, deslauriers told him that the journal was now the
property of hussonnet, who had transformed it. it was called "_l'art_, a
literary institution--a company with shares of one hundred francs each;
capital of the firm, forty thousand francs," each shareholder having the
right to put into it his own contributions; for "the company has for its
object to publish the works of beginners, to spare talent, perchance
genius, the sad crises which drench," etc.

"you see the dodge!" there was, however, something to be effected by the
change--the tone of the journal could be rai
 
 ___________________________
 
re of old saxe that had
adorned the shop attached to the office of _l'art industriel_. the
memory of former days was brought back to his mind. but a foot-soldier
of the line in undress, with that silly expression of countenance
ascribed by tradition to conscripts, planted himself right in front of
him, spreading out his two arms in order to emphasise his astonishment,
and, in spite of the hideous black moustaches, unusually pointed, which
disfigured his face, frederick recognised his old friend hussonnet. in a
half-alsatian, half-negro kind of gibberish, the bohemian loaded him
with congratulations, calling him his colonel. frederick, put out of
countenance by the crowd of personages assembled around him, was at a
loss for an answer. at a tap on the desk from a fiddlestick, the
partners in the dance fell into their places.

they were about sixty in number, the women being for the most part
dressed either as village-girls or marchionesses, and the men, who were
nearly all of mature age, being go
 
 ___________________________
 
 boots in society,
while he is at the same time discreet. these ladies adore him. he and
his wife (that lean châtelaine in the grey dress) trip about together at
every public place--aye, and at other places too. in spite of domestic
embarrassments, they have a _day_--artistic teas, at which verses are
recited. attention!"

in fact, the doctor came up to them at that moment; and soon they formed
all three, at the entrance to the drawing-room, a group of talkers,
which was presently augmented by hussonnet, then by the lover of the
female savage, a young poet who displayed, under a court cloak of
francis i.'s reign, the most pitiful of anatomies, and finally a
sprightly youth disguised as a turk of the barrier. but his vest with
its yellow galloon had taken so many voyages on the backs of strolling
dentists, his wide trousers full of creases, were of so faded a red, his
turban, rolled about like an eel in the tartar fashion, was so poor in
appearance--in short, his entire costume was so wretched 
 
 ___________________________
 
in the classical costume of dante,
who happened to be--she now made no concealment any longer about it--the
ex-singer of the alhambra, and who, though his name was auguste
delamare, had first called himself anténor delamarre, then delmas, then
belmar, and at last delmar, thus modifying and perfecting his name, as
his celebrity increased, for he had forsaken the public-house concert
for the theatre, and had even just made his _début_ in a noisy fashion
at the ambigu in _gaspardo le pécheur_.

hussonnet, on seeing him, knitted his brows. since his play had been
rejected, he hated actors. it was impossible to conceive the vanity of
individuals of this sort, and above all of this fellow. "what a prig!
just look at him!"

after a light bow towards rosanette, delmar leaned back against the
mantelpiece; and he remained motionless with one hand over his heart,
his left foot thrust forward, his eyes raised towards heaven, with his
wreath of gilt laurels above his cowl, while he strove to put into the
 
 ___________________________
 

expression of his face a considerable amount of poetry in order to
fascinate the ladies. they made, at some distance, a great circle around
him.

but the vatnaz, having given rosanette a prolonged embrace, came to beg
of hussonnet to revise, with a view to the improvement of the style, an
educational work which she intended to publish, under the title of "the
young ladies' garland," a collection of literature and moral philosophy.

the man of letters promised to assist her in the preparation of the
work. then she asked him whether he could not in one of the prints to
which he had access give her friend a slight puff, and even assign to
him, later, some part. hussonnet had forgotten to take a glass of punch
on account of 
 
 ___________________________
 
 "'tis nothing!" and at his entreaties to
be allowed to go and look after her, she replied slowly:

"pooh! what's the good? that's just as pleasant as anything else. life
is not so amusing!"

then, he shivered, a feeling of icy sadness taking possession of him, as
if he had caught a glimpse of whole worlds of wretchedness and
despair--a chafing-dish of charcoal beside a folding-bed, the corpses of
the morgue in leathern aprons, with the tap of cold water that flows
over their heads.

meanwhile, hussonnet, squatted at the feet of the female savage, was
howling in a hoarse voice in imitation of the actor grassot:

"be not cruel, o celuta! this little family fête is charming! intoxicate
me with delight, my loves! let us be gay! let us be gay!"

and he began kissing the women on the shoulders. they quivered under the
tickling of his moustaches. then he conceived the idea of breaking a
plate against his head by rapping it there with a little energy. others
followed his example. the broken earthenwa
 
 ___________________________
 
dow-panes and against the furniture, and some of
them, alighting on the heads of the guests, presented the appearance
there of large flowers.

the musicians had gone. the piano had been drawn out of the anteroom.
the vatnaz seated herself before it, and, accompanied by the choir-boy,
who thumped his tambourine, she made a wild dash into a quadrille,
striking the keys like a horse pawing the ground, and wriggling her
waist about, the better to mark the time. the maréchale dragged out
frederick; hussonnet took the windmill; the 'longshorewoman put out her
joints like a circus-clown; the merry-andrew exhibited the manoeuvres
of an orang-outang; the female savage, with outspread arms, imitated the
swaying motion of a boat. at last, unable to go on any further, they all
stopped; and a window was flung open.

the broad daylight penetrated the apartment with the cool breath of
morning. there was an exclamation of astonishment, and then came
silence. the yellow flames flickered, making the sockets of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ticed the maliciousness of this observation, so worn out
were they all.

then, while waiting for vehicles, they managed to get on their
broad-brimmed hats and cloaks. it struck seven. the angel was still in
the dining-room, seated at the table with a plate of sardines and fruit
stewed in melted butter in front of her, and close beside her was the
fishwife, smoking cigarettes, while giving her advice as to the right
way to live.

at last, the cabs having arrived, the guests took their departure.
hussonnet, who had an engagement as correspondent for the provinces, had
to read through fifty-three newspapers before his breakfast. the female
savage had a rehearsal at the theatre; pellerin had to see a model; and
the choir-boy had three appointments. but the angel, attacked by the
preliminary symptoms of indigestion, was unable to rise. the mediæval
baron carried her to the cab.

"take care of her wings!" cried the 'longshorewoman through the window.

at the top of the stairs, mademoiselle vatnaz sa
 
 ___________________________
 
ot an engagement, a promise? frederick felt a sense of delight
at merely living; he had to restrain himself to keep from singing. he
wanted to burst out, to do generous deeds, and to give alms. he looked
around him to see if there were anyone near whom he could relieve. no
wretch happened to be passing by; and his desire for self-devotion
evaporated, for he was not a man to go out of his way to find
opportunities for benevolence.

then he remembered his friends. the first of whom he thought was
hussonnet, the second, pellerin. the lowly position of dussardier
naturally called for consideration. as for cisy, he was glad to let that
young aristocrat get a slight glimpse as to the extent of his fortune.
he wrote accordingly to all four to come to a housewarming the following
sunday at eleven o'clock sharp; and he told deslauriers to bring
sénécal.

the tutor had been dismissed from the third boarding-school in which he
had been employed for not having given his consent to the distribution
of pri
 
 ___________________________
 
first place, there are no higher classes. 'tis the heart alone that
makes anyone higher than another. we want no alms, understand! but
equality, the fair division of products."

what he required was that the workman might become a capitalist, just as
the soldier might become a colonel. the trade-wardenships, at least, in
limiting the number of apprentices, prevented workmen from growing
inconveniently numerous, and the sentiment of fraternity was kept up by
means of the fêtes and the banners.

hussonnet, as a poet, regretted the banners; so did pellerin, too--a
predilection which had taken possession of him at the café dagneaux,
while listening to the phalansterians talking. he expressed the opinion
that fourier was a great man.

"come now!" said deslauriers. "an old fool who sees in the overthrow of
governments the effects of divine vengeance. he is just like my lord
saint-simon and his church, with his hatred of the french revolution--a
set of buffoons who would fain re-establish catholicis
 
 ___________________________
 
 crown."

"as long as you haven't universal suffrage----"

"allow me!"--for the artist, having been rejected at every _salon_ for
the last twenty years, was filled with rage against power.

"ah! let them not bother us! as for me, i ask for nothing. only the
chambers ought to pass enactments in the interests of art. a chair of
æsthetics should be established with a professor who, being a practical
man as well as a philosopher, would succeed, i hope, in grouping the
multitude. you would do well, hussonnet, to touch on this matter with a
word or two in your newspaper?"

"are the newspapers free? are we ourselves free?" said deslauriers in an
angry tone. "when one reflects that there might be as many as
twenty-eight different formalities to set up a boat on the river, it
makes me feel a longing to go and live amongst the cannibals! the
government is eating us up. everything belongs to it--philosophy, law,
the arts, the very air of heaven; and france, bereft of all energy, lies
under the boot of th
 
 ___________________________
 
 heart leap up with indignation.
everything that wore a beard claimed his sympathy. he was one of those
persons who fling themselves under vehicles to relieve the horses who
have fallen. his erudition was limited to two works, one entitled
_crimes of kings_, and the other _mysteries of the vatican_. he had
listened to the advocate with open-mouthed delight. at length, unable to
stand it any longer:

"for my part, the thing i blame louis philippe for is abandoning the
poles!"

"one moment!" said hussonnet. "in the first place, poland has no
existence; 'tis an invention of lafayette! the poles, as a general rule,
all belong to the faubourg saint-marceau, the real ones having been
drowned with poniatowski." in short, "he no longer gave into it;" he had
"got over all that sort of thing; it was just like the sea-serpent, the
revocation of the edict of nantes, and that antiquated hum-bug about the
saint-bartholomew massacre!"

sénécal, while he did not defend the poles, extolled the latest remarks

 
 ___________________________
 
ants_ at the
gymnase, which at that time attracted a great number of people.

sénécal regarded them with disfavour. such exhibitions corrupted the
daughters of the proletariat. then, it was noticeable that they went in
for a display of shameless luxury. therefore, he approved of the conduct
of the bavarian students who insulted lola montès. in imitation of
rousseau, he showed more esteem for the wife of a coal-porter than for
the mistress of a king.

"you don't appreciate dainties," retorted hussonnet in a majestic tone.
and he took up the championship of ladies of this class in order to
praise rosanette. then, as he happened to make an allusion to the ball
at her house and to arnoux's costume, pellerin remarked:

"people maintain that he is becoming shaky?"

the picture-dealer had just been engaged in a lawsuit with reference to
his grounds at belleville, and he was actually in a kaolin company in
lower brittany with other rogues of the same sort.

dussardier knew more about him, for his ow
 
 ___________________________
 
was over; they passed into the drawing-room, which was hung,
like that of the maréchale, in yellow damask in the style of louis xvi.

pellerin found fault with frederick for not having chosen in preference
the neo-greek style; sénécal rubbed matches against the hangings;
deslauriers did not make any remark.

there was a bookcase set up there, which he called "a little girl's
library." the principal contemporary writers were to be found there. it
was impossible to speak about their works, for hussonnet immediately
began relating anecdotes with reference to their personal
characteristics, criticising their faces, their habits, their dress,
glorifying fifth-rate intellects and disparaging those of the first; and
all the while making it clear that he deplored modern decadence.

he instanced some village ditty as containing in itself alone more
poetry than all the lyrics of the nineteenth century. he went on to say
that balzac was overrated, that byron was effaced, and that hugo knew
nothing abou
 
 ___________________________
 
n he drew dussardier
aside, and wished to know whether he could do him any service.

the honest fellow was moved. he answered that his post of cashier
entirely sufficed for his wants.

after that, frederick led deslauriers into his own apartment, and,
taking out of his escritoire two thousand francs:

"look here, old boy, put this money in your pocket. 'tis the balance of
my old debts to you."

"but--what about the journal?" said the advocate. "you are, of course,
aware that i spoke about it to hussonnet."

and, when frederick replied that he was "a little short of cash just
now," the other smiled in a sinister fashion.

after the liqueurs they drank beer, and after the beer, grog; and then
they lighted their pipes once more. at last they left, at five o'clock
in the evening, and they were walking along at each others' side without
speaking, when dussardier broke the silence by saying that frederick had
entertained them in excellent style. they all agreed with him on that
point.

then hussonnet
 
 ___________________________
 
confessed that a certain matter caused her much anxiety. arnoux
had made her sign a promissory note payable to m. dambreuse.

meanwhile frederick still cherished his literary projects as if it were
a point of honour with himself to do so. he wished to write a history of
æsthetics, a result of his conversations with pellerin; next, to write
dramas dealing with different epochs of the french revolution, and to
compose a great comedy, an idea traceable to the indirect influence of
deslauriers and hussonnet. in the midst of his work her face or that of
the other passed before his mental vision. he struggled against the
longing to see her, but was not long ere he yielded to it; and he felt
sadder as he came back from madame arnoux's house.

one morning, while he was brooding over his melancholy thoughts by the
fireside, deslauriers came in. the incendiary speeches of sénécal had
filled his master with uneasiness, and once more he found himself
without resources.

"what do you want me to do?" said
 
 ___________________________
 
r, and that she ought to break it off.

"yes," replied the maréchale, as if talking to herself. "'tis what i
shall end by doing, no doubt!"

frederick was charmed by this disinterestedness. she slackened her pace,
and he fancied that she was fatigued. she obstinately refused to let him
take a cab, and she parted with him at her door, sending him a kiss with
her finger-tips.

"ah! what a pity! and to think that imbeciles take me for a man of
wealth!"

he reached home in a gloomy frame of mind.

hussonnet and deslauriers were awaiting him. the bohemian, seated before
the table, made sketches of turks' heads; and the advocate, in dirty
boots, lay asleep on the sofa.

"ha! at last," he exclaimed. "but how sullen you look! will you listen
to me?"

his vogue as a tutor had fallen off, for he crammed his pupils with
theories unfavourable for their examinations. he had appeared in two or
three cases in which he had been unsuccessful, and each new
disappointment flung him back with greater force on the
 
 ___________________________
 
 dream of his
earlier days--a journal in which he could show himself off, avenge
himself, and spit forth his bile and his opinions. fortune and
reputation, moreover, would follow as a necessary consequence. it was in
this hope that he had got round the bohemian, hussonnet happening to be
the possessor of a press.

at present, he printed it on pink paper. he invented hoaxes, composed
rebuses, tried to engage in polemics, and even intended, in spite of the
situation of the premises, to get up concerts. a year's subscription was
to give a right to a place in the orchestra in one of the principal
theatres of paris. besides, the board of management took on itself to
furnish foreigners with all necessary information, artistic and
otherwise. but the printer gave vent t
 
 ___________________________
 
o threats; there were three
quarters' rent due to the landlord. all sorts of embarrassments arose;
and hussonnet would have allowed _l'art_ to perish, were it not for the
exhortations of the advocate, who kept every day exciting his mind. he
had brought the other with him, in order to give more weight to the
application he was now making.

"we've come about the journal," said he.

"what! are you still thinking about that?" said frederick, in an absent
tone.

"certainly, i am thinking about it!"

and he explained his plan anew. by means of the bourse returns, they
would get into communication with financie
 
 ___________________________
 
ight help the other carefully keeps everything for himself alone."

"how is that?"

"yes, you have not even introduced me to the dambreuses."

frederick cast a scrutinising glance at him. with his shabby frock-coat,
his spectacles of rough glass, and his sallow face, that advocate seemed
to him such a typical specimen of the penniless pedant that he could not
prevent his lips from curling with a disdainful smile.

deslauriers perceived this, and reddened.

he had already taken his hat to leave. hussonnet, filled with
uneasiness, tried to mollify him with appealing looks, and, as frederick
was turning his back on him:

"look here, my boy, become my mæcenas! protect the arts!"

frederick, with an abrupt movement of resignation, took a sheet of
paper, and, having scrawled some lines on it, handed it to him. the
bohemian's face lighted up.

then, passing across the sheet of paper to deslauriers:

"apologise, my fine fellow!"

their friend begged his notary to send him fifteen thousand francs as
qu
 
 ___________________________
 
ickly as possible.

"ah! i recognise you in that," said deslauriers.

"on the faith of a gentleman," added the bohemian, "you are a noble
fellow, you'll be placed in the gallery of useful men!"

the advocate remarked:

"you'll lose nothing by it, 'tis an excellent speculation."

"faith," exclaimed hussonnet, "i'd stake my head at the scaffold on its
success!"

and he said so many foolish things, and promised so many wonderful
things, in which perhaps he believed, that frederick did not know
whether he did this in order to laugh at others or at himself.

the same evening he received a letter from his mother. she expressed
astonishment at not seeing him yet a minister, while indulging in a
little banter at his expense. then she spoke of her health, and informed
him that m. roque had now become one o
 
 ___________________________
 
here was always a bundle of sticks ready
to be lighted as soon as he rang the bell. it was his consultation-hour,
and the advocate had on a white cravat.

the announcement as to the fifteen thousand francs (he had, no doubt,
given up all hope of getting the amount) made him chuckle with delight.

"that's right, old fellow, that's right--that's quite right!"

he threw some wood into the fire, sat down again, and immediately began
talking about the journal. the first thing to do was to get rid of
hussonnet.

"i'm quite tired of that idiot! as for officially professing opinions,
my own notion is that the most equitable and forcible position is to
have no opinions at all."

frederick appeared astonished.

"why, the thing is perfectly plain. it is time that politics should be
dealt with scientifically. the old men of the eighteenth century began
it when rousseau and the men of letters introduced into the political
sphere philanthropy, poetry, and other fudge, to the great delight of
the catholics--a
 
 ___________________________
 
t distinguish her face. he had a strong suspicion,
however, that it was madame arnoux. and yet this seemed impossible! why
should she have come there?

he stepped out of his own vehicle on the pretence of strolling into the
weighing-room.

"you are not very gallant!" said rosanette.

he paid no heed to her, and went on. the four-wheeled cabriolet, turning
back, broke into a trot.

frederick at the same moment, found himself button-holed by cisy.

"good-morrow, my dear boy! how are you going on? hussonnet is over
there! are you listening to me?"

frederick tried to shake him off in order to get up with the
four-wheeled cabriolet. the maréchale beckoned to him to come round to
her. cisy perceived her, and obstinately persisted in bidding her
good-day.

since the termination of the regular period of mourning for his
grandmother, he had realised his ideal, and succeeded in "getting the
proper stamp." a scotch plaid waistcoat, a short coat, large bows over
the pumps, and an entrance-card stuck in t
 
 ___________________________
 
 tugged impatiently at her dress, and
was on the point of flying into a passion. but cisy was there, in the
same attitude as before, and, with increased assurance, he invited
rosanette to dine with him that very evening.

"impossible!" she replied; "we're going together to the café anglais."

frederick, as if he had heard nothing, remained silent; and cisy quitted
the maréchale with a look of disappointment on his face.

while he had been talking to her at the right-hand door of the carriage,
hussonnet presented himself at the opposite side, and, catching the
words "café anglais":

"it's a nice establishment; suppose we had a pick there, eh?"

"just as you like," said frederick, who, sunk down in the corner of the
berlin, was gazing at the horizon as the four-wheeled cabriolet vanished
from his sight, feeling that an irreparable thing had happened, and
that there was an end of his great love. and the other woman was there
beside him, the gay and easy love! but, worn out, full of conflicting

 
 ___________________________
 
desires, and no longer even knowing what he wanted, he was possessed by
a feeling of infinite sadness, a longing to die.

a great noise of footsteps and of voices made him raise his head. the
little ragamuffins assembled round the track sprang over the ropes and
came to stare at the galleries. thereupon their occupants rose to go. a
few drops of rain began to fall. the crush of vehicles increased, and
hussonnet got lost in it.

"well! so much the better!" said frederick.

"we like to be alone better--don't we?" said the maréchale, as she
placed her hand in his.

then there swept past him with a glitter of copper and steel a
magnificent landau to which were yoked four horses driven in the daumont
style by two jockeys in velvet vests with gold fringes. madame dambreuse
was by her husband's side, and martinon was on the other seat facing
them. all three of them gazed at frederick in astonishment.

"they
 
 ___________________________
 
do you give me pain?" said he, thinking of madame arnoux.

"i give you pain?"

and, standing before him, she looked at him with her lashes drawn close
together and her two hands resting on his shoulders.

all his virtue, all his rancour gave way before the utter weakness of
his will.

he continued:

"because you won't love me," and he took her on his knees.

she gave way to him. he pressed his two hands round her waist. the
crackling sound of her silk dress inflamed him.

"where are they?" said hussonnet's voice in the lobby outside.

the maréchale arose abruptly, and went across to the other side of the
room, where she sat down with her back to the door.

she ordered oysters, and they seated themselves at table.

hussonnet was not amusing. by dint of writing every day on all sorts of
subjects, reading many newspapers, listening to a great number of
discussions, and uttering paradoxes for the purpose of dazzling people,
he had in the end lost the exact idea of things, blinding himself with
his
 
 ___________________________
 
 referring to a new
ballet entitled _ozai_, he gave a thorough blowing-up to the dancing,
and then, when the opera was in question, he attacked the italians, now
replaced by a company of spanish actors, "as if people had not quite
enough of castilles[12] already!" frederick was shocked at this, owing
to his romantic attachment to spain, and, with a view to diverting the
conversation into a new channel, he enquired about the collége of
france, where edgar quinet and mickiewicz had attended. but hussonnet,
an admirer of m. de maistre, declared himself on the side of authority
and spiritualism. nevertheless, he had doubts about the most
well-established facts, contradicted history, and disputed about things
whose certainty could not be questioned; so that at mention of the word
"geometry," he exclaimed: "what fudge this geometry is!" all this he
intermingled with imitations of actors. sainville was specially his
model.

[footnote 12: this pun of hussonnet turns on the double sense of the
word "ca
 
 ___________________________
 
stille," which not only means a place in spain, but also an
altercation.--translator.]

frederick was quite bored by these quibbles. in an outburst of
impatience he pushed his foot under the table, and pressed it on one of
the little dogs.

thereupon both animals began barking in a horrible fashion.

"you ought to get them sent home!" said he, abruptly.

rosanette did not know anyone to whom she could intrust them.

then, he turned round to the bohemian:

"look here, hussonnet; sacrifice yourself!"

"oh! yes, my boy! that would be a very obliging act!"

hussonnet set off, without even requiring to have an appeal made to him.

in what way could they repay him for his kindness? frederick did not
bestow a thought on it. he was even beginning to rejoice at finding
himself alone with her, when a waiter entered.

"madame, somebody is asking for you!"

"what! again?"

"however, i must see who it is," said rosanette.

he was thirsting for her; he wanted her. this disappearan
 
 ___________________________
 
 that madame dambreuse's
maiden name was de boutron, which proved that she was of a noble family.

"no matter! i'd like to have her equipage!" said the maréchale, throwing
herself back on the armchair.

and the sleeve of her dress, slipping up a little, showed on her left
wrist a bracelet adorned with three opals.

frederick noticed it.

"look here! why----"

all three looked into one another's faces, and reddened.

the door was cautiously half-opened; the brim of a hat could be seen,
and then hussonnet's profile exhibited itself.

"pray excuse me if i disturb the lovers!"

but he stopped, astonished at seeing cisy, and that cisy had taken his
own seat.

another cover was brought; and, as he was very hungry, he snatched up at
random from what remained of the dinner some meat which was in a dish,
fruit out of a basket, and drank with one hand while he helped himself
with the other, all the time telling them the result of his mission. the
two bow-wows had been taken home. nothing fresh at the ho
 
 ___________________________
 
the bell, calling out to the waiter, who was some
distance away:

"a carriage!"

"i have one of my own," said the vicomte.

"but, monsieur!"

"nevertheless, monsieur!"

and they stared into each other's eyes, both pale and their hands
trembling.

at last, the maréchale took cisy's arm, and pointing towards the
bohemian seated at the table:

"pray mind him! he's choking himself. i wouldn't care to let his
devotion to my pugs be the cause of his death."

the door closed behind him.

"well?" said hussonnet.

"well, what?"

"i thought----"

"what did you think?"

"were you not----?"

he completed the sentence with a gesture.

"oh! no--never in all my life!"

hussonnet did not press the matter further.

he had an object in inviting himself to dinner. his journal,--which was
no longer called _l'art_, but _le flambart_,[14] with this epigraph,
"gunners, to your cannons!"--not being at all in a flourishing
condition, he had a mind to change it into a weekly review, conducted
by himself, without any as
 
 ___________________________
 
sistance from deslauriers. he again referred
to the old project and explained his latest plan.

[footnote 14: _the blaser._]

frederick, probably not understanding what he was talking about, replied
with some vague words. hussonnet snatched up several cigars from the
tables, said "good-bye, old chap," and disappeared.

frederick called for the bill. it had a long list of items; and the
waiter, with his napkin under his arm, was expecting to be paid by
frederick, when another, a sallow-faced individual, who resembled
martinon, came and said to him:

"beg pardon; they forgot at the bar to add in the charge for the cab."

"what cab?"

"the cab the gentleman took a short time ago for the little dogs."

and the waiter put on a