of auvergne, he had amassed a
fortune which might be called considerable. furthermore, he was an
officer of the legion of honour, a member of the general council of the
aube, a deputy, and one of these days would be a peer of france.
however, affable as he was in other respects, he wearied the minister
by his continual applications for relief, for crosses, and licences for
tobacconists' shops; and in his complaints against authority he was
inclined to join the left centre.

his wife, the pretty madame dambreuse, of whom mention was made in the
fashion journals, presided at charitable assemblies. by wheedling the
duchesses, she appeased the rancours of the aristocratic faubourg, and
led the residents to believe that m. dambreuse might yet repent and
render them some services.

the young man was agitated when he called on them.

"i should have done better to take my dress-coat with me. no doubt they
will give me an invitation to next week's ball. what will they say to
me?"

his self-confidence returned 
 
 ___________________________
 
 each other. the steel
stirrups, the silver curbs and the brass rings, flung, here and there,
luminous points in the midst of the short breeches, the white gloves,
and the furs, falling over the blazonry of the carriage doors. he felt
as if he were lost in some far-off world. his eyes wandered along the
rows of female heads, and certain vague resemblances brought back madame
arnoux to his recollection. he pictured her to himself, in the midst of
the others, in one of those little broughams like madame dambreuse's
brougham.

but the sun was setting, and the cold wind raised whirling clouds of
dust. the coachmen let their chins sink into their neckcloths; the
wheels began to revolve more quickly; the road-metal grated; and all the
equipages descended the long sloping avenue at a quick trot, touching,
sweeping past one another, getting out of one another's way; then, at
the place de la concorde, they went off in different directions. behind
the tuileries, there was a patch of slate-coloured sky. the tree
 
 ___________________________
 
 24th, madame arnoux's
feast-day."

"how is that, when her name is marie?"

"and angèle also--no matter! they will entertain their guests at their
country-house at saint-cloud. i was told to give you due notice about
it. you'll find a vehicle at the magazine-office at three o'clock. so
that makes matters all right! excuse me for having disturbed you! but i
have such a number of calls to make!"

frederick had scarcely turned round when his door-keeper placed a letter
in his hand:

"monsieur and madame dambreuse beg of monsieur f. moreau to do them the
honour to come and dine with them on saturday the 24th inst.--r.s.v.p."

"too late!" he said to himself. nevertheless, he showed the letter to
deslauriers, who exclaimed:

"ha! at last! but you don't look as if you were satisfied. why?"

after some little hesitation, frederick said that he had another
invitation for the same day.

"be kind enough to let me run across to the rue de choiseul. i'm not
joking! i'll answer this for you if it puts you about."

 
 ___________________________
 
d out the money, coin by coin:

"i am not asking you for a receipt, as i see you have a lot of expense!"

frederick threw himself on his friend's neck with a thousand
affectionate protestations. deslauriers received this display of emotion
frigidly. then, next morning, noticing the parasol on the top of the
piano:

"ah! it was for that!"

"i will send it, perhaps," said frederick, with an air of carelessness.

good fortune was on his side, for that evening he got a note with a
black border from madame dambreuse announcing to him that she had lost
an uncle, and excusing herself for having to defer till a later period
the pleasure of making his acquaintance. at two o'clock, he reached the
office of the art journal. instead of waiting for him in order to drive
him in his carriage, arnoux had left the city the night before, unable
to resist his desire to get some fresh air.

every year it was his custom, as soon as the leaves were budding forth,
to start early in the morning and to remain away several day
 
 ___________________________
 
bowed in an
undecided manner, m. dambreuse, at once recognising him, came up and
apologised for having treated him with unpardonable neglect. it was an
allusion to the numerous visiting-cards he had sent in accordance with
the clerk's advice. however, he confused the periods, supposing that
frederick was in the second year of his law-course. then he said he
envied the young man for the opportunity of going into the country. he
sadly needed a little rest himself, but business kept him in paris.

madame dambreuse, leaning on his arm, nodded her head slightly, and the
agreeable sprightliness of her face contrasted with its gloomy
expression a short time before.

"one finds charming diversions in it, nevertheless," she said, after her
husband's last remark. "what a stupid play that was--was it not,
monsieur?" and all three of them remained there chatting about theatres
and new pieces.

frederick, accustomed to the grimaces of provincial dames, had not seen
in any woman such ease of manner combined with th
 
 ___________________________
 
an english park, cut in the middle
by a stick fence; and the half of it belonged to père roque, who had
another for vegetables on the bank of the river. the two neighbours,
having fallen out, abstained from making their appearance there at the
same hour. but since frederick's return, the old gentleman used to walk
about there more frequently, and was not stinted in his courtesies
towards madame moreau's son. he pitied the young man for having to live
in a country town. one day he told him that madame dambreuse had been
anxious to hear from him. on another occasion he expatiated on the
custom of champagne, where the stomach conferred nobility.

"at that time you would have been a lord, since your mother's name was
de fouvens. and 'tis all very well to talk--never mind! there's
something in a name. after all," he added, with a sly glance at
frederick, "that depends on the keeper of the seals."

this pretension to aristocracy contrasted strangely with his personal
appearance. as he was small, his big ch
 
 ___________________________
 
ures in the manner of espagnolet hung on the walls. the heavy
tapestry portières fell majestically, and the armchairs, the brackets,
the tables, the entire furniture, which was in the style of the second
empire, had a certain imposing and diplomatic air.

frederick smiled with pleasure in spite of himself.

at last he reached an oval apartment wainscoted in cypress-wood, stuffed
with dainty furniture, and letting in the light through a single sheet
of plate-glass, which looked out on a garden. madame dambreuse was
seated at the fireside, with a dozen persons gathered round her in a
circle. with a polite greeting, she made a sign to him to take a seat,
without, however, exhibiting any surprise at not having seen him for so
long a time.

just at the moment when he was entering the room, they had been praising
the eloquence of the abbé coeur. then they deplored the immorality of
servants, a topic suggested by a theft which a _valet-de-chambre_ had
committed, and they began to indulge in tittle-tattle. 
 
 ___________________________
 
undings; but what
they said was less stupid than their way of talking, which was aimless,
disconnected, and utterly devoid of animation. and yet there were
present men versed in life--an ex-minister, the curé of a large parish,
two or three government officials of high rank. they adhered to the most
hackneyed commonplaces. some of them resembled weary dowagers; others
had the appearance of horse-jockeys; and old men accompanied their
wives, of whom they were old enough to be the grandfathers.

madame dambreuse received all of them graciously. when it was mentioned
that anyone was ill, she knitted her brows with a painful expression on
her face, and when balls or evening parties were discussed, assumed a
joyous air. she would ere long be compelled to deprive herself of these
pleasures, for she was going to take away from a boarding-school a niece
of her husband, an orphan. the guests extolled her devotedness: this was
behaving like a true mother of a family.

frederick gazed at her attentively. the du
 
 ___________________________
 
fashion, was finer than silk; her
eyes of a sparkling blue; and all her movements were dainty. seated at
the lower end of the apartment, on a small sofa, she kept brushing off
the red flock from a japanese screen, no doubt in order to let her hands
be seen to greater advantage--long narrow hands, a little thin, with
fingers tilting up at the points. she wore a grey moiré gown with a
high-necked body, like a puritan lady.

frederick asked her whether she intended to go to la fortelle this year.
madame dambreuse was unable to say. he was sure, however, of one thing,
that one would be bored to death in nogent.

then the visitors thronged in more quickly. there was an incessant
rustling of robes on the carpet. ladies, seated on the edges of chairs,
gave vent to little sneering laughs, articulated two or three words, and
at the end of five minutes left along with their young daughters. it
soon became impossible to follow the conversation, and frederick
withdrew when madame dambreuse said to him:

"every w
 
 ___________________________
 
ything had not been given up to competition, to
anarchy, and to the deplorable maxim of "let things alone! let things go
their own way!" it was in this way that the feudalism of money was
established--the worst form of feudalism. but let them take care! the
people in the end will get tired of it, and may make the capitalist pay
for their sufferings either by bloody proscriptions or by the plunder of
their houses.

frederick saw, as if by a lightning-flash, a flood of men with bare arms
invading madame dambreuse's drawing-room, and smashing the mirrors with
blows of pikes.

sénécal went on to say that the workman, owing to the insufficiency of
wages, was more unfortunate than the helot, the negro, and the pariah,
especially if he has children.

"ought he to get rid of them by asphyxia, as some english doctor, whose
name i don't remember--a disciple of malthus--advises him?"

and, turning towards cisy: "are we to be obliged to follow the advice of
the infamous malthus?"

cisy, who was ignorant of the 
 
 ___________________________
 
t gates, and some servants were calling out
in the courtyard to have the carriages brought up to the end of the
steps before the house under the marquée.

then suddenly the noise in the vestibule ceased.

large trees filled up the space in front of the staircase. the porcelain
globes shed a light which waved like white moiré satin on the walls.

frederick rushed up the steps in a joyous frame of mind. an usher
announced his name. m. dambreuse extended his hand. almost at the very
same moment, madame dambreuse appeared. she wore a mauve dress trimmed
with lace. the ringlets of her hair were more abundant than usual, and
not a single jewel did she display.

she complained of his coming to visit them so rarely, and seized the
opportunity to exchange a few confidential words with him.

the guests began to arrive. in their mode of bowing they twisted their
bodies on one side or bent in two, or merely lowered their heads a
little. then, a married pair, a family passed in, and all scattered
themselves abou
 
 ___________________________
 
out the attempt of the twelfth of may."

"oh, pooh!"

"ay, ay!"

the circle had to make a little opening to give a passage to a
man-servant carrying a tray, who was trying to make his way into the
card-room.

under the green shades of the wax-lights the tables were covered with
two rows of cards and gold coins. frederick stopped beside one corner of
the table, lost the fifteen napoleons which he had in his pocket,
whirled lightly about, and found himself on the threshold of the boudoir
in which madame dambreuse happened to be at that moment.

it was filled with women sitting close to one another in little groups
on seats without backs. their long skirts, swelling round them, seemed
like waves, from which their waists emerged; and their breasts were
clearly outlined by the slope of their corsages. nearly every one of
them had a bouquet of violets in her hand. the dull shade of their
gloves showed off the whiteness of their arms, which formed a contrast
with its human flesh tints. over the shoulders of 
 
 ___________________________
 
ainty mouths, and the mother-of-pearl hue of teeth. the ceiling,
rounded like a cupola, gave to the boudoir the form of a flower-basket,
and a current of perfumed air circulated under the flapping of their
fans.

frederick, planting himself behind them, put up his eyeglass and scanned
their shoulders, not all of which did he consider irreproachable. he
thought about the maréchale, and this dispelled the temptations that
beset him or consoled him for not yielding to them.

he gazed, however, at madame dambreuse, and he considered her charming,
in spite of her mouth being rather large and her nostrils too dilated.
but she was remarkably graceful in appearance. there was, as it were, an
expression of passionate languor in the ringlets of her hair, and her
forehead, which was like agate, seemed to cover a great deal, and
indicated a masterful intelligence.

she had placed beside her her husband's niece, a rather plain-looking
young person. from time to time she left her seat to receive those who
had just
 
 ___________________________
 
 come in; and the murmur of feminine voices, made, as it were, a
cackling like that of birds.

they were talking about the tunisian ambassadors and their costumes. one
lady had been present at the last reception of the academy. another
referred to the _don juan_ of molière, which had recently been performed
at the théâtre français.

but with a significant glance towards her niece, madame dambreuse laid a
finger on her lips, while the smile which escaped from her contradicted
this display of austerity.

suddenly, martinon appeared at the door directly in front of her. she
arose at once. he offered her his arm. frederick, in order to watch the
progress of these gallantries on martinon's part, walked past the
card-table, and came up with them in the large drawing-room. madame
dambreuse very soon quitted her cavalier, and began chatting with
frederick himself in a very familiar tone.

she un
 
 ___________________________
 
risky jokes did not give any offence, all present experiencing that
sense of relief which follows a somewhat prolonged period of constraint.

martinon alone displayed anything like gravity. he refused to drink
champagne, as he thought this good form, and, moreover, he assumed an
air of tact and politeness, for when m. dambreuse, who had a contracted
chest, complained of an oppression, he made repeated enquiries about
that gentleman's health, and then let his blue eyes wander in the
direction of madame dambreuse.

she questioned frederick in order to find out which of the young ladies
he liked best. he had noticed none of them in particular, and besides,
he preferred the women of thirty.

"there, perhaps, you show your sense," she returned.

then, as they were putting on their pelisses and paletots, m. dambreuse
said to him:

"come and see me one of these mornings and we'll have a chat."

martinon, at the foot of the stairs, was lighting a cigar, and, as he
puffed it, he presented such a heavy profile 
 
 ___________________________
 
 heads," replied the young magistrate, with an
air of mingled self-complacency and annoyance.

as soon as frederick was in bed, he summed up the main features of the
evening party. in the first place, his own toilet (he had looked at
himself several times in the mirrors), from the cut of his coat to the
knot of his pumps left nothing to find fault with. he had spoken to
influential men, and seen wealthy ladies at close quarters. m. dambreuse
had shown himself to be an admirable type of man, and madame dambreuse
an almost bewitching type of woman. he weighed one by one her slightest
words, her looks, a thousand things incapable of being analysed. it
would be a right good thing to have such a mistress. and, after all, why
should he not? he would have as good a chance with her as any other man.
perhaps she was not so hard to win? then martinon came back to his
recollection; and, as he fell asleep, he smiled with pity for this
worthy fellow.

he woke up with the thought of the maréchale in his mind. thos
 
 ___________________________
 
dience to this summons, left the room along
with her pupil.

m. dambreuse, annoyed at the disarrangement of the chairs by this
movement, asked what was the matter.

"'tis madame regimbart."

"wait a moment! regimbart! i know that name. i have come across his
signature."

frederick at length broached the question. arnoux deserved some
consideration; he was even going, for the sole purpose of fulfilling his
engagements, to sell a house belonging to his wife.

"she is considered very pretty," said madame dambreuse.

the banker added, with a display of good-nature:

"are you on friendly terms with them--on intimate terms?"

frederick, without giving an explicit reply, said that he would be very
much obliged to him if he considered the matter.

"well, since it pleases you, be it so; we will wait. i have some time to
spare yet; suppose we go down to my office. would you mind?"

they had finished breakfast. madame dambreuse bowed slightly towards
frederick, smiling in a singular fashion, with a mixture of po
 
 ___________________________
 

came to stare at the galleries. thereupon their occupants rose to go. a
few drops of rain began to fall. the crush of vehicles increased, and
hussonnet got lost in it.

"well! so much the better!" said frederick.

"we like to be alone better--don't we?" said the maréchale, as she
placed her hand in his.

then there swept past him with a glitter of copper and steel a
magnificent landau to which were yoked four horses driven in the daumont
style by two jockeys in velvet vests with gold fringes. madame dambreuse
was by her husband's side, and martinon was on the other seat facing
them. all three of them gazed at frederick in astonishment.

"they have recognised me!" said he to himself.

rosanette wished to stop in order to get a better view of the people
driving away from the course. madame arnoux might again make her
appearance! he called out to the postilion:

"go on! go on! forward!" and the berlin dashed towards the
champs-élysées in the midst of the other vehicles--calashes, britzkas,
wurths, ta
 
 ___________________________
 
o her lids, and made her eyeballs glitter. the
red colour of the fruit blended with the purple of her lips; her thin
nostrils heaved; and there was about her entire person an air of
insolence, intoxication, and recklessness that exasperated frederick,
and yet filled his heart with wild desires.

then, she asked, in a calm voice, who owned that big landau with
chestnut-coloured livery.

cisy replied that it was "the comtesse dambreuse"

"they're very rich--aren't they?"

"oh! very rich! although madame dambreuse, who was merely a mademoiselle
boutron and the daughter of a prefect, had a very modest fortune."

her husband, on the other hand, must have inherited several
estates--cisy enumerated them: as he visited the dambreuses, he knew
their family history.

frederick, in order to make himself disagreeable to the other, took a
pleasure in contradicting him. he maintained that madame dambreuse's
maiden name was de boutron, which proved that she was of a noble family.

"no matter! i'd like to have her eq