ds on the keeper of the seals."

this pretension to aristocracy contrasted strangely with his personal
appearance. as he was small, his big chestnut-coloured frock-coat
exaggerated the length of his bust. when he took off his hat, a face
almost like that of a woman with an extremely sharp nose could be seen;
his hair, which was of a yellow colour, resembled a wig. he saluted
people with a very low bow, brushing against the wall.

up to his fiftieth year, he had been content with the services of
catherine, a native of lorraine, of the same age as himself, who was
strongly marked with small-pox. but in the year 1834, he brought back
with him from paris a handsome blonde with a sheep-like type of
countenance and a "queenly carriage." ere long, she was observed
strutting about with large earrings; and everything was explained by the
birth of a daughter who was introduced to the world under the name of
elisabeth olympe louise roque.

catherine, in her first ebullition of jealousy, expected that she 
 
 ___________________________
 
 her
marriage, she went to pay a visit at the sub-prefecture, no longer
"thee'd" and "thou'd" the servants, and took it into her head that, as a
matter of good form, she ought to exhibit a certain severity towards the
child. she was present while the little one was at her lessons. the
teacher, an old clerk who had been employed at the mayor's office, did
not know how to go about the work of instructing the girl. the pupil
rebelled, got her ears boxed, and rushed away to shed tears on the lap
of catherine, who always took her part. after this the two women
wrangled, and m. roque ordered them to hold their tongues. he had
married only out of tender regard for his daughter, and did not wish to
be annoyed by them.

she often wore a white dress with ribbons, and pantalettes trimmed with
lace; and on great festival-days she would leave the house attired like
a princess, in order to mortify a little the matrons of the town, who
forbade their brats to associate with her on account of her illegitimate
b
 
 ___________________________
 
éléonore had just died.

this death, after all, was not a misfortune for anyone, not even for her
child. the young girl would only find it all the better for herself
afterwards.

as the two houses were close to one another, a great coming and going
and a clatter of tongues could be heard; and the idea of this corpse
being so near them threw a certain funereal gloom over their parting.
madame moreau wiped her eyes two or three times. frederick felt his
heart oppressed.

when the meal was over, catherine stopped him between two doors.
mademoiselle had peremptorily expressed a wish to see him. she was
waiting for him in the garden. he went out there, strode over the hedge,
and knocking more or less against the trees, directed his steps towards
m. roque's house. lights were glittering through a window in the second
story then a form appeared in the midst of the darkness, and a voice
whispered:

"'tis i!"

she seemed to him taller than usual, owing to her black dress, no doubt.
not knowing what to
 
 ___________________________
 
 say to her, he contented himself with catching her
hands, and sighing forth:

"ah! my poor louise!"

she did not reply. she gazed at him for a long time with a look of sad,
deep earnestness.

frederick was afraid of missing the coach; he fancied that he could hear
the rolling of wheels some distance away, and, in order to put an end to
the interview without any delay:

"catherine told me that you had something----"

"yes--'tis true! i wanted to tell you----"

he was astonished to find that she addressed him in the plural; and, as
she again relapsed into silence:

"well, what?"

"i don't know. i forget! is it true that you're going away?"

"yes, i'm starting just now."

she repeated: "ah! just now?--for good?--we'll never see one another
again?"

she was choking with sobs.

"good-bye! good-bye! embrace me then!"

and she threw her arms about him passionately.




chapter