stonishment at the sums paid for their works; and they were all
complaining of not having been sufficiently remunerated themselves, when
the conversation was interrupted by the entrance of a man of middle
stature, who had his coat fastened by a single button, and whose eyes
glittered with a rather wild expression.

"what a lot of shopkeepers you are!" said he. "god bless my soul! what
does that signify? the old masters did not trouble their heads about the
million--correggio, murillo----"

"add pellerin," said sombary.

but, without taking the slightest notice of the epigram, he went on
talking with such vehemence, that arnoux was forced to repeat twice to
him:

"my wife wants you on thursday. don't forget!"

this remark recalled madame arnoux to frederick's thoughts. no doubt,
one might be able to reach her through the little room near the sofa.
arnoux had just opened the portière leading into it to get a
pocket-handkerchief, and frédéric had seen a wash-stand at the far end
of the apartme
 
 ___________________________
 
t this point a kind of muttering sound came from the corner of the
chimney-piece; it was caused by the personage who sat in the armchair
reading the newspaper. he was a man of five feet nine inches in height,
with rather heavy eyelashes, a head of grey hair, and an imposing
appearance; and his name was regimbart.

"what's the matter now, citizen?" said arnoux.

"another fresh piece of rascality on the part of government!"

the thing that he was referring to was the dismissal of a schoolmaster.

pellerin again took up his parallel between michael angelo and
shakespeare. dittmer was taking himself off when arnoux pulled him back
in order to put two bank notes into his hand. thereupon hussonnet said,
considering this an opportune time:

"couldn't you give me an advance, my dear master----?"

but arnoux had resumed his seat, and was administering a severe
reprimand to an old man of mean aspect, who wore a pair of blue
spectacles.

"ha! a nice fellow you are, père isaac! here are three works cried
 
 ___________________________
 
ified
articles, tore open letters, set out accounts in a row; at the sound of
hammering in the warehouse he went out to look after the packing; then
he went back to his ordinary work; and, while he kept his steel pen
running over the paper, he indulged in sharp witticisms. he had an
invitation to dine with his lawyer that evening, and was starting next
day for belgium.

the others chatted about the topics of the day--cherubini's portrait,
the hemicycle of the fine arts, and the next exhibition. pellerin railed
at the institute. scandalous stories and serious discussions got mixed
up together. the apartment with its low ceiling was so much stuffed up
that one could scarcely move; and the light of the rose-coloured
wax-tapers was obscured in the smoke of their cigars, like the sun's
rays in a fog.

the door near the sofa flew open, and a tall, thin woman entered with
abrupt movements, which made all the trinkets of her watch rattle under
her black taffeta gown.

it was the woman of whom frederic
 
 ___________________________
 
k had caught a glimpse last summer at
the palais-royal. some of those present, addressing her by name, shook
hands with her. hussonnet had at last managed to extract from his
employer the sum of fifty francs. the clock struck seven.

all rose to go.

arnoux told pellerin to remain, and accompanied mademoiselle vatnaz into
the dressing-room.

frederick could not hear what they said; they spoke in whispers.
however, the woman's voice was raised:

"i have been waiting ever since the job was done, six months ago."

there was a long silence, and then mademoiselle vatnaz reappeared.
arnoux had again promised her something.

"oh! oh! later, we shall see!"

"good-bye! happy man," said she, as she was going out.

arnoux quickly re-entered the dressing-room, rubbed some 
 
 ___________________________
 
cosmetic over
his moustaches, raised his braces, stretched his straps; and, while he
was washing his hands:

"i would require two over the door at two hundred and fifty apiece, in
boucher's style. is that understood?"

"be it so," said the artist, his face reddening.

"good! and don't forget my wife!"

frederick accompanied pellerin to the top of the faubourg poissonnière,
and asked his permission to come to see him sometimes, a favour which
was graciously accorded.

pellerin read every work on æsthetics, in order to find out the true
theory of the beautiful, convinced that, when he had discovered it, he
would produce masterpieces. he surrounded himself with every imaginable
auxiliary--drawings, plaster-casts, models, engravings; and he kept
searching about, eating his heart out. he blamed the weather, his
nerves, his studio, went out into the street to find inspiration there,
quivered with delight at the thought that he had caught it, then
abandoned the work in wh
 
 ___________________________
 
g any
discouragement, but he was always irritated, and in that state of
exaltation, at the same time factitious and natural, which is
characteristic of comedians.

on entering his studio one's attention was directed towards two large
pictures, in which the first tones of colour laid on here and there made
on the white canvas spots of brown, red, and blue. a network of lines in
chalk stretched overhead, like stitches of thread repeated twenty times;
it was impossible to understand what it meant. pellerin explained the
subject of these two compositions by pointing out with his thumb the
portions that were lacking. the first was intended to represent "the
madness of nebuchadnezzar," and the second "the burning of rome by
nero." frederick admired them.

he admired academies of women with dishevelled hair, landscapes in which
trunks of trees, twisted by the storm, abounded, and above all freaks of
the pen, imitations from memory of callot, rembrandt, or goya, of which
he did not know the models. pe
 
 ___________________________
 
llerin no longer set any value on these
works of his youth. he was now all in favour of the grand style; he
dogmatised eloquently about phidias and winckelmann. the objects around
him strengthened the force of his language; one saw a death's head on a
prie-dieu, yataghans, a monk's habit. frederick put it on.

when he arrived early, he surprised the artist in his wretched
folding-bed, which was hidden from view by a strip of tapestry; for
pellerin went to bed late, being an assiduous frequenter of the
theatres. an old woman in tatters attended on him. he dined at a
cook-shop, and lived without a mistress. his acquirements, picked up in
the most irregular fashion, rendered his paradoxes amusing. his hatred
of the vulgar and the "bourgeois" overflowed in sarcasms, marked by a
superb lyricism, and he had such religious reverence for the masters
that it raised him almost to their level.

but why had he never spoken about madame arnoux? as fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r her son, at one
time he called pellerin a decent fellow, at other times a charlatan.
frederick was waiting for some disclosures on his part.

one day, while turning over one of the portfolios in the studio, he
thought he could trace in the portrait of a female bohemian some
resemblance to mademoiselle vatnaz; and, as he felt interested in this
lady, he desired to know what was her exact social position.

she had been, as far as pellerin could ascertain, originally a
schoolmistress in the provinces. she now gave lessons in paris, and
tried to write for the small journals.

according to frederick, one would imagine from her manners with arnoux
that she was his mistress.

"pshaw! he has others!"

then, turning away his face, which reddened with shame as he realised
the baseness of the suggestion, the young man added, with a swaggering
air:

"very likely his wife pays him back for it?"

"not at all; she is virtuous."

frederick ag
 
 ___________________________
 
mplated them.
where, then, did she reside? how was he to meet her now? once more
around the object of his desire a solitude opened more immense than
ever!

"are you coming to take it?" asked regimbart.

"to take what?"

"the absinthe."

and, yielding to his importunities, frederick allowed himself to be led
towards the bordelais smoking-divan. whilst his companion, leaning on
his elbow, was staring at the decanter, he was turning his eyes to the
right and to the left. but he caught a glimpse of pellerin's profile on
the footpath outside; the painter gave a quick tap at the window-pane,
and he had scarcely sat down when regimbart asked him why they no longer
saw him at the office of _l'art industriel_.

"may i perish before ever i go back there again. the fellow is a brute,
a mere tradesman, a wretch, a downright rogue!"

these insulting words harmonised with frederick's present angry mood.
nevertheless, he was wounded, for it seemed to him that they hit at
madame arnoux more or less.

"why, wh
 
 ___________________________
 
at has he done to you?" said regimbart.

pellerin stamped with his foot on the ground, and his only response was
an energetic puff.

he had been devoting himself to artistic work of a kind that he did not
care to connect his name with, such as portraits for two crayons, or
pasticcios from the great masters for amateurs of limited knowledge;
and, as he felt humiliated by these inferior productions, he preferred
to hold his tongue on the subject as a general rule. but "arnoux's dirty
conduct" exasperated him too much. he had to relieve his feeli
 
 ___________________________
 
ngs.

in accordance with an order, which had been given in frederick's very
presence, he had brought arnoux two pictures. thereupon the dealer took
the liberty of criticising them. he found fault with the composition,
the colouring, and the drawing--above all the drawing; he would not, in
short, take them at any price. but, driven to extremities by a bill
falling due, pellerin had to give them to the jew isaac; and, a
fortnight later, arnoux himself sold them to a spaniard for two thousand
francs.

"not a sou less! what rascality! and, faith, he has done many other
things just as bad. one of these mornings we'll see him in the dock!"

"how you exaggerate!" said frederick, in a timid voice.

"come, now, that's good; i exaggerate!" exclaimed the artist, giving the
table a great blow with his fist.

this violence had the effect of completely restoring the young man's
se
 
 ___________________________
 
lf-command. no doubt he might have acted more nicely; still, if arnoux
found these two pictures----

"bad! say it out! are you a judge of them? is this your profession? now,
you know, my youngster, i don't allow this sort of thing on the part of
mere amateurs."

"ah! well, it's not my business," said frederick.

"then, what interest have you in defending him?" returned pellerin,
coldly.

the young man faltered:

"but--since i am his friend----"

"go, and give him a hug for me. good evening!"

and the painter rushed away in a rage, and, of course, without paying
for his drink.

frederick, whilst defending arnoux, had convinced himself. in the heat
of his eloquence, he was filled with tenderness towards this man, so
intelligent and kind, whom his friends calumniated, and who had now to
work all alone, abandoned by them. he could not resist a strange impulse
to go at onc
 
 ___________________________
 
or the
shop-door, and passed out through it, as he imagined, for the last time
in his life. madame arnoux herself had been lowered by the vulgarity of
her husband.

during the same week he got a letter from deslauriers, informing him
that the clerk would be in paris on the following thursday. then he
flung himself back violently on this affection as one of a more solid
and lofty character. a man of this sort was worth all the women in the
world. he would no longer have any need of regimbart, of pellerin, of
hussonnet, of anyone! in order to provide his friend with as comfortable
lodgings as possible, he bought an iron bedstead and a second armchair,
and stripped off some of his own bed-covering to garnish this one
properly. on thursday morning he was dressing himself to go to meet
deslauriers when there was a ring at the door.

arnoux entered.

"just one word. yesterday i got a lovely trout from geneva. we expect
you by-and-by--at seven o'clock sharp. the address is the rue de
choiseul 24 _bis
 
 ___________________________
 

then the guests arrived, nearly all at the same time--dittmer, lovarias,
burrieu, the composer rosenwald, the poet théophile lorris, two art
critics, colleagues of hussonnet, a paper manufacturer, and in the rear
the illustrious pierre paul meinsius, the last representative of the
grand school of painting, who blithely carried along with his glory his
forty-five years and his big paunch.

when they were passing into the dining-room, madame arnoux took his arm.
a chair had been left vacant for pellerin. arnoux, though he took
advantage of him, was fond of him. besides, he was afraid of his
terrible tongue, so much so, that, in order to soften him, he had given
a portrait of him in _l'art industriel_, accompanied by exaggerated
eulogies; and pellerin, more sensitive about distinction than about
money, made his appearance about eight o'clock quite out of breath.
frederick fancied that they had been a long time reconciled.

he liked the company, the dishes, everything. the dining-room, which
res
 
 ___________________________
 
 about theatrical matters by listening to
rosenwald's chat about the opera; and the atrocious existence of bohemia
assumed for him a droll aspect when seen through the gaiety of
hussonnet, who related, in a picturesque fashion, how he had spent an
entire winter with no food except dutch cheese. then, a discussion
between lovarias and burrieu about the florentine school gave him new
ideas with regard to masterpieces, widened his horizon, and he found
difficulty in restraining his enthusiasm when pellerin exclaimed:

"don't bother me with your hideous reality! what does it mean--reality?
some see things black, others blue--the multitude sees them
brute-fashion. there is nothing less natural than michael angelo; there
is nothing more powerful! the anxiety about external truth is a mark of
contemporary baseness; and art will become, if things go on that way, a
sort of poor joke as much below religion as it is below poetry, and as
much below politics as it is below business. you will never reach it
 
 ___________________________
 
t brows of hers, bent over her shoulder; her bosom swelled; her eyes
were wide apart; her neck, from which roulades made their escape, fell
back as if under aërial kisses. she flung out three sharp notes, came
down again, cast forth one higher still, and, after a silence, finished
with an organ-point.

rosenwald did not leave the piano. he continued playing, to amuse
himself. from time to time a guest stole away. at eleven o'clock, as the
last of them were going off, arnoux went out along with pellerin, under
the pretext of seeing him home. he was one of those people who say that
they are ill when they do not "take a turn" after dinner. madame arnoux
had made her way towards the anteroom. dittmer and hussonnet bowed to
her. she stretched out her hand to them. she did the same to frederick;
and he felt, as it were, something penetrating every particle of his
skin.

he quitted his friends. he wished to be alone. his heart was
overflowing. why had she offered him her hand? was it a thoughtless
a
 
 ___________________________
 
istence
was now perfectly clear, and there could be no mistake about the future.

when he had shut his door, he heard some one snoring in the dark closet
near his apartment. it was his friend. he no longer bestowed a thought
on him.

his own face presented itself to his view in the glass. he thought
himself handsome, and for a minute he remained gazing at himself.




chapter v.

"love knoweth no laws."


before twelve o'clock next day he had bought a box of colours,
paintbrushes, and an easel. pellerin consented to give him lessons, and
frederick brought him to his lodgings to see whether anything was
wanting among his painting utensils.

deslauriers had come back, and the second armchair was occupied by a
young man. the clerk said, pointing towards him:

"'tis he! there he is! sénécal!" frederick disliked this young man. his
forehead was heightened by the way in which he wore his hair, cut
straight like a brush. there was a certain hard, cold look in his grey
eyes; and his long black coat,
 
 ___________________________
 
 his entire costume, savoured of the
pedagogue and the ecclesiastic.

they first discussed topics of the hour, amongst others the _stabat_ of
rossini. sénécal, in answer to a question, declared that he never went
to the theatre.

pellerin opened the box of colours.

"are these all for you?" said the clerk.

"why, certainly!"

"well, really! what a notion!" and he leaned across the table, at which
the mathematical tutor was turning over the leaves of a volume of louis
blanc. he had brought it with him, and was reading passages from it in
low tones, while pellerin and frederick were examining together the
palette, the knife, and the bladders; then the talk came round to the
dinner at arnoux's.

"the picture-dealer, is it?" asked s
 
 ___________________________
 
énécal. "a nice gentleman, truly!"

"why, now?" said pellerin. sénécal replied:

"a man who makes money by political turpitude!"

and he went on to talk about a well-known lithograph, in which the royal
family was all represented as being engaged in edifying occupations:
louis philippe had a copy of the code in his hand; the queen had a
catholic prayer-book; the princesses were embroidering; the duc de
nemours was girding on a sword; m. de joinville was showing a map to his
young brothers; and at the end of the apartment could be seen a bed with
two div
 
 ___________________________
 
isions. this picture, which was entitled "a good family," was a
source of delight to commonplace middle-class people, but of grief to
patriots.

pellerin, in a tone of vexation, as if he had been the producer of this
work himself, observed by way of answer that every opinion had some
value. sénécal protested: art should aim exclusively at promoting
morality amongst the masses! the only subjects that ought to be
reproduced were those which impelled people to virtuous actions; all
others were injurious.

"but that depends on the execution," cried pellerin. "i might produce
masterpieces."

"so much the worse for you, then; you have no right----"

 
 ___________________________
 

"what?"

"no, monsieur, you have no right to excite my interest in matters of
which i disapprove. what need have we of laborious trifles, from which
it is impossible to derive any benefit--those venuses, for instance,
with all your landscapes? i see there no instruction for the people!
show us rather their miseries! arouse enthusiasm in us for their
sacrifices! ah, my god! there is no lack of subjects--the farm, the
workshop----"

pellerin stammered forth his indignation at this, and, imagining that he
had found an argument:

"molière, do you accept him?"

"certainly!" said sénécal. "i admire him as the precursor of the french
revolution."

"ha! the revolution! what art! never was there a more pitiable epoch!"

"none greater, monsieur!"

pellerin folded his arms, and looking at him straight in the face:

"you have the appearance of a famous member of the national guard!"

his opponent, accustomed to discussions, responded:

"i
 
 ___________________________
 
tinople
occupying the centre of three walls respectively, equestrian subjects by
alfred de dreux here and there, a group by pradier over the mantelpiece,
numbers of _l'art industriel_ lying on the piano, and works in boards on
the floor in the corners, encumbered the apartment which he occupied to
such an extent that it was hard to find a place to lay a book on, or to
move one's elbows about freely. frederick maintained that he needed all
this for his painting.

he pursued his art-studies under pellerin. but when he called on the
artist, the latter was often out, being accustomed to attend at every
funeral and public occurrence of which an account was given in the
newspapers, and so it was that frederick spent entire hours alone in the
studio. the quietude of this spacious room, which nothing disturbed save
the scampering of the mice, the light falling from the ceiling, or the
hissing noise of the stove, made him sink into a kind of intellectual
ease. then his eyes, wandering away from the tas
 
 ___________________________
 
ishment of the other young men was greatly increased when they
learned that he had just come away from m. dambreuse's house. in fact,
the banker dambreuse had just bought a portion of an extensive wood
from martinon senior; and, when the worthy man introduced his son, the
other had invited them both to dinner.

"was there a good supply of truffles there?" asked deslauriers. "and did
you take his wife by the waist between the two doors, _sicut decet_?"

hereupon the conversation turned on women. pellerin would not admit that
there were beautiful women (he preferred tigers); besides the human
female was an inferior creature in the æsthetic hierarchy.

"what fascinates you is just the very thing that degrades her as an
idea; i mean her breasts, her hair----"

"nevertheless," urged frederick, "long black hair and large dark
eyes----"

"oh! we know all about that," cried hussonnet. "enough of andalusian
beauties on the lawn. those things are out of date; no thank you! for
the fact is, honour brigh
 
 ___________________________
 
ught a glimpse of her foot. she wore little
open shoes of reddish-brown leather, with three straps crossing each
other so as to draw just above her stockings a wirework of gold.

those who had been invited arrived. with the exception of maître
lefaucheur, an advocate, they were the same guests who came to the
thursday dinners. each of them had brought some present--dittmer a
syrian scarf, rosenwald a scrap-book of ballads, burieu a water-colour
painting, sombary one of his own caricatures, and pellerin a
charcoal-drawing, representing a kind of dance of death, a hideous
fantasy, the execution of which was rather poor. hussonnet dispensed
with the formality of a present.

frederick was waiting to offer his, after the others.

she thanked him very much for it. thereupon, he said:

"why, 'tis almost a debt. i have been so much annoyed----"

"at what, pray?" she returned. "i don't understand."

"come! dinner is waiting!" said arnoux, catching hold of his arm; then
in a whisper: "you are not very 
 
 ___________________________
 
 to the
carriage.

"would you like me to go back with you?" said madame arnoux.

"why, certainly!" and, making her a graceful bow: "you know well,
madame, that it is impossible to live without you!"

everyone congratulated her on having so good a husband.

"ah! it is because i am not the only one," she replied quietly, pointing
towards her little daughter.

then, the conversation having turned once more on painting, there was
some talk about a ruysdaél, for which arnoux expected a big sum, and
pellerin asked him if it were true that the celebrated saul mathias from
london had come over during the past month to make him an offer of
twenty-three thousand francs for it.

"'tis a positive fact!" and turning towards frederick: "that was the
very same gentleman i brought with me a few days ago to the alhambra,
much against my will, i assure you, for these english are by no means
amusing companions."

frederick, who suspected that mademoiselle vatnaz's letter contained
some reference to an intrigue,
 
 ___________________________
 
ch a fine fellow as the other--the
clerk in the wagon-office."

frederick bestowed a mental imprecation on dussardier. she would now be
taking it for granted that he associated with the common herd.

then they began to talk about the ornamentation of the capital--the new
districts of the city--and the worthy oudry happened to refer to m.
dambreuse as one of the big speculators.

frederick, taking advantage of the opportunity to make a good figure,
said he was acquainted with that gentleman. but pellerin launched into a
harangue against shopkeepers--he saw no difference between them, whether
they were sellers of candles or of money. then rosenwald and burieu
talked about old china; arnoux chatted with madame oudry about
gardening; sombary, a comical character of the old school, amused
himself by chaffing her husband, referring to him sometimes as "odry,"
as if he were the actor of that name, and remarking that he must be
descended from oudry, the dog-painter, seeing that the bump of the
animals
 
 ___________________________
 
vocates' pleading
rehearsals at orsay, had made a speech which was greatly applauded.
although he was sober, he drank a little more wine than was good for
him, and said to dussardier at dessert:

"you are an honest fellow!--and, when i'm a rich man, i'll make you my
manager."

all were in a state of delight. cisy was not going to finish his
law-course. martinon intended to remain during the period before his
admission to the bar in the provinces, where he would be nominated a
deputy-magistrate. pellerin was devoting himself to the production of a
large picture representing "the genius of the revolution." hussonnet
was, in the following week, about to read for the director of public
amusements the scheme of a play, and had no doubt as to its success:

"as for the framework of the drama, they may leave that to me! as for
the passions, i have knocked about enough to understand them thoroughly;
and as for witticisms, they're entirely in my line!"

he gave a spring, fell on his two hands, and thus 
 
 ___________________________
 
ng on the great men who had worked in garrets. a soul
like that of madame arnoux ought to be touched at such a spectacle, and
she would be moved by it to sympathetic tenderness. so, after all, this
catastrophe was a piece of good fortune; like those earthquakes which
unveil treasures, it had revealed to him the hidden wealth of his
nature. but there was only one place in the world where this could be
turned to account--paris; for to his mind, art, science, and love (those
three faces of god, as pellerin would have said) were associated
exclusively with the capital. that evening, he informed his mother of
his intention to go back there. madame moreau was surprised and
indignant. she regarded it as a foolish and absurd course. it would be
better to follow her advice, namely, to remain near her in an office.
frederick shrugged his shoulders, "come now"--looking on this proposal
as an insult to himself.

thereupon, the good lady adopted another plan. in a tender voice broken
by sobs she began to d
 
 ___________________________
 
res, or anything else.

he hastened to the rue de choiseul. m. and madame arnoux no longer
resided there, and a woman next door was keeping an eye on the porter's
lodge. frederick waited to see the porter himself. after some time he
made his appearance--it was no longer the same man. he did not know
their address.

frederick went into a café, and, while at breakfast, consulted the
commercial directory. there were three hundred arnoux in it, but no
jacques arnoux. where, then, were they living? pellerin ought to know.

he made his way to the very top of the faubourg poissonnière, to the
artist's studio. as the door had neither a bell nor a knocker, he rapped
loudly on it with his knuckles, and then called out--shouted. but the
only response was the echo of his voice from the empty house.

after this he thought of hussonnet; but where could he discover a man of
that sort? on one occasion he had waited on hussonnet when the latter
was paying a visit to his mistress's house in the rue de fleurus
 
 ___________________________
 
ead, like the son of m.
alexandre.

frederick expected that he would have felt spasms of joy; but the
passions grow pale when we find ourselves in an altered situation; and,
as he no longer saw madame arnoux in the environment wherein he had
known her, she seemed to him to have lost some of her fascination; to
have degenerated in some way that he could not comprehend--in fact, not
to be the same. he was astonished at the serenity of his own heart. he
made enquiries about some old friends, about pellerin, amongst others.

"i don't see him often," said arnoux. she added:

"we no longer entertain as we used to do formerly!"

was the object of this to let him know that he would get no invitation
from them? but arnoux, continuing to exhibit the same cordiality,
reproached him for not having come to dine with them uninvited; and he
explained why he had changed his business.

"what are you to do in an age of decadence like ours? great painting is
gone out of fashion! besides, we may import art into e
 
 ___________________________
 
ted to charm him. in a sudden
revolt of his youthful blood he swore that he would enjoy such things;
he grew bold; then, coming back to the place opening into the
drawing-room, where there was now a larger gathering--it kept moving
about in a kind of luminous pulverulence--he stood to watch the
quadrilles, blinking his eyes to see better, and inhaling the soft
perfumes of the women, which floated through the atmosphere like an
immense kiss.

but, close to him, on the other side of the door, was
pellerin--pellerin, in full dress, his left arm over his breast and with
his hat and a torn white glove in his right.

"halloa! 'tis a long time since we saw you! where the deuce have you
been? gone to travel in italy? 'tis a commonplace country enough--italy,
eh? not so unique as people say it is? no matter! will you bring me your
sketches one of these days?"

and, without giving him time to answer, the artist began talking about
himself. he had made considerable progress, having definitely satisfied
h
 
 ___________________________
 
l over his white cravat, his hair, still fair, and curling naturally
like that of a poodle, gave him a certain frivolity of aspect.

she was listening to him with her face bent close to his. presently, she
accommodated him with a little glass of syrup; and nothing could be more
dainty than her hands under their laced sleeves, which passed over the
facings of her green coat. when the old man had swallowed it, he kissed
them.

"why, that's m. oudry, a neighbor of arnoux!"

"he has lost her!" said pellerin, smiling.

a longjumeau postilion caught her by the waist. a waltz was beginning.
then all the women, seated round the drawing-room on benches, rose up
quickly at the same time; and their petticoats, their scarfs, and their
head-dresses went whirling round.

they whirled so close to him that frederick could notice the beads of
perspiration on their foreheads; and this gyral movement, more and more
lively, regular, provocative of dizzy sensations, communicated to his
mind a sort of intoxication,
 
 ___________________________
 
lls of which were hidden from view under some fine old earthenware
that was hung up there; and this crude light, falling perpendicularly,
rendered still whiter, amid the side-dishes and the fruits, a huge
turbot which occupied the centre of the tablecloth, with plates all
round filled with crayfish soup. with a rustle of garments, the women,
having arranged their skirts, their sleeves, and their scarfs, took
their seats beside one another; the men, standing up, posted themselves
at the corners. pellerin and m. oudry were placed near rosanette. arnoux
was facing her. palazot and his female companion had just gone out.

"good-bye to them!" said she. "now let us begin the attack!"

and the choir-boy, a facetious man with a big sign of the cross, said
grace.

the ladies were scandalised, and especially the fishwife, the mother of
a young girl of whom she wished to make an honest woman. neither did
arnoux like "that sort of thing," as he considered that religion ought
to be respected.

a german clo
 
 ___________________________
 
lk followed--puns, anecdotes, bragging remarks, bets, lies taken
for truth, improbable assertions, a tumult of words, which soon became
dispersed in the form of chats between particular individuals. the wines
went round; the dishes succeeded each other; the doctor carved. an
orange or a cork would every now and then be flung from a distance.
people would quit their seats to go and talk to some one at another end
of the table. rosanette turned round towards delmar, who sat motionless
behind her; pellerin kept babbling; m. oudry smiled. mademoiselle vatnaz
ate, almost alone, a group of crayfish, and the shells crackled under
her long teeth. the angel, poised on the piano-stool--the only place on
which her wings permitted her to sit down--was placidly masticating
without ever stopping.

"what an appetite!" the choir-boy kept repeating in amazement, "what an
appetite!"

and the sphinx drank brandy, screamed out with her throat full, and
wriggled like a demon. suddenly her jaws swelled, and no long
 
 ___________________________
 
the angel was still in
the dining-room, seated at the table with a plate of sardines and fruit
stewed in melted butter in front of her, and close beside her was the
fishwife, smoking cigarettes, while giving her advice as to the right
way to live.

at last, the cabs having arrived, the guests took their departure.
hussonnet, who had an engagement as correspondent for the provinces, had
to read through fifty-three newspapers before his breakfast. the female
savage had a rehearsal at the theatre; pellerin had to see a model; and
the choir-boy had three appointments. but the angel, attacked by the
preliminary symptoms of indigestion, was unable to rise. the mediæval
baron carried her to the cab.

"take care of her wings!" cried the 'longshorewoman through the window.

at the top of the stairs, mademoiselle vatnaz said to rosanette:

"good-bye, darling! that was a very nice evening party of yours."

then, bending close to her ear: "take care of him!"

"till better times come," returned the maréc
 
 ___________________________
 
mise? frederick felt a sense of delight
at merely living; he had to restrain himself to keep from singing. he
wanted to burst out, to do generous deeds, and to give alms. he looked
around him to see if there were anyone near whom he could relieve. no
wretch happened to be passing by; and his desire for self-devotion
evaporated, for he was not a man to go out of his way to find
opportunities for benevolence.

then he remembered his friends. the first of whom he thought was
hussonnet, the second, pellerin. the lowly position of dussardier
naturally called for consideration. as for cisy, he was glad to let that
young aristocrat get a slight glimpse as to the extent of his fortune.
he wrote accordingly to all four to come to a housewarming the following
sunday at eleven o'clock sharp; and he told deslauriers to bring
sénécal.

the tutor had been dismissed from the third boarding-school in which he
had been employed for not having given his consent to the distribution
of prizes--a custom which he
 
 ___________________________
 
ch man now. ah! upon my
soul, so much the better!"

cisy made his appearance with crape on his hat. since the death of his
grandmother, he was in the enjoyment of a considerable fortune, and was
less bent on amusing himself than on being distinguished from
others--not being the same as everyone else--in short, on "having the
proper stamp." this was his favourite phrase.

however, it was now midday, and they were all yawning.

frederick was waiting for some one.

at the mention of arnoux's name, pellerin made a wry face. he looked on
him as a renegade since he had abandoned the fine arts.

"suppose we pass over him--what do you say to that?"

they all approved of this suggestion.

the door was opened by a man-servant in long gaiters; and the
dining-room could be seen with its lofty oak plinths relieved with gold,
and its two sideboards laden with plate.

the bottles of wine were heating on the stove; the blades of new knives
were glittering beside oysters. in the milky tint of the enamelled
gla
 
 ___________________________
 
eart alone that
makes anyone higher than another. we want no alms, understand! but
equality, the fair division of products."

what he required was that the workman might become a capitalist, just as
the soldier might become a colonel. the trade-wardenships, at least, in
limiting the number of apprentices, prevented workmen from growing
inconveniently numerous, and the sentiment of fraternity was kept up by
means of the fêtes and the banners.

hussonnet, as a poet, regretted the banners; so did pellerin, too--a
predilection which had taken possession of him at the café dagneaux,
while listening to the phalansterians talking. he expressed the opinion
that fourier was a great man.

"come now!" said deslauriers. "an old fool who sees in the overthrow of
governments the effects of divine vengeance. he is just like my lord
saint-simon and his church, with his hatred of the french revolution--a
set of buffoons who would fain re-establish catholicism."

m. de cisy, no doubt in order to get informati
 
 ___________________________
 
t high enough!

"and why are they paid? my god! to erect the palace for apes at the
museum, to make showy staff-officers parade along our squares, or to
maintain a gothic etiquette amongst the flunkeys of the château!"

"i have read in the _mode_," said cisy, "that at the tuileries ball on
the feast of saint-ferdinand, everyone was disguised as a miser."

"how pitiable!" said the socialist, with a shrug of his shoulders, as if
to indicate his disgust.

"and the museum of versailles!" exclaimed pellerin. "let us talk about
it! these idiots have foreshortened a delacroix and lengthened a gros!
at the louvre they have so well restored, scratched, and made a jumble
of all the canvases, that in ten years probably not one will be left. as
for the errors in the catalogue, a german has written a whole volume on
the subject. upon my word, the foreigners are laughing at us."

"yes, we are the laughing-stock of europe," said sénécal.

"'tis because art is conveyed in fee-simple to the crown."

"as lon
 
 ___________________________
 
 they went in
for a display of shameless luxury. therefore, he approved of the conduct
of the bavarian students who insulted lola montès. in imitation of
rousseau, he showed more esteem for the wife of a coal-porter than for
the mistress of a king.

"you don't appreciate dainties," retorted hussonnet in a majestic tone.
and he took up the championship of ladies of this class in order to
praise rosanette. then, as he happened to make an allusion to the ball
at her house and to arnoux's costume, pellerin remarked:

"people maintain that he is becoming shaky?"

the picture-dealer had just been engaged in a lawsuit with reference to
his grounds at belleville, and he was actually in a kaolin company in
lower brittany with other rogues of the same sort.

dussardier knew more about him, for his own master, m. moussinot, having
made enquiries about arnoux from the banker, oscar lefébvre, the latter
had said in reply that he considered him by no means solvent, as he knew
about bills of his that had b
 
 ___________________________
 
een renewed.

the dessert was over; they passed into the drawing-room, which was hung,
like that of the maréchale, in yellow damask in the style of louis xvi.

pellerin found fault with frederick for not having chosen in preference
the neo-greek style; sénécal rubbed matches against the hangings;
deslauriers did not make any remark.

there was a bookcase set up there, which he called "a little girl's
library." the principal contemporary writers were to be found there. it
was impossible to speak about their works, for hussonnet immediately
began relating anecdotes with reference to their personal
characteristics, criticising their faces, their habits, their d
 
 ___________________________
 
 at last they left, at five o'clock
in the evening, and they were walking along at each others' side without
speaking, when dussardier broke the silence by saying that frederick had
entertained them in excellent style. they all agreed with him on that
point.

then hussonnet remarked that his luncheon was too heavy. sénécal found
fault with the trivial character of his household arrangements. cisy
took the same view. it was absolutely devoid of the "proper stamp."

"for my part, i think," said pellerin, "he might have had the grace to
give me an order for a picture."

deslauriers held his tongue, as he had the bank-notes that had been
given to him in his breeches' pocket.

frederick was left by himself. he was thinking about his friends, and it
seemed to him as if a huge ditch surrounded with shade separated him
from them. he had nevertheless held out his hand to them, and they had
not responded to the sincerity of his heart.

he recalled to mind what pellerin and dussardier had said about ar
 
 ___________________________
 
ins, timepieces, and household
articles. madame arnoux even pointed out to frederick in the lobby an
enormous supply of tea-kettles, foot-warmers, and samovars. finally, she
one day confessed that a certain matter caused her much anxiety. arnoux
had made her sign a promissory note payable to m. dambreuse.

meanwhile frederick still cherished his literary projects as if it were
a point of honour with himself to do so. he wished to write a history of
æsthetics, a result of his conversations with pellerin; next, to write
dramas dealing with different epochs of the french revolution, and to
compose a great comedy, an idea traceable to the indirect influence of
deslauriers and hussonnet. in the midst of his work her face or that of
the other passed before his mental vision. he struggled against the
longing to see her, but was not long ere he yielded to it; and he felt
sadder as he came back from madame arnoux's house.

one morning, while he was brooding over his melancholy thoughts by the
fireside
 
 ___________________________
 
een two doors in order
to say in a subdued voice, "i'm engaged--for the evening;" or else he
found her surrounded by a dozen persons; and when they were alone, so
many impediments presented themselves one after the other, that one
would have sworn there was a bet to keep matters from going any further.
he invited her to dinner; as a rule, she declined the invitation. on one
occasion, she accepted it, but did not come.

a machiavellian idea arose in his brain.

having heard from dussardier about pellerin's complaints against
himself, he thought of giving the artist an order to paint the
maréchale's portrait, a life-sized portrait, which would necessitate a
good number of sittings. he would not fail to be present at all of them.
the habitual incorrectness of the painter would facilitate their private
conversations. so then he would urge rosanette to get the picture
executed in order to make a present of her face to her dear arnoux. she
consented, for she saw herself in the midst of the grand sa
 
 ___________________________
 
lon in the
most prominent position with a crowd of people staring at her picture,
and the newspapers would all talk about it, which at once would set her
afloat.

as for pellerin, he eagerly snatched at the offer. this portrait ought
to place him in the position of a great man; it ought to be a
masterpiece. he passed in review in his memory all the portraits by
great masters with which he was acquainted, and decided finally in
favour of a titian, which would be set off with ornaments in the style
of veronese. therefore, he would carry out his design without artificial
backgrounds in a bold light, which would illuminate the flesh-tints with
a single tone, and which would
 
 ___________________________
 
ng against his legs. then, he recalled to mind one
winter twilight when on the same footpath madame arnoux walked thus by
his side, and he became so much absorbed in this recollection that he no
longer saw rosanette, and did not bestow a thought upon her.

she kept looking straight before her in a careless fashion, lagging a
little, like a lazy child. it was the hour when people had just come
back from their promenade, and equipages were making their way at a
quick trot over the hard pavement.

pellerin's flatteries having probably recurred to her mind, she heaved a
sigh.

"ah! there are some lucky women in the world. decidedly, i was made for
a rich man!"

he replied, with a certain brutality in his tone:

"you have one, in the meantime!" for m. oudry was looked upon as a man
that could count a million three times over.

she asked for nothing better than to get free from him.

"what prevents you from doing so?" and he gave utterance to bitter jests
about this old bewigged citizen, pointing ou
 
 ___________________________
 
t that he coveted the wife of this man, at whose dinner-table he
constantly sat. nevertheless, he continued his visits, excusing himself
on the ground that he was bound to protect her, and that an occasion
might present itself for being of service to her.

eight days after the ball, he had paid a visit to m. dambreuse. the
financier had offered him twenty shares in a coal-mining speculation;
frederick did not go back there again. deslauriers had written letters
to him, which he left unanswered. pellerin had invited him to go and see
the portrait; he always put it off. he gave way, however, to cisy's
persistent appeals to be introduced to rosanette.

she received him very nicely, but without springing on his neck as she
used to do formerly. his comrade was delighted at being received by a
woman of easy virtue, and above all at having a chat with an actor.
delmar was there when he called. a drama in which he appeared as a
peasant lecturing louis xiv. and prophesying the events of '89 had made
hi