xecution, among other matters under the head
of news from the mediterranean, there appeared in a naval chronicle of
the time, an authorized weekly publication, an account of the affair. it
was doubtless for the most part written in good faith, tho' the medium,
partly rumor, through which the facts must have reached the writer,
served to deflect and in part falsify them. the account was as follows:--

"on the tenth of the last month a deplorable occurrence took place on
board h.m.s. indomitable. john claggart, the ship's master-at-arms,
discovering that some sort of plot was incipient among an inferior
section of the ship's company, and that the ringleader was one william
budd; he, claggart, in the act of arraigning the man before the captain
was vindictively stabbed to the heart by the suddenly drawn sheath-knife
of budd.

"the deed and the implement employed, sufficiently suggest that tho'
mustered into the service under an english name the assassin was no
englishman, but one of those aliens adopt
 
 ___________________________
 
tunate man signally refutes, if refutation were needed,
that peevish saying attributed to the late dr. johnson, that patriotism
is the last refuge of a scoundrel.

"the criminal paid the penalty of his crime. the promptitude of the
punishment has proved salutary. nothing amiss is now apprehended aboard
h.m.s. indomitable."

the above, appearing in a publication now long ago superannuated and
forgotten, is all that hitherto has stood in human record to attest what
manner of men respectively were john claggart and billy budd.



chapter 30


everything is for a term remarkable in navies. any tangible object
associated with some striking incident of the service is converted into
a monument. the spar from which the foretopman was suspended, was for
some few years kept trace of by the blue-jackets. their knowledge
followed it from ship to dock-yard and again from dock-yard to ship,
still pursuing it even when at last reduced to a mere dock-yard boom. to
them a chip of it was as a piece of the cross. ign