 the
strenuous file along the spar.

the moral nature was seldom out of keeping with the physical make.
indeed, except as toned by the former, the comeliness and power, always
attractive in masculine conjunction, hardly could have drawn the sort of
honest homage the handsome sailor in some examples received from his
less gifted associates.

such a cynosure, at least in aspect, and something such too in nature,
though with important variations made apparent as the story proceeds,
was welkin-eyed billy budd, or baby budd, as more familiarly under
circumstances hereafter to be given he at last came to be called, aged
twenty-one, a foretopman of the british fleet toward the close of the
last decade of the eighteenth century. it was not very long prior to the
time of the narration that follows that he had entered the king's
service, having been impressed on the narrow seas from a homeward-bound
english merchantman into a seventy-four outward-bound, h.m.s.
indomitable; which ship, as was not unusual i
 
 ___________________________
 
ssion. on a fair day with a fair
wind and all going well, a certain musical chime in his voice seemed to
be the veritable unobstructed outcome of the innermost man. he had much
prudence, much conscientiousness, and there were occasions when these
virtues were the cause of overmuch disquietude in him. on a passage, so
long as his craft was in any proximity to land, no sleep for captain
graveling. he took to heart those serious responsibilities not so
heavily borne by some shipmasters.

now while billy budd was down in the forecastle getting his kit
together, the indomitable's lieutenant, burly and bluff, nowise
disconcerted by captain graveling's omitting to proffer the customary
hospitalities on an occasion so unwelcome to him, an omission simply
caused by preoccupation of thought, unceremoniously invited himself into
the cabin, and also to a flask from the spirit-locker, a receptacle
which his experienced eye instantly discovered. in fact he was one of
those sea-dogs in whom all the hardship an
 
 ___________________________
 
e did, but anyhow he gave the burly fool a terrible drubbing. it took
about half a minute, i should think. and, lord bless you, the lubber was
astonished at the celerity. and will you believe it, lieutenant, the red
whiskers now really loves billy--loves him, or is the biggest hypocrite
that ever i heard of. but they all love him. some of 'em do his washing,
darn his old trousers for him; the carpenter is at odd times making a
pretty little chest of drawers for him. anybody will do anything for
billy budd; and it's the happy family here. but now, lieutenant, if that
young fellow goes--i know how it will be aboard the rights. not again
very soon shall i, coming up from dinner, lean over the capstan smoking
a quiet pipe--no, not very soon again, i think. ay, lieutenant, you are
going to take away the jewel of 'em; you are going to take away my
peacemaker!" and with that the good soul had really some ado in checking
a rising sob.

"well," said the officer who had listened with amused interest to al
 
 ___________________________
 
and simpler sphere to the ampler
and more knowing world of a great war-ship; this might well have abashed
him had there been any conceit or vanity in his composition. among her
miscellaneous multitude, the indomitable mustered several individuals
who, however inferior in grade, were of no common natural stamp, sailors
more signally susceptive of that air which continuous martial discipline
and repeated presence in battle can in some degree impart even to the
average man. as the handsome sailor, billy budd's position aboard the
seventy-four was something analogous to that of a rustic beauty
transplanted from the provinces and brought into competition with the
highborn dames of the court. but this change of circumstances he scarce
noted. as little did he observe that something about him provoked an
ambiguous smile in one or two harder faces among the blue-jackets. nor
less unaware was he of the peculiar favorable effect his person and
demeanour had upon the more intelligent gentlemen of the quarte
 
 ___________________________
 
r."

struck by the straightforward simplicity of these replies, the officer
next asked, "do you know anything about your beginning?"

"no, sir. but i have heard that i was found in a pretty silklined basket
hanging one morning from the knocker of a good man's door in bristol."

"found say you? well," throwing back his head and looking up and down
the new recruit; "well, it turns out to have been a pretty good find.
hope they'll find some more like you, my man; the fleet sadly needs
them."

yes, billy budd was a foundling, a presumable by-blow, and, evidently,
no ignoble one. noble descent was as evident in him as in a blood horse.

for the rest, with little or no sharpness of faculty or any trace of the
wisdom of the serpent, nor yet quite a dove, he possessed that kind and
degree of intelligence going along with the unconventional rectitude of
a sound human creature, one to whom not yet has been proffered the
questionable apple of knowledge. he was illiterate; he could not read,
but he could si
 
 ___________________________
 
nce that the arch interferer,
the envious marplot of eden, still has more or less to do with every
human consignment to this planet of earth. in every case, one way or
another he is sure to slip in his little card, as much as to remind
us--i too have a hand here.

the avowal of such an imperfection in the handsome sailor should be
evidence not alone that he is not presented as a conventional hero, but
also that the story in which he is the main figure is no romance.


chapter 3


at the time of billy budd's arbitrary enlistment into the indomitable
that ship was on her way to join the mediterranean fleet. no long time
elapsed before the junction was effected. as one of that fleet the
seventy-four participated in its movements, tho' at times, on account of
her superior sailing qualities, in the absence of frigates, despatched
on separate duty as a scout and at times on less temporary service. but
with all this the story has little concernment, restricted as it is to
the inner life of one particul
 
 ___________________________
 
he ship's-corporals, so called, were
the immediate subordinates, and compliant ones; and this, as is to be
noted in some business departments ashore, almost to a degree
inconsistent with entire moral volition. his place put various
converging wires of underground influence under the chief's control,
capable when astutely worked thro' his understrappers, of operating to
the mysterious discomfort, if nothing worse, of any of the
sea-commonalty.



chapter 9


life in the fore-top well agreed with billy budd. there, when not
actually engaged on the yards yet higher aloft, the topmen, who as such
had been picked out for youth and activity, constituted an aerial club
lounging at ease against the smaller stun'sails rolled up into cushions,
spinning yarns like the lazy gods, and frequently amused with what was
going on in the busy world of the decks below. no wonder then that a
young fellow of billy's disposition was well content in such society.
giving no cause of offence to anybody, he was always ale
 
 ___________________________
 
tried to
extract; but the old sea-chiron, thinking perhaps that for the nonce he
had sufficiently instructed his young achilles, pursed his lips,
gathered all his wrinkles together and would commit himself to nothing
further.

years, and those experiences which befall certain shrewder men
subordinated life-long to the will of superiors, all this had developed
in the dansker the pithy guarded cynicism that was his leading
characteristic.



chapter 10


the next day an incident served to confirm billy budd in his incredulity
as to the dansker's strange summing--up of the case submitted. the ship
at noon, going large before the wind, was rolling on her course, and he,
below at dinner and engaged in some sportful talk with the members of
his mess, chanced in a sudden lurch to spill the entire contents of his
soup-pan upon the new scrubbed deck. claggart, the master-at-arms,
official rattan in hand, happened to be passing along the battery in a
bay of which the mess was lodged, and the greasy liquid
 
 ___________________________
 
 the heart, some distorting expression
perhaps; for a drummer-boy heedlessly frolicking along from the opposite
direction and chancing to come into light collision with his person was
strangely disconcerted by his aspect. nor was the impression lessened
when the official, impulsively giving him a sharp cut with the rattan,
vehemently exclaimed, "look where you go!"



chapter 11


what was the matter with the master-at-arms? and, be the matter what it
might, how could it have direct relation to billy budd with whom, prior
to the affair of the spilled soup, he had never come into any special
contact, official or otherwise? what indeed could the trouble have to do
with one so little inclined to give offence as the merchant-ship's
peacemaker, even him who in claggart's own phrase was "the sweet and
pleasant young fellow"? yes, why should jimmy legs, to borrow the
dansker's expression, be down on the handsome sailor? but, at heart and
not for nothing, as the late chance encounter may indicate to the
 
 ___________________________
 

discerning, down on him, secretly down on him, he assuredly was.

now to invent something touching the more private career of claggart,
something involving billy budd, of which something the latter should be
wholly ignorant, some romantic incident implying that claggart's
knowledge of the young blue-jacket began at some period anterior to
catching sight of him on board the seventy-four-all this, not so
difficult to do, might avail in a way more or less interesting to
account for whatever of enigma may appear to lurk in the case. but in
fact there was nothing of the sort. and yet the cause, necessarily to be
assumed as the sole one assignable, is in its very 
 
 ___________________________
 
point of the present story turning on the hidden nature of the
master-at-arms has necessitated this chapter. with an added hint or two
in connection with the incident at the mess, the resumed narrative must
be left to vindicate, as it may, its own credibility.



chapter 12


that claggart's figure was not amiss, and his face, save the chin, well
moulded, has already been said. of these favorable points he seemed not
insensible, for he was not only neat but careful in his dress. but the
form of billy budd was heroic; and if his face was without the
intellectual look of the pallid claggart's, not the less was it lit,
like his, from within, though from a different source. the bonfire in
his heart made luminous the rose-tan in his cheek.

in view of the marked contrast between the persons of the twain, it is
more than probable that when the master-at-arms in the scene last given
applied to the sailor the proverb handsome is as handsome does, he there
let escape an ironic inkling, not caught by the 
 
 ___________________________
 
nalty pleaded guilty to horrible actions, did ever
anybody seriously confess to envy? something there is in it universally
felt to be more shameful than even felonious crime. and not only does
everybody disown it, but the better sort are inclined to incredulity
when it is in earnest imputed to an intelligent man. but since its
lodgement is in the heart not the brain, no degree of intellect supplies
a guarantee against it. but claggart's was no vulgar form of the
passion. nor, as directed toward billy budd, did it partake of that
streak of apprehensive jealousy that marred saul's visage perturbedly
brooding on the comely young david. claggart's envy struck deeper. if
askance he eyed the good looks, cheery health and frank enjoyment of
young life in billy budd, it was because these went along with a nature
that, as claggart magnetically felt, had in its simplicity never willed
malice or experienced the reactionary bite of that serpent. to him, the
spirit lodged within billy, and looking out from h
 
 ___________________________
 
is welkin eyes as from
windows, that ineffability it was which made the dimple in his dyed
cheek, suppled his joints, and dancing in his yellow curls made him
preeminently the handsome sailor. one person excepted, the
master-at-arms was perhaps the only man in the ship intellectually
capable of adequately appreciating the moral phenomenon presented in
billy budd. and the insight but intensified his passion, which assuming
various secret forms within him, at times assumed that of cynic
disdain--disdain of innocence. to be nothing more than innocent! yet in
an aesthetic way he saw the charm of it, the courageous free-and-easy
temper of it, and fain would have shared it, but he despaired of it.

with no power to annul the elemental evil in him, tho' readily enough he
could hide it; apprehending the good, but powerless to be it; a nature
like claggart's su
 
 ___________________________
 
ated place, a narrow
platform, one of six, outside of the high bulwarks and screened by the
great dead-eyes and multiple columned lanyards of the shrouds and
back-stays; and, in a great war-ship of that time, of dimensions
commensurate with the hull's magnitude; a tarry balcony, in short,
overhanging the sea, and so secluded that one mariner of the
indomitable, a non-conformist old tar of a serious turn, made it even in
daytime his private oratory.

in this retired nook the stranger soon joined billy budd. there was no
moon as yet; a haze obscured the star-light. he could not distinctly see
the stranger's face. yet from something in the outline and carriage,
billy took him to be, and correctly, one of the afterguard.

"hist! billy," said the man in the same quick cautionary whisper as
before; "you were impressed, weren't you? well, so was i!"; and he
paused, as to mark the effect. but billy, not knowing exactly what to
make of this, said nothing. then the other: "we are not the only
impressed on
 
 ___________________________
 
s for the brief commotion, since of all the sections of a
ship's company, the forecastlemen, veterans for the most part and
bigoted in their sea-prejudices, are the most jealous in resenting
territorial encroachments, especially on the part of any of the
afterguard, of whom they have but a sorry opinion, chiefly landsmen,
never going aloft except to reef or furl the mainsail and in no wise
competent to handle a marlinspike or turn in a dead-eye, say.



chapter 15


this incident sorely puzzled billy budd. it was an entirely new
experience; the first time in his life that he had ever been personally
approached in underhand intriguing fashion. prior to this encounter he
had known nothing of the afterguardsman, the two men being stationed
wide apart, one forward and aloft during his watch, the other on deck
and aft.

what could it mean? and could they really be guineas, those two
glittering objects the interloper had held up to his eyes? where could
the fellow get guineas? why even spare buttons a
 
 ___________________________
 
re not so plentiful at
sea. the more he turned the matter over, the more he was non-plussed,
and made uneasy and discomforted. in his disgustful recoil from an
overture which tho' he but ill comprehended he instinctively knew must
involve evil of some sort, billy budd was like a young horse fresh from
the pasture suddenly inhaling a vile whiff from some chemical factory,
and by repeated snortings tries to get it out of his nostrils and lungs.
this frame of mind barred all desire of holding further parley with the
fellow, even were it but for the purpose of gaining some enlightenment
as to his design in approaching him. and yet he was not without natural
curiosity to see how such a visitor in the dark would look in broad day.

he espied him the following afte
 
 ___________________________
 
or was ready to ascribe them to almost
anybody but the man who, to use billy's own expression, "always had a
pleasant word for him." this is to be wondered at. yet not so much to be
wondered at. in certain matters, some sailors even in mature life remain
unsophisticated enough. but a young seafarer of the disposition of our
athletic foretopman, is much of a child-man. and yet a child's utter
innocence is but its blank ignorance, and the innocence more or less
wanes as intelligence waxes. but in billy budd intelligence, such as it
was, had advanced, while yet his simplemindedness remained for the most
part unaffected. experience is a teacher indeed; yet did billy's years
make his experience small. besides, he had none of that intuitive
knowledge of the bad which in natures not good or incompletely so
foreruns experience, and therefore may pertain, as in some instances it
too clearly does pertain, even to youth.

and what could billy know of man except of man as a mere sailor? and the
old-fashione
 
 ___________________________
 
n
to the fairness of the appearance, some foul turn may be served him. a
ruled undemonstrative distrustfulness is so habitual, not with
business-men so much, as with men who know their kind in less shallow
relations than business, namely, certain men-of-the-world, that they
come at last to employ it all but unconsciously; and some of them would
very likely feel real surprise at being charged with it as one of their
general characteristics.



chapter 17


but after the little matter at the mess billy budd no more found himself
in strange trouble at times about his hammock or his clothesbag or what
not. while, as to that smile that occasionally sunned him, and the
pleasant passing word, these were if not more frequent, yet if anything,
more pronounced than before.

but for all that, there were certain other demonstrations now. when
claggart's unobserved glance happened to light on belted billy rolling
along the upper gun deck in the leisure of the second dog-watch,
exchanging passing broadsides o
 
 ___________________________
 
anding to
know his purpose in the initial interview, so abruptly closed in the
fore-chains. shrewd ones may also think it but natural in billy to set
about sounding some of the other impressed men of the ship in order to
discover what basis, if any, there was for the emissary's obscure
suggestions as to plotting disaffection aboard. yes, the shrewd may so
think. but something more, or rather, something else than mere
shrewdness is perhaps needful for the due understanding of such a
character as billy budd's.

as to claggart, the monomania in the man--if that indeed it were--as
involuntarily disclosed by starts in the manifestations detailed, yet in
general covered over by his self-contained and rational demeanour; this,
like a subterranean fire was eating its way deeper and deeper in him.
something decisive must come of it.



chapter 18


after the mysterious interview in the fore-chains--the one so abruptly
ended there by billy--nothing especially german to the story occurred
until the events 
 
 ___________________________
 
 a man not so young whom partly for that reason he
deemed less fitted for the post. be it parenthesized here that since the
mizzentopmen having not to handle such breadths of heavy canvas as the
lower sails on the main-mast and fore-mast, a young man if of the right
stuff not only seems best adapted to duty there, but in fact is
generally selected for the captaincy of that top, and the company under
him are light hands and often but striplings. in sum, captain vere had
from the beginning deemed billy budd to be what in the naval parlance of
the time was called a "king's bargain," that is to say, for his
britannic majesty's navy a capital investment at small outlay or none at
all.

after a brief pause during which the reminiscences above mentioned
passed vividly through his mind and he weighed the import of claggart's
last suggestion conveyed in the phrase "man-trap under his daisies," and
the more he weighed it the less reliance he felt in the informer's good
faith, suddenly he turned upon him a
 
 ___________________________
 
 court. tell the lieutenants what
has happened, and tell mr. mordant," meaning the captain of marines,
"and charge them to keep the matter to themselves."



chapter 20


full of disquietude and misgiving the surgeon left the cabin. was
captain vere suddenly affected in his mind, or was it but a transient
excitement, brought about by so strange and extraordinary a happening?
as to the drum-head court, it struck the surgeon as impolitic, if
nothing more. the thing to do, he thought, was to place billy budd in
confinement and in a way dictated by usage, and postpone further action
in so extraordinary a case to such time as they should rejoin the
squadron, and then refer it to the admiral. he recalled the unwonted
agitation of captain vere and his excited exclamations so at variance
with his normal manner. was he unhinged?

but assuming that he is, it is not so susceptible of proof. what then
can he do? no more trying situation is conceivable than that of an
officer subordinate under a captain whom
 
 ___________________________
 
braced the entire area under
the poopdeck. aft, and on either side, was a small state-room; the one
room temporarily a jail and the other a dead-house, and a yet smaller
compartment leaving a space between, expanding forward into a goodly
oblong of length coinciding with the ship's beam. a skylight of moderate
dimension was overhead and at each end of the oblong space were two
sashed port-hole windows easily convertible back into embrasures for
short carronades.

all being quickly in readiness, billy budd was arraigned, captain vere
necessarily appearing as the sole witness in the case, and as such,
temporarily sinking his rank, though singularly maintaining it in a
matter apparently trivial, namely, that he testified from the ship's
weather-side, with that object having caused the court to sit on the
lee-side. concisely he narrated all that had led up to the catastrophe,
omitting nothing in claggart's accusation and deposing as to the manner
in which the prisoner had received it. at this testim
 
 ___________________________
 
ony the three
officers glanced with no little surprise at billy budd, the last man
they would have suspected either of the mutinous design alleged by
claggart or the undeniable deed he himself had done. the first
lieutenant, taking judicial primacy and turning toward the prisoner,
said, "captain vere has spoken. is it or is it not as captain vere
says?"

in response came syllables not so much impeded in the utterance as might
have been anticipated. they were these: "captain vere tells the truth.
it is just as captain vere says, but it is not as the master-at-arm
 
 ___________________________
 
een fought. it is
another thing personally and under fire to direct the fighting while
involved in the obscuring smoke of it. much so with respect to other
emergencies involving considerations both practical and moral, and when
it is imperative promptly to act. the greater the fog the more it
imperils the steamer, and speed is put on tho' at the hazard of running
somebody down. little ween the snug card-players in the cabin of the
responsibilities of the sleepless man on the bridge."

in brief, billy budd was formally convicted and sentenced to be hung at
the yard-arm in the early morning watch, it being now night. otherwise,
as is customary in such cases, the sentence would forthwith have been
carried out. in war-time on the field or in the fleet, a mortal
punishment decreed by a drum-head court--on the field sometimes decreed
by but a nod from the general--follows without delay on the heel of
conviction without appeal.



chapter 22


it was captain vere himself who of his own motion communica
 
 ___________________________
 
d him for
a space, then slipping aside, withdrew for the time, peradventure
feeling that even he the minister of christ, tho' receiving his stipend
from mars, had no consolation to proffer which could result in a peace
transcending that which he beheld. but in the small hours he came again.
and the prisoner, now awake to his surroundings, noticed his approach,
and civilly, all but cheerfully, welcomed him. but it was to little
purpose that in the interview following the good man sought to bring
billy budd to some godly understanding that he must die, and at dawn.
true, billy himself freely referred to his death as a thing close at
hand; but it was something in the way that children will refer to death
in general, who yet among their other sports will play a funeral with
hearse and mourners.

not that like children billy was incapable of conceiving what death
really is. no, but he was wholly without irrational fear of it, a fear
more prevalent in highly civilized communities than those so-called

 
 ___________________________
 
put ashore. he lingered for some days, but the end came. unhappily
he was cut off too early for the nile and trafalgar. the spirit that
spite its philosophic austerity may yet have indulged in the most secret
of all passions, ambition, never attained to the fulness of fame.

not long before death, while lying under the influence of that magical
drug which soothing the physical frame mysteriously operates on the
subtler element in man, he was heard to murmur words inexplicable to his
attendant--"billy budd, billy budd." that these were not the accents of
remorse, would seem clear from what the attendant said to the
indomitable's senior officer of marines who, as the most reluctant to
condemn of the members of the drum-head court, too well knew, tho' here
he kept the knowledge to himself, who billy budd was.



chapter 29


some few weeks after the execution, among other matters under the head
of news from the mediterranean, there appeared in a naval chronicle of
the time, an authorized weekly pub
 
 ___________________________
 
y refutes, if refutation were needed,
that peevish saying attributed to the late dr. johnson, that patriotism
is the last refuge of a scoundrel.

"the criminal paid the penalty of his crime. the promptitude of the
punishment has proved salutary. nothing amiss is now apprehended aboard
h.m.s. indomitable."

the above, appearing in a publication now long ago superannuated and
forgotten, is all that hitherto has stood in human record to attest what
manner of men respectively were john claggart and billy budd.



chapter 30


everything is for a term remarkable in navies. any tangible object
associated with some striking incident of the service is converted into
a monument. the spar from which the foretopman was suspended, was for
some few years kept trace of by the blue-jackets. their knowledge
followed it from ship to dock-yard and again from dock-yard to ship,
still pursuing it even when at last reduced to a mere dock-yard boom. to
them a chip of it was as a piece of the cross. ignorant tho' they
 
 ___________________________
 
ature and its unconscious simplicity eventually
found rude utterance from another foretopman, one of his own watch,
gifted, as some sailors are, with an artless poetic temperament; the
tarry hands made some lines which after circulating among the shipboard
crew for a while, finally got rudely printed at portsmouth as a ballad.
the title given to it was the sailor's.

billy in the darbies

good of the chaplain to enter lone bay
and down on his marrow-bones here and pray
for the likes just o' me, billy budd.--but look:
through the port comes the moon-shine astray!
it tips the guard's cutlas and silvers this nook;
but 'twill die in the dawning of billy's last day.
a jewel-block they'll make of me to-morrow,
pendant pearl from the yard-arm-end
like the ear-drop i gave to bristol molly--
o, 'tis me, not the sentence they'll suspend.
ay, ay, ay, all is up; and i must up too
early in the morning, aloft from alow.
on an empty stomach, now, never it would do.
they'll give me a nibble--bit o' biscuit ere 