nd low; and the
wind in the cordage and the wash of the sea helped the more to put them
beyond earshot; nevertheless, the interview's continuance already had
attracted observation from some topmen aloft and other sailors in the
waist or further forward.

having determined upon his measures, captain vere forthwith took action.
abruptly turning to claggart he asked, "master-at-arms, is it now budd's
watch aloft?"

"no, your honor."

whereupon, "mr. wilkes!" summoning the nearest midshipman, "tell albert
to come to me." albert was the captain's hammock-boy, a sort of
sea-valet in whose discretion and fidelity his master had much
confidence. the lad appeared.

"you know budd the foretopman?"

"i do, sir."

"go find him. it is his watch off. manage to tell him out of earshot
that he is wanted aft. contrive it that he speaks to nobody. keep him in
talk yourself. and not till you get well aft here, not till then let him
know that the place where he is wanted is my cabin. you understand.
go.--master
 
 ___________________________
 
-at-arms, show yourself on the decks below, and when you
think it time for albert to be coming with his man, stand by quietly to
follow the sailor in."



chapter 19


now when the foretopman found himself closeted there, as it were, in the
cabin with the captain and claggart, he was surprised enough. but it was
a surprise unaccompanied by apprehension or distrust. to an immature
nature essentially honest and humane, forewarning intimations of subtler
danger from one's kind come tardily if at all. the only thing that took
shape in the young sailor's mind was this: yes, the c
 
 ___________________________
 
should reappear with
quite another aspect than that which had gone into hiding. the father in
him, manifested towards billy thus far in the scene, was replaced by the
military disciplinarian. in his official tone he bade the foretopman
retire to a state-room aft (pointing it out), and there remain till
thence summoned. this order billy in silence mechanically obeyed. then
going to the cabin-door where it opened on the quarter-deck, captain
vere said to the sentry without, "tell somebody to send albert here."
when the lad appeared his master so contrived it that he should not
catch sight of the prone one. "albert," he said to him, "tell the
surgeon i wish to see him. you need not come back till called."

when the surgeon entered--a self-poised character of that grave sense
and experience that hardly anything could take him aback,--captain vere
advanced to meet him, thus unconsciously intercepting his view of
claggart, and interrupting the other's wonted ceremonious salutation,
said, "nay, tel