ly boy, and then you'll be
sure to know if anybody meddles with it."

now there was a veteran aboard who because his years began to disqualify
him for more active work had been recently assigned duty as mainmastman
in his watch, looking to the gear belayed at the rail roundabout that
great spar near the deck. at off-times the foretopman had picked up some
acquaintance with him, and now in his trouble it occurred to him that he
might be the sort of person to go to for wise counsel. he was an old
dansker long anglicized in the service, of few words, many wrinkles and
some honorable scars. his wizened face, time-tinted and weather-stained
to the complexion of an antique parchment, was here and there peppered
blue by the chance explosion of a gun-cartridge in action.

he was an agamemnon man; some two years prior to the time of this story
having served under nelson, when but sir horatio, in that ship immortal
in naval memory, and which, dismantled and in part broken up to her bare
ribs, is seen a
 
 ___________________________
 
 grand skeleton in haydon's etching. as one of a
boarding-party from the agamemnon he had received a cut slantwise along
one temple and cheek, leaving a long scar like a streak of dawn's light
falling athwart the dark visage. it was on account of that scar and the
affair in which it was known that he had received it, as well as from
his blue-peppered complexion, that the dansker went among the
indomitable's crew by the name of "board-her-in-the-smoke."

now the first time that his small weazel-eyes happened to light on billy
budd, a certain grim internal merriment set all his ancient wrinkles
into antic play. was it that his eccentric unsentimental old sapience,
primitive in its kind, saw or thought it saw something which, in
contrast with the war-ship's environment, looked oddly incongruous in
the handsome sailor? but after slyly studying him at intervals, the old
mer
 
 ___________________________
 
t of look, but it would
be but momentary and sometimes replaced by an expression of speculative
query as to what might eventually befall a nature like that, dropped
into a world not without some man--traps and against whose subtleties
simple courage, lacking experience and address and without any touch of
defensive ugliness, is of little avail; and where such innocence as man
is capable of does yet in a moral emergency not always sharpen the
faculties or enlighten the will.

however it was, the dansker in his ascetic way rather took to billy. nor
was this only because of a certain philosophic interest in such a
character. there was another cause. while the old man's eccentricities,
sometimes bordering on the ursine, repelled the juniors, billy,
undeterred thereby, revering him as a salt hero, would make advances,
never passing the old agamemnon man without a salutation marked by that
respect which is seldom lost on the aged however crabbed at times or
whatever their station in life.

there wa
 
 ___________________________
 
s a vein of dry humor, or what not, in the mast-man; and,
whether in freak of patriarchal irony touching billy's youth and
athletic frame, or for some other and more recondite reason, from the
first in addressing him he always substituted baby for billy. the
dansker in fact being the originator of the name by which the foretopman
eventually became known aboard ship.

well then, in his mysterious little difficulty, going in quest of the
wrinkled one, billy found him off duty in a dog-watch ruminating by
himself, seated on a shot-box of the upper gun deck, now and then
surveying with a somewhat cynical regard certain of the more swaggering
promenaders there. billy recounted his trouble, again wondering how it
all happened. the salt seer attentively listened,
 
 ___________________________
 
 accompanying the
foretopman's recital with queer twitchings of his wrinkles and
problematical little sparkles of his small ferret eyes. making an end of
his story, the foretopman asked, "and now, dansker, do tell me what you
think of it."

the old man, shoving up the front of his tarpaulin and deliberately
rubbing the long slant scar at the point where it entered the thin hair,
laconically said, "baby budd, jimmy legs" (meaning the master--at-arms)
"is down on you."

"jimmy legs!" ejaculated billy, his welkin eyes expanding; "what for?
why he calls me the sweet and pleasant fellow, they tell me."

"does he so?" grinned the grizzled one; then said, "ay, baby lad, a
sweet voice has jimmy legs."


 
 ___________________________
 
novice, disturbed billy almost as much as the mystery for which he had
sought explanation. something less unpleasingly oracular he tried to
extract; but the old sea-chiron, thinking perhaps that for the nonce he
had sufficiently instructed his young achilles, pursed his lips,
gathered all his wrinkles together and would commit himself to nothing
further.

years, and those experiences which befall certain shrewder men
subordinated life-long to the will of superiors, all this had developed
in the dansker the pithy guarded cynicism that was his leading
characteristic.



chapter 10


the next day an incident served to confirm billy budd in his incredulity
as to the dansker's strange summing--up of the case submitted. the ship
at noon, going large before the wind, was rolling on her course, and he,
below at dinner and engaged in some sportful talk with the members of
his mess, chanced in a sudden lurch to spill the entire contents of his
soup-pan upon the new scrubbed deck. claggart, the master-a
 
 ___________________________
 
apter 11


what was the matter with the master-at-arms? and, be the matter what it
might, how could it have direct relation to billy budd with whom, prior
to the affair of the spilled soup, he had never come into any special
contact, official or otherwise? what indeed could the trouble have to do
with one so little inclined to give offence as the merchant-ship's
peacemaker, even him who in claggart's own phrase was "the sweet and
pleasant young fellow"? yes, why should jimmy legs, to borrow the
dansker's expression, be down on the handsome sailor? but, at heart and
not for nothing, as the late chance encounter may indicate to the
discerning, down on him, secretly down on him, he assuredly was.

now to invent something touching the more private career of claggart,
something involving billy budd, of which something the latter should be
wholly ignorant, some romantic incident implying that claggart's
knowledge of the young blue-jacket began at some period anterior to
catching sight of him on boa
 
 ___________________________
 
best to smother it. it never entered his mind that here was a
matter which from its extreme questionableness, it was his duty as a
loyal blue-jacket to report in the proper quarter. and, probably, had
such a step been suggested to him, he would have been deterred from
taking it by the thought, one of novice-magnanimity, that it would savor
overmuch of the dirty work of a telltale. he kept the thing to himself.
yet upon one occasion, he could not forbear a little disburthening
himself to the old dansker, tempted thereto perhaps by the influence of
a balmy night when the ship lay becalmed; the twain, silent for the most
part, sitting together on deck, their heads propped against the
bulwarks. but it was only a partial and anonymous account that billy
gave, the unfounded scruples above referred to preventing full
disclosure to anybody. upon hearing billy's version, the sage dansker
seemed to divine more than he was told; and after a little meditation
during which his wrinkles were pursed as into
 
 ___________________________
 
 plug of tobacco, vouchsafing no reply
to billy's impetuous question, tho' now repeated, for it was his wont to
relapse into grim silence when interrogated in skeptical sort as to any
of his sententious oracles, not always very clear ones, rather partaking
of that obscurity which invests most delphic deliverances from any
quarter.

long experience had very likely brought this old man to that bitter
prudence which never interferes in aught and never gives advice.



chapter 16


yes, despite the dansker's pithy insistence as to the master-at-arms
being at the bottom of these strange experiences of billy on board the
indomitable, the young sailor was ready to ascribe them to almost
anybody but the man who, to use billy's own expression, "always had a
pleasant word for him." this is to be wondered at. yet not so much to be
wondered at. in certain matters, some sailors even in mature life remain
unsophisticated enough. but a young seafarer of the disposition of our
athletic foretopman, is much of