pping and eager airs. they are coming, waves.
the whitemaned seahorses, champing, brightwindbridled, the steeds of
mananaan.

i mustn’t forget his letter for the press. and after? the ship, half
twelve. by the way go easy with that money like a good young imbecile.
yes, i must.

his pace slackened. here. am i going to aunt sara’s or not? my
consubstantial father’s voice. did you see anything of your artist
brother stephen lately? no? sure he’s not down in strasburg terrace with
his aunt sally? couldn’t he fly a bit higher than that, eh? and and
and and tell us, stephen, how is uncle si? o, weeping god, the things
i married into! de boys up in de hayloft. the drunken little costdrawer
and his brother, the cornet player. highly respectable gondoliers! and
skeweyed walter sirring his father, no less! sir. yes, sir. no, sir.
jesus wept: and no wonder, by christ!

i pull the wheezy bell of their shuttered cottage: and wait. they take
me for a dun, peer out from a coign of vantage.

—
 
 ___________________________
 
there’s a friend of yours gone by, dedalus, he said.

—who is that?

—your son and heir.

—where is he? mr dedalus said, stretching over across.

the carriage, passing the open drains and mounds of rippedup roadway
before the tenement houses, lurched round the corner and, swerving back
to the tramtrack, rolled on noisily with chattering wheels. mr dedalus
fell back, saying:

—was that mulligan cad with him? his fidus achates!

—no, mr bloom said. he was alone.

—down with his aunt sally, i suppose, mr dedalus said, the goulding
faction, the drunken little costdrawer and crissie, papa’s little lump
of dung, the wise child that knows her own father.

mr bloom smiled joylessly on ringsend road. wallace bros: the
bottleworks: dodder bridge.

richie goulding and the legal bag. goulding, collis and ward he calls
the firm. his jokes are getting a bit damp. great card he was. waltzing
in stamer street with ignatius gallaher on a sunday morning, the
landlady’s two hats pinned on hi
 
 ___________________________
 
erty
macdowell, and she noticed at once that that foreign gentleman that was
sitting on the rocks looking was

     cuckoo
     cuckoo
     cuckoo.





[ 14 ]

deshil holles eamus. deshil holles eamus. deshil holles eamus.

send us bright one, light one, horhorn, quickening and wombfruit. send
us bright one, light one, horhorn, quickening and wombfruit. send us
bright one, light one, horhorn, quickening and wombfruit.

hoopsa boyaboy hoopsa! hoopsa boyaboy hoopsa! hoopsa boyaboy hoopsa!

universally that person’s acumen is esteemed very little perceptive
concerning whatsoever matters are being held as most profitably by
mortals with sapience endowed to be studied who is ignorant of that
which the most in doctrine erudite and certainly by reason of that in
them high mind’s ornament deserving of veneration constantly maintain
when by general consent they affirm that other circumstances being
equal by no exterior splendour is the prosperity of a nation more
efficaciously asserted than by 
 
 ___________________________
 
e light, hearing the everflying moth.)

bloom: i wanted then to have now concluded. nightdress was never. hence
this. but tomorrow is a new day will be. past was is today. what now is
will then morrow as now was be past yester.

virag: (prompts in a pig’s whisper.) insects of the day spend their
brief existence in reiterated coition, lured by the smell of the
inferiorly pulchritudinous fumale possessing extendified pudendal nerve
in dorsal region. pretty poll! (his yellow parrotbeak gabbles nasally.)
they had a proverb in the carpathians in or about the year five thousand
five hundred and fifty of our era. one tablespoonful of honey will
attract friend bruin more than half a dozen barrels of first choice malt
vinegar. bear’s buzz bothers bees. but of this apart. at another time we
may resume. we were very pleased, we others. (he coughs and, bending his
brow, rubs his nose thoughtfully with a scooping hand.) you shall find
that these night insects follow the light. an illusion for rememb