and not till
then. tram kran kran kran. good oppor. coming. krandlkrankran. i’m sure
it’s the burgund. yes. one, two. let my epitaph be. kraaaaaa. written. i
have.

pprrpffrrppffff.

done.





[ 12 ]

i was just passing the time of day with old troy of the d. m. p. at the
corner of arbour hill there and be damned but a bloody sweep came along
and he near drove his gear into my eye. i turned around to let him have
the weight of my tongue when who should i see dodging along stony batter
only joe hynes.

—lo, joe, says i. how are you blowing? did you see that bloody
chimneysweep near shove my eye out with his brush?

—soot’s luck, says joe. who’s the old ballocks you were talking to?

—old troy, says i, was in the force. i’m on two minds not to give that
fellow in charge for obstructing the thoroughfare with his brooms and
ladders.

—what are you doing round those parts? says joe.

—devil a much, says i. there’s a bloody big foxy thief beyond by the
garrison church at the co
 
 ___________________________
 
e
bound over in your own recognisances for six months in the sum of five
pounds.

j. j. o’molloy: a daniel did i say? nay! a peter o’brien!

nosey flynn: where do i draw the five pounds?

pisser burke: for bladder trouble?

bloom:

     acid. nit. hydrochlor. dil., 20 minims
     tinct. nux vom., 5 minims
     extr. taraxel. liq., 30 minims.
     aq. dis. ter in die.

chris callinan: what is the parallax of the subsolar ecliptic of
aldebaran?

bloom: pleased to hear from you, chris. k. 11.

joe hynes: why aren’t you in uniform?

bloom: when my progenitor of sainted memory wore the uniform of the
austrian despot in a dank prison where was yours?

ben dollard: pansies?

bloom: embellish (beautify) suburban gardens.

ben dollard: when twins arrive?

bloom: father (pater, dad) starts thinking.

larry o’rourke: an eightday licence for my new premises. you remember
me, sir leo, when you were in number seven. i’m sending around a dozen
of stout for the missus.

bloom: (coldly.) you have the 
 
 ___________________________
 
fish, woman’s
slipperslappers. after him freshfound the hue and cry zigzag gallops
in hot pursuit of follow my leader: 65 c, 66 c, night watch, john henry
menton, wisdom hely, v. b. dillon, councillor nannetti, alexander keyes,
larry o’rourke, joe cuffe, mrs o’dowd, pisser burke, the nameless one,
mrs riordan, the citizen, garryowen, whodoyoucallhim, strangeface,
fellowthatsolike, sawhimbefore, chapwithawen, chris callinan, sir
charles cameron, benjamin dollard, lenehan, bartell d’arcy, joe hynes,
red murray, editor brayden, t. m. healy, mr justice fitzgibbon, john
howard parnell, the reverend tinned salmon, professor joly, mrs
breen, denis breen, theodore purefoy, mina purefoy, the westland
row postmistress, c. p. m’coy, friend of lyons, hoppy holohan,
maninthestreet, othermaninthestreet, footballboots, pugnosed driver,
rich protestant lady, davy byrne, mrs ellen m’guinness, mrs joe
gallaher, george lidwell, jimmy henry on corns, superintendent laracy,
father cowley, crofton out of
 
 ___________________________
 
t echoes of that sound were by both and each heard?

by stephen:

      liliata rutilantium. turma circumdet.
      iubilantium te virginum. chorus excipiat.

by bloom:

     heigho, heigho,
     heigho, heigho.

where were the several members of the company which with bloom that day
at the bidding of that peal had travelled from sandymount in the south
to glasnevin in the north?

martin cunningham (in bed), jack power (in bed), simon dedalus (in bed),
ned lambert (in bed), tom kernan (in bed), joe hynes (in bed), john
henry menton (in bed), bernard corrigan (in bed), patsy dignam (in bed),
paddy dignam (in the grave).

alone, what did bloom hear?

the double reverberation of retreating feet on the heavenborn earth, the
double vibration of a jew’s harp in the resonant lane.

alone, what did bloom feel?

the cold of interstellar space, thousands of degrees below freezing
point or the absolute zero of fahrenheit, centigrade or réaumur: the
incipient intimations of proximate dawn.

of what did 