uncovered as he entered.

—entrez, mes enfants! lenehan cried.

—i escort a suppliant, mr o’madden burke said melodiously. youth led by
experience visits notoriety.

—how do you do? the editor said, holding out a hand. come in. your
governor is just gone. ???

lenehan said to all:

—silence! what opera resembles a railwayline? reflect, ponder,
excogitate, reply.

stephen handed over the typed sheets, pointing to the title and
signature.

—who? the editor asked.

bit torn off.

—mr garrett deasy, stephen said.

—that old pelters, the editor said. who tore it? was he short taken?

     on swift sail flaming
     from storm and south
     he comes, pale vampire,
     mouth to my mouth.

—good day, stephen, the professor said, coming to peer over their
shoulders. foot and mouth? are you turned...?

bullockbefriending bard. shindy in wellknown restaurant

—good day, sir, stephen answered blushing. the letter is not mine. mr
garrett deasy asked me to...

—o, i know him, myles crawfo
 
 ___________________________
 
less, bolts like a phantom past the winningpost,
his mane moonfoaming, his eyeballs stars. the field follows, a bunch of
bucking mounts. skeleton horses, sceptre, maximum the second, zinfandel,
the duke of westminster’s shotover, repulse, the duke of beaufort’s
ceylon, prix de paris. dwarfs ride them, rustyarmoured, leaping, leaping
in their, in their saddles. last in a drizzle of rain on a brokenwinded
isabelle nag, cock of the north, the favourite, honey cap, green jacket,
orange sleeves, garrett deasy up, gripping the reins, a hockeystick at
the ready. his nag on spavined whitegaitered feet jogs along the rocky
road.)

the orange lodges: (jeering.) get down and push, mister. last lap!
you’ll be home the night!

garrett deasy: (bolt upright, his nailscraped face plastered with
postagestamps, brandishes his hockeystick, his blue eyes flashing in the
prism of the chandelier as his mount lopes by at schooling gallop.)

per vias rectas!

(a yoke of buckets leopards all over him and his rearing 
 
 ___________________________
 
ghter of the mother in the washkitchen that
was fostersister to the heir of the house or else they were connected
through the mother in some way, both occurrences happening at the same
time if the whole thing wasn’t a complete fabrication from start to
finish. anyhow he was all in.

—i wouldn’t ask you only, pursued he, on my solemn oath and god knows
i’m on the rocks.

—there’ll be a job tomorrow or next day, stephen told him, in a boys’
school at dalkey for a gentleman usher. mr garrett deasy. try it. you
may mention my name.

—ah, god, corley replied, sure i couldn’t teach in a school, man. i was
never one of your bright ones, he added with a half laugh. i got stuck
twice in the junior at the christian brothers.

—i have no place to sleep myself, stephen informed him.

corley at the first go-off was inclined to suspect it was something to
do with stephen being fired out of his digs for bringing in a bloody
tart off the street. there was a dosshouse in marlborough street, mrs
