ld you be very kind?  would you come round
with me to the registry office?  there's a housemaid who
won't say yes but doesn't say no."

on their way thither they too looked up at the wilcoxes'
flat.  evie was in the balcony, "staring most rudely,"
according to mrs. munt.  oh yes, it was a nuisance, there
was no doubt of it.  helen was proof against a passing
encounter but--margaret began to lose confidence.  might it
reawake the dying nerve if the family were living close
against her eyes?  and frieda mosebach was stopping with
them for another fortnight, and frieda was sharp, abominably
sharp, and quite capable of remarking, "you love one of the
young gentlemen opposite, yes?"  the remark would be untrue,
but of the kind which, if stated often enough, may become
true; just as the remark, "england and germany are bound to
fight," renders war a little more likely each time that it
is made, and is therefore made the more readily by the
gutter press of either nation.  have the private emotions
also thei
 
 ___________________________
 
 the nations, and portsmouth, a latent fire, and
all around it, with double and treble collision of tides,
swirls the sea.  how many villages appear in this view!  how
many castles!  how many churches, vanished or triumphant!
how many ships, railways, and roads!  what incredible
variety of men working beneath that lucent sky to what final
end!  the reason fails, like a wave on the swanage beach;
the imagination swells, spreads, and deepens, until it
becomes geographic and encircles england.

so frieda mosebach, now frau architect liesecke, and
mother to her husband's baby, was brought up to these
heights to be impressed, and, after a prolonged gaze, she
said that the hills were more swelling here than in
pomerania, which was true, but did not seem to mrs. munt
apposite.  poole harbour was dry, which led her to praise
the absence of muddy foreshore at friedrich wilhelms bad,
rugen, where beech-trees hang over the tideless baltic, and
cows may contemplate the brine.  rather unhealthy mrs. munt
thought 