scene:
rousillon; paris; florence; marseilles


act i. scene 1.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter bertram, the countess of rousillon, helena, and lafeu, all
in black

  countess. in delivering my son from me, i bury a second
husband.
  bertram. and i in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death
anew;
    but i must attend his majesty's command, to whom i am now in
    ward, evermore in subjection.
  lafeu. you shall find of the king a husband, madam; you, sir, a
    father. he that so generally is at all times good must of
    necessity hold his virtue to you, whose worthiness would stir
it
    up where it wanted, rather than lack it where there is such
    
 
 ___________________________
 
abundance.
  countess. what hope is there of his majesty's amendment?
  lafeu. he hath abandon'd his physicians, madam; under whose
    practices he hath persecuted time with hope, and finds no
other
    advantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time.
  countess. this young gentlewoman had a father- o, that 'had,'
how
    sad a passage 'tis!-whose skill was almost as great as his
    honesty; had it stretch'd so far, would have made nature
    immortal, and death should have play for lack of work. would,
for
    the king's sake, he were living! i think it would be the
death of
    the king's disease.
  lafeu. how call'd you the man you speak of, madam?
  countess. he was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was his
    great right to be so
 
 ___________________________
 
- gerard de narbon.
  lafeu. he was excellent indeed, madam; the king very lately
spoke
    of him admiringly and mourningly; he was skilful enough to
have
    liv'd still, if knowledge could be set up against mortality.
  bertram. what is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
  lafeu. a fistula, my lord.
  bertram. i heard not of it before.
  lafeu. i would it were not notorious. was this gentlewoman the
    daughter of gerard de narbon?
  countess. his sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
    overlooking. i have those hopes of her good that her
education
    promises; her dispositions she inherits, which makes fair
gifts
    fairer; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities,
    there commendations go with pity-they are virtues and
traitors
    too. in her they are the better for their simpleness; she
derives
    her honesty, and achieves her goodness.
  lafeu. your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
countess. 'tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise
in.
    the remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but
the
    tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek.
no
    more of this, helena; go to, no more, lest it be rather
thought
    you affect a sorrow than to have-
  helena. i do affect a sorrow indeed, but i have it too.
  lafeu. moderate lamentation is the right of the dead: excessive
    grief the enemy to the living.
  countess. if the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes
it
    soon mortal.
  bertram. madam, i desire your holy wishes.
  lafeu. how understand we that?
  countess. be thou blest, bertram, and succeed thy father
    in manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue
    contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
    share with thy birthright! love all, trust a few,
    do wrong to none; be able for thine enemy
    rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
    under thy own life's ke
 
 ___________________________
 
y; be check'd for silence,
    but never tax'd for speech. what heaven more will,
    that thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,
    fall on thy head! farewell. my lord,
    'tis an unseason'd courtier; good my lord,
    advise him.
  lafeu. he cannot want the best
    that shall attend his love.
  countess. heaven bless him! farewell, bertram.            exit
  bertram. the best wishes that can be forg'd in your thoughts be
    servants to you!  [to helena]  be comfortable to my mother,
your
    mistress, and make much of her.
  lafeu. farewell, pretty lady; you must hold the credit of your
    father.                             exeunt bertram and lafeu
  helena. o, were that all! i think not on my father;
    and these great tears grace his remembrance more
    than those i shed for hi
 
 ___________________________
 
i know't. how long is't, count,
    since the physician at your father's died?
    he was much fam'd.
  bertram. some six months since, my lord.
  king. if he were living, i would try him yet-
    lend me an arm-the rest have worn me out
    with several applications. nature and sickness
    debate it at their leisure. welcome, count;
    my son's no dearer.
  bertram. thank your majesty.                 exeunt [flourish]




act i. scene 3.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess, steward, and clown

  countess. i will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?
  steward. madam, the care i have had to even your content i wish
    might be found in the calendar of my past endeavours; for
then we
    wound our modesty, and make foul the clearness of our
deservings,
    when of ourselves we publish them.
  countess. what does this knave here? get you gone, sirrah. the
    complaints i have heard of you i do not all believe; 'tis my
    slowness that i do not, f
 
 ___________________________
 
or i know you lack not folly to
commit
    them and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours.
  clown. 'tis not unknown to you, madam, i am a poor fellow.
  countess. well, sir.
  clown. no, madam, 'tis not so well that i am poor, though many
of
    the rich are damn'd; but if i may have your ladyship's good
will
    to go to the world, isbel the woman and i will do as we may.
  countess. wilt thou needs be a beggar?
  clown. i do beg your good will in this case.
  countess. in what case?
  clown. in isbel's case and mine own. service is no heritage;
and i
    think i shall never have the blessing of god till i have
issue o'
    my body; for they say bames are blessings.
  countess. tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
  clown. my poor body, madam, requires it. i am driven on by the
    flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.
  countess. is this all your worship's reason?
  clown. faith, madam, i have other holy reasons, such as they
are.
 
 ___________________________
 

  countess. may the world know them?
  clown. i have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and all
flesh
    and blood are; and, indeed, i do marry that i may repent.
  countess. thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
  clown. i am out o' friends, madam, and i hope to have friends
for
    my wife's sake.
  countess. such friends are thine enemies, knave.
  clown. y'are shallow, madam-in great friends; for the knaves
come
    to do that for me which i am aweary of. he that ears my land
    spares my team, and gives me leave to in the crop. if i be
his
    cuckold, he's my drudge. he that comforts my wife is the
    cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh
and
    blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my flesh and
blood
    is my friend; ergo, he that kisses my wife is 
 
 ___________________________
 
my friend. if
men
    could be contented to be what they are, there were no fear in
    marriage; for young charbon the puritan and old poysam the
    papist, howsome'er their hearts are sever'd in religion,
their
    heads are both one; they may jowl horns together like any
deer
    i' th' herd.
  countess. wilt thou ever be a foul-mouth'd and calumnious
knave?
  clown. a prophet i, madam; and i speak the truth the next way:

              for i the ballad will repeat,
                which men full true shall find:
              your marriage comes by destiny,
                your cuckoo sings by kind.

  countess. get you gone, sir; i'll talk with you more anon.
  steward. may it please you, madam, that he bid helen come to
you.
    of her i am to speak.
  countess. sirrah, tell my
 
 ___________________________
 
.  [sings]

               'was this fair face the cause' quoth she
                 'why the grecians sacked troy?
               fond done, done fond,
                 was this king priam's joy?'
               with that she sighed as she stood,
               with that she sighed as she stood,
                 and gave this sentence then:
               'among nine bad if one be good,
               among nine bad if one be good,
                 there's yet one good in ten.'

  countess. what, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.
  clown. one good woman in ten, madam, which is a purifying o'
th'
    song. would god would serve the world so all the year! we'd
find
    no fault with the tithe-woman, if i were the parson. one in
ten,
    quoth 'a! an we might have a good woman born before every
blazing
    star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery well: a
man
    may draw his heart out ere 'a pluck one.
  countess. you'll be gone, sir knave, and do
 
 ___________________________
 
 as i command you.
  clown. that man should be at woman's command, and yet no hurt
done!
    though honesty be no puritan, yet it will do no hurt; it will
    wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big
heart.
    i am going, forsooth. the business is for helen to come
hither.
 exit
  countess. well, now.
  steward. i know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.
  countess. faith i do. her father bequeath'd her to me; and she
    herself, without other advantage, may lawfully make title to
as
    much love as she finds. there is more owing her than is paid;
and
    more shall be paid her than she'll demand.
  steward. madam, i was very late more near her than i think she
    wish'd me. alone she was, and did communicate to herself her
own
    words to her own ears; she thought, i dare vow for her, they
    touch'd not any stranger sense. her matter was,
 
 ___________________________
 
betwixt their two estates; love no god, that would
not
    extend his might only where qualities were level; diana no
queen
    of virgins, that would suffer her poor knight surpris'd
without
    rescue in the first assault, or ransom afterward. this she
    deliver'd in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er i
heard
    virgin exclaim in; which i held my duty speedily to acquaint
you
    withal; sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns
you
    something to know it.
  countess. you have discharg'd this honestly; keep it to
yourself.
    many likelihoods inform'd me of this before, which hung so
    tott'ring in the balance that i could neither believe nor
    misdoubt. pray you leave me. stall this in your bosom; and i
    thank you for your honest care. i will speak with you further
    anon.                                           exit steward

                            enter helena

    even so it was with me when i was young.
    if ever we are nat
 
 ___________________________
 
ure's, these are ours; this thorn
    doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
    our blood to us, this to our blood is born.
    it is the show and seal of nature's truth,
    where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth.
    by our remembrances of days foregone,
    such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
    her eye is sick on't; i observe her now.
  helena. what is your pleasure, madam?
  countess. you know, helen,
    i am a mother to you.
  helena. mine honourable mistress.
  countess. nay, a mother.
    why not a mother? when i said 'a mother,'
    methought you saw a serpent. what's in 'mother'
    that you start at it? i say i am your mother,
    and put you in the catalogue of those
    that were enwombed mine. 'tis often seen
    adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
    a native slip to us from foreign seeds.
    you ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
 
 ___________________________
 

    yet i express to you a mother's care.
    god's mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
    to say i am thy mother? what's the matter,
    that this distempered messenger of wet,
    the many-colour'd iris, rounds thine eye?
    why, that you are my daughter?
  helena. that i am not.
  countess. i say i am your mother.
  helena. pardon, madam.
    the count rousillon cannot be my brother:
    i am from humble, he from honoured name;
    no note upon my parents, his all noble.
    my master, my dear lord he is; and i
    his servant live, and will his vassal die.
    he must not be my brother.
  countess. nor i your mother?
  helena. you are my mother, madam; would you were-
    so that my lord your son were not my brother-
    indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
 
 ___________________________
 

    i care no more for than i do for heaven,
    so i were not his sister. can't no other,
    but, i your daughter, he must be my brother?
  countess. yes, helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.
    god shield you mean it not! 'daughter' and 'mother'
    so strive upon your pulse. what! pale again?
    my fear hath catch'd your fondness. now i see
    the myst'ry of your loneliness, and find
    your salt tears' head. now to all sense 'tis gross
    you love my son; invention is asham'd,
    against the proclamation of thy passion,
    to say thou dost not. therefore tell me true;
    but tell me then, 'tis so; for, look, thy cheek
 
 ___________________________
 
s
    confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes
    see it so grossly shown in thy behaviours
    that in their kind they speak it; only sin
    and hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
    that truth should be suspected. speak, is't so?
    if it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
    if it be not, forswear't; howe'er, i charge thee,
    as heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
    to tell me truly.
  helena. good madam, pardon me.
  countess. do you love my son?
  helena. your pardon, noble mistress.
  countess. love you my son?
  helena. do not you love him, madam?
  countess. go not about; my love hath in't a bond
    whereof the world takes note. come, come, disclose
    the state of your affection; for your passions
    have to the full appeach'd.
  helena. then i confess,
    here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
    that before you, and next unto high heaven,
    i love your son.
    my friends were poor, b
 
 ___________________________
 
dam,
    let not your hate encounter with my love,
    for loving where you do; but if yourself,
    whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
    did ever in so true a flame of liking
    wish chastely and love dearly that your dian
    was both herself and love; o, then, give pity
    to her whose state is such that cannot choose
    but lend and give where she is sure to lose;
    that seeks not to find that her search implies,
    but, riddle-like, lives sweetly where she dies!
  countess. had you not lately an intent-speak truly-
    to go to paris?
  helena. madam, i had.
  countess. wherefore? tell true.
  helena. i will tell truth; by grace itself i swear.
    you know my father left me some prescriptions
    of rare and prov'd effects, such as his reading
    and manifest experience had collected
    for general sovereignty; and that he will'd me
    in heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
    as notes whose faculties inclusive were
    more than they were in 
 
 ___________________________
 
note. amongst the rest
    there is a remedy, approv'd, set down,
    to cure the desperate languishings whereof
    the king is render'd lost.
  countess. this was your motive
    for paris, was it? speak.
  helena. my lord your son made me to think of this,
    else paris, and the medicine, and the king,
    had from the conversation of my thoughts
    haply been absent then.
  countess. but think you, helen,
    if you should tender your supposed aid,
    he would receive it? he and his physicians
    are of a mind: he, that they cannot help him;
    they, that they cannot help. how shall they credit
    a poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
    embowell'd of their doctrine, have let off
    the danger to itself?
  helena. there's something in't
    more than my father's skill, which was the great'st
    of his profession, that his good receipt
    shall for m
 
 ___________________________
 
y legacy be sanctified
    by th' luckiest stars in heaven; and, would your honour
    but give me leave to try success, i'd venture
    the well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure.
    by such a day and hour.
  countess. dost thou believe't?
  helena. ay, madam, knowingly.
  countess. why, helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
    means and attendants, and my loving greetings
    to those of mine in court. i'll stay at home,
    and pray god's blessing into thy attempt.
    be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this,
    what i can help thee to thou shalt not miss.          exeunt



<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon un
 
 ___________________________
 
n time, for i,
    thy resolv'd patient, on thee still rely.
    more should i question thee, and more i must,
    though more to know could not be more to trust,
    from whence thou cam'st, how tended on. but rest
    unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest.
    give me some help here, ho! if thou proceed
    as high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
                                              [flourish. exeunt]




act ii. scene 2.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess and clown

  countess. come on, sir; i shall now put you to the height of
your
    breeding.
  clown. i will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. i know
my
    business is but to the court.
  countess. to the court! why, what place make you special, when
you
    put off that with such contempt? but to the court!
  clown. truly, madam, if god have lent a man any manners, he may
    easily put it off at court. he that cannot make a leg, put
off's
    cap, kiss his hand, and say 
 
 ___________________________
 
nothing, has neither leg, hands,
lip,
    nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were not
for
    the court; but for me, i have an answer will serve all men.
  countess. marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
questions.
  clown. it is like a barber's chair, that fits all buttocks-the
pin
    buttock, the quatch buttock, the brawn buttock, or any
buttock.
  countess. will your answer serve fit to all questions?
  clown. as fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as
your
    french crown for your taffety punk, as tib's rush for tom's
    forefinger, as a pancake for shrove tuesday, a morris for
mayday,
    as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a
scolding
    quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the friar's
    mouth; nay, as the pudding to his skin.
  countess. have you, i, say, an answer of such fitness for all
 
 ___________________________
 

    questions?
  clown. from below your duke to beneath your constable, it will
fit
    any question.
  countess. it must be an answer of most monstrous size that must
fit
    all demands.
  clown. but a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
should
    speak truth of it. here it is, and all that belongs to't. ask
me
    if i am a courtier: it shall do you no harm to learn.
  countess. to be young again, if we could, i will be a fool in
    question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. i pray you,
sir,
    are you a courtier?
  clown. o lord, sir!-there's a simple putting off. more, more, a
    hundred of them.
  countess. sir, i am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
  clown. o lord, sir!-thick, thick; spare not me.
  countess. i think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
  clown. o lord, sir!-nay, put me to't, i warrant you.
  countess. you were lat
 
 ___________________________
 
ely whipp'd, sir, as i think.
  clown. o lord, sir!-spare not me.
  countess. do you cry 'o lord, sir!' at your whipping, and
'spare
    not me'? indeed your 'o lord, sir!' is very sequent to your
    whipping. you would answer very well to a whipping, if you
were
    but bound to't.
  clown. i ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'o lord, sir!' i
see
    thing's may serve long, but not serve ever.
  countess. i play the noble housewife with the time,
    to entertain it so merrily with a fool.
  clown. o lord, sir!-why, there't serves well again.
  countess. an end, sir! to your business: give helen this,
    and urge her to a present answer back;
    commend me to my kinsmen and my son. this is not much.
  clown. not much commendation to them?
  countess. not much employment for you. you understand me?
  clown. most fruitfully; i am there before my legs.
  countess. haste you again.      
 
 ___________________________
 
  as often as i guess'd.
  duke. be it his pleasure.
  first lord. but i am sure the younger of our nature,
    that surfeit on their ease, will day by day
    come here for physic.
  duke. welcome shall they be
    and all the honours that can fly from us
    shall on them settle. you know your places well;
    when better fall, for your avails they fell.
    to-morrow to th' field. flourish.                     exeunt




act iii. scene 2.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess and clown

  countess. it hath happen'd all as i would have had it, save
that he
    comes not along with her.
  clown. by my troth, i take my young lord to be a very
melancholy
    man.
  countess. by what observance, i pray you?
  clown. why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff
and
    sing; ask questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing. i know
a
    man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for
a
    song.
  countess. let me see what he writes
 
 ___________________________
 
, and when he means to come.
                                              [opening a letter]
  clown. i have no mind to isbel since i was at court. our old
ling
    and our isbels o' th' country are nothing like your old ling
and
    your isbels o' th' court. the brains of my cupid's knock'd
out;
    and i begin to love, as an old man loves money, with no
stomach.
  countess. what have we here?
  clown. e'en that you have there.                          exit

  countess.  [reads]  'i have sent you a daughter-in-law; she
hath
    recovered the king and undone me. i have wedded her, not
bedded
    her; and sworn to make the "not" eternal. you shall hear i am
run
    away; know it before the report come. if there be breadth
enough
    in the world, i will hold a long distance. my duty to you.
                                           your unfortunate son,
                                                       bertram.'
    this is not well, rash and u
 
 ___________________________
 
nbridled boy,
    to fly the favours of so good a king,
    to pluck his indignation on thy head
    by the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
    for the contempt of empire.

                           re-enter clown

  clown. o madam, yonder is heavy news within between two
soldiers
    and my young lady.
  countess. what is the -matter?
  clown. nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort;
your
    son will not be kill'd so soon as i thought he would.
  countess. why should he be kill'd?
  clown. so say i, madam, if he run away, as i hear he does the
    danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss of men, though
it be
    the getting of children. here they come will tell you more.
for my
    part, i only hear your son was run away.                exit

              enter helena and the two french gentlemen

  second gentleman. save you, good madam.
  helena. madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
  first gentleman. do not say so.
  count
 
 ___________________________
 
 madam, he's gone to serve the duke of
florence.
    we met him thitherward; for thence we came,
    and, after some dispatch in hand at court,
    thither we bend again.
  helena. look on this letter, madam; here's my passport.
    [reads]  'when thou canst get the ring upon my finger, which
    never shall come off, and show me a child begotten of thy
body
    that i am father to, then call me husband; but in such a
"then" i
    write a "never."
    this is a dreadful sentence.
  countess. brought you this letter, gentlemen?
  first gentleman. ay, madam;
    and for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains.
  countess. i prithee, lady, have a better cheer;
    if thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
    thou robb'st me of a moiety. he was my son;
    but i do wash his name out of my blood,
    and thou art all my child. towards florence is he?
  first gentleman. ay, madam.
  countess. and to be a soldier?
  first gentleman. such is his noble purpose; and, believ
 
 ___________________________
 
e 't,
    the duke will lay upon him all the honour
    that good convenience claims.
  countess. return you thither?
  second gentleman. ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
  helena.  [reads]  'till i have no wife, i have nothing in
france.'
    'tis bitter.
  countess. find you that there?
  helena. ay, madam.
  second gentleman. 'tis but the boldness of his hand haply,
which
    his heart was not consenting to.
  countess. nothing in france until he have no wife!
    there's nothing here that is too good for him
    but only she; and she deserves a lord
    that twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
    and call her hourly mistress. who was with him?
  second gentleman. a servant only, and a gentleman
    which i have sometime known.
  countess. parolles, was it not?
  second gentleman. ay, my good lady, he.
  countess. a very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
    my son corrupts a well-derived 
 
 ___________________________
 
nature
    with his inducement.
  second gentleman. indeed, good lady,
    the fellow has a deal of that too much
    which holds him much to have.
  countess. y'are welcome, gentlemen.
    i will entreat you, when you see my son,
    to tell him that his sword can never win
    the honour that he loses. more i'll entreat you
    written to bear along.
  first gentleman. we serve you, madam,
    in that and all your worthiest affairs.
  countess. not so, but as we change our courtesies.
    will you draw near?            exeunt countess and gentlemen
  helena. 'till i have no wife, i have nothing in france.'
    nothing in france until he has no wife!
    thou shalt have none, rousillon, none in france
    then hast thou all again. poor lord! is't i
    that chase thee from thy country, and expose
    those tender limbs of thine to the event
    of the non-sparing war? and is it i
    that drive thee from the sportive court, w
 
 ___________________________
 
  a charge too heavy for my strength; but yet
    we'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
    to th' extreme edge of hazard.
  duke. then go thou forth;
    and fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
    as thy auspicious mistress!
  bertram. this very day,
    great mars, i put myself into thy file;
    make me but like my thoughts, and i shall prove
    a lover of thy drum, hater of love.                   exeunt




act iii. scene 4.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess and steward

  countess. alas! and would you take the letter of her?
    might you not know she would do as she has done
    by sending me a letter? read it again.
  steward.  [reads]  'i am saint jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.
    ambitious love hath so in me offended
    that barefoot plod i the cold ground upon,
    with sainted vow my faults to have amended.
    write, write, that from the bloody course of war
    my dearest master, your dear son, may hie.
    bless him at home i
 
 ___________________________
 
n peace, whilst i from far
    his name with zealous fervour sanctify.
    his taken labours bid him me forgive;
    i, his despiteful juno, sent him forth
    from courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
    where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.
    he is too good and fair for death and me;
    whom i myself embrace to set him free.'
  countess. ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
    rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much
    as letting her pass so; had i spoke with her,
    i could have well diverted her intents,
    which thus she hath prevented.
  steward. pardon me, madam;
    if i had given you this at over-night,
    she might have been o'er ta'en; and yet she writes
    pursuit would be but vain.
  countess. what angel shall
    bless this unworthy husband? he cannot thrive,
    unless her prayers, w
 
 ___________________________
 
nesty
    go with your impositions, i am yours
    upon your will to suffer.
  helena. yet, i pray you:
    but with the word the time will bring on summer,
    when briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
    and be as sweet as sharp. we must away;
    our waggon is prepar'd, and time revives us.
    all's well that ends well. still the fine's the crown.
    whate'er the course, the end is the renown.           exeunt




act iv scene 5.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess, lafeu, and clown

  lafeu. no, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta
fellow
    there, whose villainous saffron would have made all the
unbak'd
    and doughy youth of a nation in his colour. your
daughter-in-law
    had been alive at this hour, and your son here at home, more
    advanc'd by the king than by that red-tail'd humble-bee i
speak
    of.
  countess. i would i had not known him. it was the death of the
most
    virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had pra
 
 ___________________________
 
any will be too chill and tender: and they'll be for the
    flow'ry way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
  lafeu. go thy ways, i begin to be aweary of thee; and i tell
thee
    so before, because i would not fall out with thee. go thy
ways;
    let my horses be well look'd to, without any tricks.
  clown. if i put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be jades'
    tricks, which are their own right by the law of nature.
 exit
  lafeu. a shrewd knave, and an unhappy.
  countess. so 'a is. my lord that's gone made himself much
sport
    out of him. by his authority he remains here, which he thinks
is
    a patent for his sauciness; and indeed he has no pace, but
runs
    where he will.
  lafeu. i like him well; 'tis not amiss. and i was about to tell
    you, since i heard of the good lady's death, and that my lord
    your son was upon his return home, i moved the king my master
to
    speak in the behalf of my daughter; which, in the minority of
    them 
 
 ___________________________
 
both, his majesty out of a self-gracious remembrance did
    first propose. his highness hath promis'd me to do it; and,
to
    stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against your son,
there
    is no fitter matter. how does your ladyship like it?
  countess. with very much content, my lord; and i wish it
happily
    effected.
  lafeu. his highness comes post from marseilles, of as able body
as
    when he number'd thirty; 'a will be here to-morrow, or i am
    deceiv'd by him that in such intelligence hath seldom fail'd.
  countess. it rejoices me that i hope i shall see him ere i die.
    i have letters that my son will be here to-night. i shall
beseech
    your lordship to remain with me till they meet together.
  lafeu. madam, i was 
 
 ___________________________
 
thinking with what manners i might safely
be
    admitted.
  countess. you need but plead your honourable privilege.
  lafeu. lady, of that i have made a bold charter; but, i thank
my
    god, it holds yet.

                         re-enter clown

  clown. o madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of
velvet
    on's face; whether there be a scar under 't or no, the velvet
    knows; but 'tis a goodly patch of velvet. his left cheek is a
    cheek of two pile and a half, but his right cheek is worn
bare.
  lafeu. a scar nobly got, or a noble sc
 
 ___________________________
 
, knave! dost thou put upon me at once both
the
    office of god and the devil? one brings the in grace, and the
    other brings thee out.    [trumpets sound]  the king's
coming; i
    know by his trumpets. sirrah, inquire further after me; i had
    talk of you last night. though you are a fool and a knave,
you
    shall eat. go to; follow.
  parolles. i praise god for you.                         exeunt




act v scene 3.
rousillon. the count's palace

flourish. enter king, countess, lafeu, the two french lords, with
attendants

  king. we lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
    was made much poorer by it; but your son,
    as mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know
    her estimation home.
  countess. 'tis past, my liege;
    and i beseech your majesty to make it
    natural rebellion, done i' th' blaze of youth,
    when oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
    o'erbears it and burns on.
  king. my honour'd lady,
    i have forgiven and forgotten all;
 
 ___________________________
 
ivial price of serious things we have,
    not knowing them until we know their grave.
    oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
    destroy our friends, and after weep their dust;
    our own love waking cries to see what's done,
    while shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
    be this sweet helen's knell. and now forget her.
    send forth your amorous token for fair maudlin.
    the main consents are had; and here we'll stay
    to see our widower's second marriage-day.
  countess. which better than the first, o dear heaven, bless!
    or, ere they meet, in me, o nature, cesse!
  lafeu. come on, my son, in whom my house's name
    must be digested; give a favour from you,
    to sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
    that she may quickly come.
                                          [bertram gives a ring]
    by my old beard,
    and ev'ry hair that's on 't, helen, that's dead,
    was a sweet creature; such a ring as this,
    the last that e'er i took h
 
 ___________________________
 
 i saw upon her finger.
  bertram. hers it was not.
  king. now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye,
    while i was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't.
    this ring was mine; and when i gave it helen
    i bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
    necessitied to help, that by this token
    i would relieve her. had you that craft to reave her
    of what should stead her most?
  bertram. my gracious sovereign,
    howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
    the ring was never hers.
  countess. son, on my life,
    i have seen her wear it; and she reckon'd it
    at her life's rate.
  lafeu. i am sure i saw her wear it.
  bertram. you are deceiv'd, my lord; she never saw it.
    in florence was it from a casement thrown me,
    wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
    of her that threw it. noble she was, and thought
    i stood engag'd; but when i had subscrib'd
    to mine own fortune, and inform'd her fully
    i could not answer in that course of honour
    as s
 
 ___________________________
 
educer flourishes, and a
poor
    maid is undone.
                                                diana capilet.'
  lafeu. i will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for this.
    i'll none of him.
  king. the heavens have thought well on thee, lafeu,
    to bring forth this discov'ry. seek these suitors.
    go speedily, and bring again the count.
                                               exeunt attendants
    i am afeard the life of helen, lady,
    was foully snatch'd.
  countess. now, justice on the doers!

                       enter bertram, guarded

  king. i wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you.
    and that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
    yet you desire to marry.
                                           enter widow and diana
    what woman's that?
  diana. i am, my lord, a wretched florentine,
    derived from the ancient capilet.
    my suit, as i do understand, you know,
    and therefore know how far i may be pitied.
  widow.
 
 ___________________________
 
. good my lord,
    ask him upon his oath if he does think
    he had not my virginity.
  king. what say'st thou to her?
  bertram. she's impudent, my lord,
    and was a common gamester to the camp.
  diana. he does me wrong, my lord; if i were so
    he might have bought me at a common price.
    do not believe him. o, behold this ring,
    whose high respect and rich validity
    did lack a parallel; yet, for all that,
    he gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
    if i be one.
  countess. he blushes, and 'tis it.
    of six preceding ancestors, that gem
    conferr'd by testament to th' sequent issue,
    hath it been ow'd and worn. this is his wife:
    that ring's a thousand proofs.
  king. methought you said
    you saw one here in court could witness it.
  diana. i did, my lord, but loath am to produce
    so bad an instrument; his name's parolles.
  lafeu. i saw the man to-day, if man he be.
  king. find him, and bring him hither.        exit an attendant
  bert