, count,
    since the physician at your father's died?
    he was much fam'd.
  bertram. some six months since, my lord.
  king. if he were living, i would try him yet-
    lend me an arm-the rest have worn me out
    with several applications. nature and sickness
    debate it at their leisure. welcome, count;
    my son's no dearer.
  bertram. thank your majesty.                 exeunt [flourish]




act i. scene 3.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess, steward, and clown

  countess. i will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?
  steward. madam, the care i have had to even your content i wish
    might be found in the calendar of my past endeavours; for
then we
    wound our modesty, and make foul the clearness of our
deservings,
    when of ourselves we publish them.
  countess. what does this knave here? get you gone, sirrah. the
    complaints i have heard of you i do not all believe; 'tis my
    slowness that i do not, for i know you lack n
 
 ___________________________
 
ot folly to
commit
    them and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours.
  clown. 'tis not unknown to you, madam, i am a poor fellow.
  countess. well, sir.
  clown. no, madam, 'tis not so well that i am poor, though many
of
    the rich are damn'd; but if i may have your ladyship's good
will
    to go to the world, isbel the woman and i will do as we may.
  countess. wilt thou needs be a beggar?
  clown. i do beg your good will in this case.
  countess. in what case?
  clown. in isbel's case and mine own. service is no heritage;
and i
    think i shall never have the blessing of god till i have
issue o'
    my body; for they say bames are blessings.
  countess. tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
  clown. my poor body, madam, requires it. i am driven on by the
    flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.
  countess. is this all your worship's reason?
  clown. faith, madam, i have other holy reasons, such as they
are.
  countess. may the wor
 
 ___________________________
 
ld know them?
  clown. i have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and all
flesh
    and blood are; and, indeed, i do marry that i may repent.
  countess. thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
  clown. i am out o' friends, madam, and i hope to have friends
for
    my wife's sake.
  countess. such friends are thine enemies, knave.
  clown. y'are shallow, madam-in great friends; for the knaves
come
    to do that for me which i am aweary of. he that ears my land
    spares my team, and gives me leave to in the crop. if i be
his
    cuckold, he's my drudge. he that comforts my wife is the
    cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh
and
    blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my flesh and
blood
    is my friend; ergo, he that kisses my wife is my friend. if
men
    could be contented to be 
 
 ___________________________
 
what they are, there were no fear in
    marriage; for young charbon the puritan and old poysam the
    papist, howsome'er their hearts are sever'd in religion,
their
    heads are both one; they may jowl horns together like any
deer
    i' th' herd.
  countess. wilt thou ever be a foul-mouth'd and calumnious
knave?
  clown. a prophet i, madam; and i speak the truth the next way:

              for i the ballad will repeat,
                which men full true shall find:
              your marriage comes by destiny,
                your cuckoo sings by kind.

  countess. get you gone, sir; i'll talk with you more anon.
  steward. may it please you, madam, that he bid helen come to
you.
    of her i am to speak.
  countess. sirrah, tell my gentlewoman i would speak with her;
helen
    i mean.
  clown.
 
 ___________________________
 
she
                 'why the grecians sacked troy?
               fond done, done fond,
                 was this king priam's joy?'
               with that she sighed as she stood,
               with that she sighed as she stood,
                 and gave this sentence then:
               'among nine bad if one be good,
               among nine bad if one be good,
                 there's yet one good in ten.'

  countess. what, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.
  clown. one good woman in ten, madam, which is a purifying o'
th'
    song. would god would serve the world so all the year! we'd
find
    no fault with the tithe-woman, if i were the parson. one in
ten,
    quoth 'a! an we might have a good woman born before every
blazing
    star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery well: a
man
    may draw his heart out ere 'a pluck one.
  countess. you'll be gone, sir knave, and do as i command you.
  clown. that man should be at woman's comm
 
 ___________________________
 
,
    thy resolv'd patient, on thee still rely.
    more should i question thee, and more i must,
    though more to know could not be more to trust,
    from whence thou cam'st, how tended on. but rest
    unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest.
    give me some help here, ho! if thou proceed
    as high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
                                              [flourish. exeunt]




act ii. scene 2.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess and clown

  countess. come on, sir; i shall now put you to the height of
your
    breeding.
  clown. i will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. i know
my
    business is but to the court.
  countess. to the court! why, what place make you special, when
you
    put off that with such contempt? but to the court!
  clown. truly, madam, if god have lent a man any manners, he may
    easily put it off at court. he that cannot make a leg, put
off's
    cap, kiss his hand, and say nothing, h
 
 ___________________________
 
as neither leg, hands,
lip,
    nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were not
for
    the court; but for me, i have an answer will serve all men.
  countess. marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
questions.
  clown. it is like a barber's chair, that fits all buttocks-the
pin
    buttock, the quatch buttock, the brawn buttock, or any
buttock.
  countess. will your answer serve fit to all questions?
  clown. as fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as
your
    french crown for your taffety punk, as tib's rush for tom's
    forefinger, as a pancake for shrove tuesday, a morris for
mayday,
    as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a
scolding
    quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the friar's
    mouth; nay, as the pudding to his skin.
  countess. have you, i, say, an answer of such fitness for all
    questions?
  clown. from below your duke to bene
 
 ___________________________
 
ath your constable, it will
fit
    any question.
  countess. it must be an answer of most monstrous size that must
fit
    all demands.
  clown. but a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
should
    speak truth of it. here it is, and all that belongs to't. ask
me
    if i am a courtier: it shall do you no harm to learn.
  countess. to be young again, if we could, i will be a fool in
    question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. i pray you,
sir,
    are you a courtier?
  clown. o lord, sir!-there's a simple putting off. more, more, a
    hundred of them.
  countess. sir, i am a poor friend of yours, that loves
 
 ___________________________
 
 you.
  clown. o lord, sir!-thick, thick; spare not me.
  countess. i think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
  clown. o lord, sir!-nay, put me to't, i warrant you.
  countess. you were lately whipp'd, sir, as i think.
  clown. o lord, sir!-spare not me.
  countess. do you cry 'o lord, sir!' at your whipping, and
'spare
    not me'? indeed your 'o lord, sir!' is very sequent to your
    whipping. you would answer very well to a whipping, if you
were
    but bound to't.
  clown. i ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'o lord, sir!' i
see
    thing's may serve long, but not serve ever.
  countess. i play the noble housewife with the time,
    to entertain it so merrily with a fool.
  clown. o lord, sir!-why, there't serves well again.
  countess. an end, sir! to your business: give helen this,
    and urge her to a present answer back;
    commend me to my kinsmen and my son. this is not much.
  clown. not much commendation to them?
  countess. not much empl
 
 ___________________________
 
oyment for you. you understand me?
  clown. most fruitfully; i am there before my legs.
  countess. haste you again.                              exeunt




act ii. scene 3.
paris. the king's palace

enter bertram, lafeu, and parolles

  lafeu. they say miracles are past; and we have our
philosophical
    persons to make modern and familiar things supernatural and
    causeless. hence is it that we make trifles of terrors,
    ensconcing ourselves into seeming knowledge when we should
submit
    ourselves to an unknown 
 
 ___________________________
 
lles. will this capriccio hold in thee, art sure?
  bertram. go with me to my chamber and advise me.
    i'll send her straight away. to-morrow
    i'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
  parolles. why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'tis
hard:
    a young man married is a man that's marr'd.
    therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.
    the king has done you wrong; but, hush, 'tis so.      exeunt




act ii. scene 4.
paris. the king's palace

enter helena and clown

  helena. my mother greets me kindly; is she well?
  clown. she is not well, but yet she has her health; she's very
    merry, but yet she is not well. but thanks be given, she's
very
    well, and wants nothing i' th' world; but yet she is not
well.
  helena. if she be very well, what does she ail that she's not
very
    well?
  clown. truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
  helena. what two things?
  clown. one, that she's not in heaven, whither god send her
quickl
 
 ___________________________
 
y!
    the other, that she's in earth, from whence god send her
quickly!

                        enter parolles

  parolles. bless you, my fortunate lady!
  helena. i hope, sir, i have your good will to have mine own
good
    fortunes.
  parolles. you had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them
on,
    have them still. o, my knave, how does my old lady?
  clown. so that you had her wrinkles and i her money, i would
she
    did as you say.
  parolles. why, i say nothing.
  clown. marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's tongue
shakes
    out his master's undoing. to say nothing, to do nothing, to
know
    nothing, and to have nothing, is to be a great part of your
    title, which is within a very little of nothing.
  parolles. away! th'art a knave.
  clown. you should have said, sir, 'before a knave th'art a
knave';
    that's 'before me th'art a knave.' this had been truth, sir.
  parolles. go to, thou art a witty fool; i have found thee.
  clown. di
 
 ___________________________
 
 i guess'd.
  duke. be it his pleasure.
  first lord. but i am sure the younger of our nature,
    that surfeit on their ease, will day by day
    come here for physic.
  duke. welcome shall they be
    and all the honours that can fly from us
    shall on them settle. you know your places well;
    when better fall, for your avails they fell.
    to-morrow to th' field. flourish.                     exeunt




act iii. scene 2.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess and clown

  countess. it hath happen'd all as i would have had it, save
that he
    comes not along with her.
  clown. by my troth, i take my young lord to be a very
melancholy
    man.
  countess. by what observance, i pray you?
  clown. why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff
and
    sing; ask questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing. i know
a
    man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for
a
    song.
  countess. let me see what he writes, and when
 
 ___________________________
 
 he means to come.
                                              [opening a letter]
  clown. i have no mind to isbel since i was at court. our old
ling
    and our isbels o' th' country are nothing like your old ling
and
    your isbels o' th' court. the brains of my cupid's knock'd
out;
    and i begin to love, as an old man loves money, with no
stomach.
  countess. what have we here?
  clown. e'en that you have there.                          exit

  countess.  [reads]  'i have sent you a daughter-in-law; she
hath
    recovered the king and undone me. i have wedded her, not
bedded
    her; and sworn to make the "not" eternal. you shall hear i am
run
    away; know it before the report come. if there be breadth
enough
    in the world, i will hold a long distance. my duty to you.
                                           your unfortunate son,
                           
 
 ___________________________
 
                            bertram.'
    this is not well, rash and unbridled boy,
    to fly the favours of so good a king,
    to pluck his indignation on thy head
    by the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
    for the contempt of empire.

                           re-enter clown

  clown. o madam, yonder is heavy news within between two
soldiers
    and my young lady.
  countess. what is the -matter?
  clown. nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort;
your
    son will not be kill'd so soon as i thought he would.
  countess. why should he be kill'd?
  clown. so say i, madam, if he run away, as i hear he does the
    danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss of men, though
it be
    the getting of children. here they come will tell you more.
for my
    part, i only hear your son was run away.                exit

              enter helena and the two french gentlemen

  s
 
 ___________________________
 
ur impositions, i am yours
    upon your will to suffer.
  helena. yet, i pray you:
    but with the word the time will bring on summer,
    when briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
    and be as sweet as sharp. we must away;
    our waggon is prepar'd, and time revives us.
    all's well that ends well. still the fine's the crown.
    whate'er the course, the end is the renown.           exeunt




act iv scene 5.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess, lafeu, and clown

  lafeu. no, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta
fellow
    there, whose villainous saffron would have made all the
unbak'd
    and doughy youth of a nation in his colour. your
daughter-in-law
    had been alive at this hour, and your son here at home, more
    advanc'd by the king than by that red-tail'd humble-bee i
speak
    of.
  countess. i would i had not known him. it was the death of the
most
    virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for
creating.
 
 ___________________________
 
 if
    she had partaken of my flesh, and cost me the dearest groans
of a
    mother, i could not have owed her a more rooted love.
  lafeu. 'twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady. we may pick a
thousand
    sallets ere we light on such another herb.
  clown. indeed, sir, she was the sweet-marjoram of the sallet,
or,
    rather, the herb of grace.
  lafeu. they are not sallet-herbs, you knave; they are
nose-herbs.
  clown. i am no great nebuchadnezzar, sir; i have not much skill
in
    grass.
  lafeu. whether dost thou profess thyself-a knave or a fool?
  clown. a fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a
man's.
  lafeu. your distinction?
  clown. i would cozen the man of his wife, and do his service.
  lafeu. so you were a knave at his service, indeed.
  clown. and i would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her
service.
  lafeu. i will subscribe for thee; thou art both knave and fool.
  clo
 
 ___________________________
 
wn. at your service.
  lafeu. no, no, no.
  clown. why, sir, if i cannot serve you, i can serve as great a
    prince as you are.
  lafeu. who's that? a frenchman?
  clown. faith, sir, 'a has an english name; but his fisnomy is
more
    hotter in france than there.
  lafeu. what prince is that?
  clown. the black prince, sir; alias, the prince of darkness;
alias,
    the devil.
  lafeu. hold thee, there's my purse. i give thee not this to
suggest
    thee from thy master thou talk'st of; serve him still.
  clown. i am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great
fire;
    and the master i speak of ever keeps a good fire. but, sure,
he
    is the prince of the world; let his nobility remain in's
court. i
    am for the house with the narrow gate, which i take to be too
    li
 
 ___________________________
 
ttle for pomp to enter. some that humble themselves may;
but
    the many will be too chill and tender: and they'll be for the
    flow'ry way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
  lafeu. go thy ways, i begin to be aweary of thee; and i tell
thee
    so before, because i would not fall out with thee. go thy
ways;
    let my horses be well look'd to, without any tricks.
  clown. if i put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be jades'
    tricks, which are their own right by the law of nature.
 exit
  lafeu. a shrewd knave, and an unhappy.
  countess. so 'a is. my lord that's gone made himself much
sport
    out of him. by his authority he remains here, which he thinks
is
    a patent for his sauciness; and indeed he has no pace, but
runs
    where he will.
  lafeu. i like him well; 'tis not amiss. and i was about to tell
    you, since i heard of the good 
 
 ___________________________
 
gence hath seldom fail'd.
  countess. it rejoices me that i hope i shall see him ere i die.
    i have letters that my son will be here to-night. i shall
beseech
    your lordship to remain with me till they meet together.
  lafeu. madam, i was thinking with what manners i might safely
be
    admitted.
  countess. you need but plead your honourable privilege.
  lafeu. lady, of that i have made a bold charter; but, i thank
my
    god, it holds yet.

                         re-enter clown

  clown. o madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of
velvet
    on's face; whether there be a scar under 't or no, the velvet
    knows; but 'tis a goodly patch of velvet. his left cheek is a
    cheek of two pile and a half, but his right cheek is worn
bare.
  lafeu. a scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good liv'ry of
    honour; so belike is that.
  clown. but it is your carbonado'd face.
  lafeu. let us go see your son, i pray you;
    i long to talk with the young nob
 
 ___________________________
 
le soldier.
  clown. faith, there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine hats,
and
    most courteous feathers, which bow the head and nod at every
man.
                                                          exeunt



<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copie
 
 ___________________________
 
er to his gracious hand;
    which i presume shall render you no blame,
    but rather make you thank your pains for it.
    i will come after you with what good speed
    our means will make us means.
  gentleman. this i'll do for you.
  helena. and you shall find yourself to be well thank'd,
    whate'er falls more. we must to horse again;
    go, go, provide.                                      exeunt




act v scene 2.
rousillon. the inner court of the count's palace

enter clown and parolles

  parolles. good monsieur lavache, give my lord lafeu this
letter. i
    have ere now, sir, been better known to you, when i have held
    familiarity with fresher clothes; but i am now, sir, muddied
in
    fortune's mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong
    displeasure.
  clown. truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it
smell
    so strongly as thou speak'st of. i will henceforth eat no
fish
    of fortune's butt'ring. prithee, allow the wind.
  pa
 
 ___________________________
 
rolles. nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir; i spake but
by
    a metaphor.
  clown. indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, i will stop my
nose; or
    against any man's metaphor. prithee, get thee further.
  parolles. pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
  clown. foh! prithee stand away. a paper from fortune's
close-stool
    to give to a nobleman! look here he comes himself.

                           enter lafeu

    here is a pur of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's cat, but not
    a musk-cat, that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond of her
    displeasure, and, as he says, is muddied withal. pray you,
sir,
    use the carp as you may; for he looks like a poor, decayed,
    ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. i do pity his distress
    