 sense, and do suppose
    what hath been cannot be. who ever strove
    to show her merit that did miss her love?
    the king's disease-my project may deceive me,
    but my intents are fix'd, and will not leave me.        exit




act i. scene 2.
paris. the king's palace

flourish of cornets. enter the king of france, with letters,
and divers attendants

  king. the florentines and senoys are by th' ears;
    have fought with equal fortune, and continue
    a braving war.
  first lord. so 'tis reported, sir.
  king. nay, 'tis most credible. we here receive it,
    a certainty, vouch'd from our cousin austria,
    with caution, that the florentine will move us
    for speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
    prejudicates the business, and would seem
    to have us make denial.
  first lord. his love and wisdom,
    approv'd so to your majesty, may plead
    for amplest credence.
  king. he hath arm'd our answer,
    and florence is denied before he comes;
    ye
 
 ___________________________
 
t, for our gentlemen that mean to see
    the tuscan service, freely have they leave
    to stand on either part.
  second lord. it well may serve
    a nursery to our gentry, who are sick
    for breathing and exploit.
  king. what's he comes here?

              enter bertram, lafeu, and parolles

  first lord. it is the count rousillon, my good lord,
    young bertram.
  king. youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
    frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
    hath well compos'd thee. thy father's moral parts
    mayst thou inherit too! welcome to paris.
  bertram. my thanks and duty are your majesty's.
  king. i would i had that corporal soundness now,
    as when thy father and myself in friendship
    first tried our soldiership. he did look far
    into the service of the time, a
 
 ___________________________
 
ervice that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act ii. scene 1.
paris. the king's palace

flourish of cornets. enter the king with divers young lords
taking leave
for the florentine war; bertram and parolles; attendants

  king. farewell, young lords; these war-like principles
    do not throw from you. and you, my lords, farewell;
    share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all,
    the gift doth stretch itself as 'tis receiv'd,
    and is enough for both.
  first lord. 'tis our hope, sir,
    after well-ent'red soldiers, to return
    and find your grace in health.
  king. no, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
    will not confess he owes the malady
    that doth my life besiege. farewell, young lords;
    whether i live or die, be you the sons
    of worthy frenchmen; let higher italy-
    those bated that inherit but the fall
    of the last monarchy-see that you come
    not to woo honour, but to wed it; when
    the bravest questant shrinks, 
 
 ___________________________
 
find what you seek,
    that fame may cry you aloud. i say farewell.
  second lord. health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
  king. those girls of italy, take heed of them;
    they say our french lack language to deny,
    if they demand; beware of being captives
    before you serve.
    both. our hearts receive your warnings.
  king. farewell.  [to attendants]  come hither to me.
                                       the king retires attended
  first lord. o my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
  parolles. 'tis not his fault, the spark.
    second lord. o, 'tis brave wars!
  parolles. most admirable! i have seen those wars.
  bertram. i am commanded here and kept a coil with
    'too young' and next year' and "tis too early.'
  parolles. an thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.
  bertram. i shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
    creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
    till honour be bought up, and no sword wo
 
 ___________________________
 
rn
    but one to dance with. by heaven, i'll steal away.
  first lord. there's honour in the theft.
  parolles. commit it, count.
  second lord. i am your accessary; and so farewell.
  bertram. i grow to you, and our parting is a tortur'd body.
  first lord. farewell, captain.
  second lord. sweet monsieur parolles!
  parolles. noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. good sparks
and
    lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment
of
    the spinii one captain spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem
of
    war, here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword
    entrench'd it. say to him i live; and observe his reports for
me.
  first lord. we shall, noble captain.
  parolles. mars dote on you for his novices!      
 
 ___________________________
 
otest i simply am a maid.
    please it your majesty, i have done already.
    the blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
    'we blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused,
    let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
    we'll ne'er come there again.'
  king. make choice and see:
    who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
  helena. now, dian, from thy altar do i fly,
    and to imperial love, that god most high,
    do my sighs stream. sir, will you hear my suit?
  first lord. and grant it.
  helena. thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
  lafeu. i had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for
my
    life.
  helena. the honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
    before i speak, too threat'ningly replies.
    love make your fortunes twenty times above
    her that so wishes, and her humble love!
  second lord. no better, if you please.
  helena. my wish receive,
    which great love grant; and so i take my leave.
  lafeu. do all they deny her? an
 
 ___________________________
 
ted or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act iii. scene 1.
florence. the duke's palace

        flourish. enter the duke of florence, attended; two
               french lords, with a troop of soldiers

  duke. so that, from point to point, now have you heard
    the fundamental reasons of this war;
    whose great decision hath much blood let forth
    and more thirsts after.
  first lord. holy seems the quarrel
    upon your grace's part; black and fearful
    on the opposer.
  duke. therefore we marvel much our cousin france
    would in so just a business shut his bosom
    against our borrowing prayers.
  second lord. good my lord,
    the reasons of our state i cannot yield,
    but like a common and an outward man
    that the great figure of a council frames
    by self-unable motion; therefore dare not
    say what i think of it, since i have found
    myself
 
 ___________________________
 
 in my incertain grounds to fail
    as often as i guess'd.
  duke. be it his pleasure.
  first lord. but i am sure the younger of our nature,
    that surfeit on their ease, will day by day
    come here for physic.
  duke. welcome shall they be
    and all the honours that can fly from us
    shall on them settle. you know your places well;
    when better fall, for your avails they fell.
    to-morrow to th' field. flourish.                     exeunt




act iii. scene 2.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess and clown

  countess. it hath happen'd all as i would h
 
 ___________________________
 
my house.
  helena. i humbly thank you.
    please it this matron and this gentle maid
    to eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
    i will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
    worthy the note.
    both. we'll take your offer kindly.                   exeunt




act iii. scene 6.
camp before florence

enter bertram, and the two french lords

  second lord. nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his
way.
  first lord. if your lordship find him not a hiding, hold me no
more
    in your respect.
  second lord. on my life, my lord, a bubble.
  bertram. do you think i am so far deceived in him?
  second lord. believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
    without any malice, but to speak of him as my kinsman, he's a
    most notable coward, an infinite and endless liar, an hourly
    promise-breaker, the owner of no one good quality worthy your
    lordship's entertainment.
  first lord. it we
 
 ___________________________
 
re fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in
his
    virtue, which he hath not, he might at some great and trusty
    business in a main danger fail you.
  bertram. i would i knew in what particular action to try him.
  first lord. none better than to let him fetch off his drum,
which
    you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
  second lord. i with a troop of florentines will suddenly
surprise
    him; such i will have whom i am sure he knows not from the
enemy.
    we will bind and hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no
other
    but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries
when
    we bring him to our own tents. be but your lordship present
at
    his examination; if he do not, for th
 
 ___________________________
 
e promise of his life
and in
    the highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
    deliver all the intelligence in his power against you, and
that
    with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my
    judgment in anything.
  first lord. o, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his
drum; he
    says he has a stratagem for't. when your lordship sees the
bottom
    of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump
of
    ore will be melted, if you give him not john drum's
    entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. here he
comes.

                      enter parolles

  second lord. o, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour
of
    his design; let him fetch off his drum in any hand.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 bertram. how now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your
    disposition.
  first lord. a pox on 't; let it go; 'tis but a drum.
  parolles. but a drum! is't but a drum? a drum so lost! there
was
    excellent command: to charge in with our horse upon our own
    wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
  first lord. that was not to be blam'd in the command of the
    service; it was a disaster of war that caesar himself could
not
    have prevented, if he had been there to command.
  bertram. well, we cannot greatly condemn our success.
    some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it is not
to
    be recovered.
  parolles. it might have been recovered.
  bertram. it might, but it is not now.
  parolles. it is to be recovered. but that the merit of service
is
    seldom attributed to
 
 ___________________________
 
success will be, my lord, but the
    attempt i vow.
  bertram. i know th' art valiant; and, to the possibility of thy
soldiership,
    will subscribe for thee. farewell.
  parolles. i love not many words.                          exit
  second lord. no more than a fish loves water. is not this a
strange
    fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems to undertake this
    business, which he knows is not to be done; damns himself to
do,
    and dares better be damn'd than to do 't.
  first lord. you do not know him, my lord, as we do. certain it
is
    that he will steal himself into a man's favour, and for a
week
    escape a great deal of discoveries; but when you find him
out,
    you have him ever after.
  bertram. why, do you think he will make no deed at all of this
that
    so seriously he does address himself unto?
  second lord. none in the world; but return with an invention,
and
    clap upon you two or three probable lies. but we have almost
    emboss'd him. 
 
 ___________________________
 
you shall see his fall to-night; for indeed he
is
    not for your lordship's respect.
  first lord. we'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case
him.
    he was first smok'd by the old lord lafeu. when his disguise
and
    he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him; which
you
    shall see this very night.
  second lord. i must go look my twigs; he shall be caught.
  bertram. your brother, he shall go along with me.
  second lord. as't please your lordship. i'll leave you.   exit
  bertram. now will i lead you to the house, and show you
    the lass i spoke of.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 first lord. but you say she's honest.
  bertram. that's all the fault. i spoke with her but once,
    and found her wondrous cold; but i sent to her,
    by this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
    tokens and letters which she did re-send;
    and this is all i have done. she's a fair creature;
    will you go see her?
  first lord. with all my heart, my lord.                 exeunt




act iii. scene 7.
florence. the widow's house

enter helena and widow

  helena. if you misdoubt me that i am not she,
    i know not how i shall assure you further
    but i shall lose the grounds i work upon.
  widow. though my estate be fall'n, i was well born,
    nothing acquainted with these businesses;
    and would not put my reputation now
    in any staining act.
  helena. nor would i wish you.
  first give me t
 
 ___________________________
 
e says all men
    have the like oaths. he had sworn to marry me
    when his wife's dead; therefore i'll lie with him
    when i am buried. since frenchmen are so braid,
    marry that will, i live and die a maid.
    only, in this disguise, i think't no sin
    to cozen him that would unjustly win.                   exit




act iv. scene 3.
the florentine camp

enter the two french lords, and two or three soldiers

  second lord. you have not given him his mother's letter?
  first lord. i have deliv'red it an hour since. there is
something
    in't that stings his nature; for on the reading it he chang'd
    almost into another man.
  second lord. he has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking
off
    so good a wife and so sweet a lady.
  first lord. especially he hath incurred the everlasting
displeasure
    of the king, who had even tun'd his bounty to sing happiness
to
    him. i will tell you a thing, but you shall let it dwell
darkly
    with you.
  sec
 
 ___________________________
 
ond lord. when you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and i am the
grave
    of it.
  first lord. he hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in
florence,
    of a most chaste renown; and this night he fleshes his will
in
    the spoil of her honour. he hath given her his monumental
ring,
    and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.
  second lord. now, god delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves,


    what things are we!
  first lord. merely our own traitors. and as in the common
course of
    all treasons we still see them reveal themselves till they
attain
    to their abhorr'd ends; so he that in this action contrives
    against his own nobility, in his proper stream, o'erflows
    himself.
  second lord. is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters of
our
    unlawful intents? we shall not then have his company
to-night?
  first lord. not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his
hour.
  second lord.
 
 ___________________________
 
 that approaches apace. i would gladly have him see
his
    company anatomiz'd, that he might take a measure of his own
    judgments, wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.
  first lord. we will not meddle with him till he come; for his
    presence must be the whip of the other.
  second lord. in the meantime, what hear you of these wars?
  first lord. i hear there is an overture of peace.
  second lord. nay, i assure you, a peace concluded.
  first lord. what will count rousillon do then? will he travel
    higher, or return again into france?
  second lord. i perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether


    of his counsel.
  first lord. let it be forbid, sir! so should i be a great deal
    of his act.
  second lord. sir, his wife, some two months since, fled from
his
    house. her pretence is a pilgrimage to saint jaques le grand;
    which holy undertaking with most austere sanctimony she
    accomplish'd; and, there resi
 
 ___________________________
 
ding, the tenderness of her
nature
    became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan of her
last
    breath, and now she sings in heaven.
  first lord. how is this justified?
  second lord. the stronger part of it by her own letters, which
    makes her story true even to the point of her death. her
death
    itself, which could not be her office to say is come, was
    faithfully confirm'd by the rector of the place.
  first lord. hath the count all this intelligence?
  second lord. ay, and the particular confirmations, point from
    point, to the full arming of the verity.
  first lord. i am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
  second lord. how mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our
    losses!
  first lord. and how mightily some other times we drown our gain
in
    tears! the great dignity that his valour hath here acquir'd
for
    him shall at home be encount'red with a shame as ample.
  se
 
 ___________________________
 
 faults whipt them
    not; and our crimes would despair if they were not cherish'd
by
    our virtues.

                      enter a messenger

    how now? where's your master?
  servant. he met the duke in the street, sir; of whom he hath
taken
    a solemn leave. his lordship will next morning for france.
the
    duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the king.
  second lord. they shall be no more than needful there, if they
were
    more than they can commend.
  first lord. they cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness.
    here's his lordship now.

                        enter bertram

    how now, my lord, is't not after midnight?
  bertram. i have to-night dispatch'd sixteen businesses, a
month's
    length apiece; by an abstract of success: i have congied with
the
    duke, done my adieu with his nearest; buried a wife, mourn'd
for
    her; writ to my lady mother i am returning; entertain'd my
    convoy; and between these main parcels of dis
 
 ___________________________
 
rogues, upon my reputation and credit, and as i hope to live.
  first soldier. shall i set down your answer so?
  parolles. do; i'll take the sacrament on 't, how and which way
you
    will.
  bertram. all's one to him. what a past-saving slave is this!
  second lord. y'are deceiv'd, my lord; this is monsieur
parolles,
    the gallant militarist-that was his own phrase-that had the
whole
    theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in
the
    chape of his dagger.
  first lord. i will never trust a man again for keeping his
sword
    clean; nor believe he can have everything in him by wearing
his
    apparel neatly.
  first soldier. well, that's set down.
  parolles. 'five or six thousand horse' i said-i will say true-
'or
    thereabouts' set down, for i'll speak truth.
  second lord. he's very near the truth in this.
  bertram. but i con him no thanks for't in the nature he
delivers it.
  parolles. 'poor rogues' i pray you say.
  first soldier. well, t
 
 ___________________________
 
 half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
    he ne'er pays after-debts, take it before.
    and say a soldier, dian, told thee this:
    men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
    for count of this, the count's a fool, i know it,
    who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
    thine, as he vow'd to thee in thine ear,
                                                   parolles.'
  bertram. he shall be whipt through the army with this rhyme
in's
    forehead.
  first lord. this is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
    linguist, and the amnipotent soldier.
  bertram. i could endure anything before but a cat, and now he's
a
    cat to me.
  first soldier. i perceive, sir, by our general's looks we shall
be
    fain to hang you.
  parolles. my life, sir, in any case! not that i am afraid to
die,
    but that, my offences being many, i would repent out the
    remainder of nature. let me live, sir, in a dungeon, i' th'
    stocks, or anywhere, so i 
 
 ___________________________
 
ut-villain'd villainy so far that the
rarity
    redeems him.
  bertram. a pox on him! he's a cat still.
  first soldier. his qualities being at this poor price, i need
not
    to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
  parolles. sir, for a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of
his
    salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut th' entail from all


    remainders and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.
  first soldier. what's his brother, the other captain dumain?
  first lord. why does he ask him of me?
  first soldier. what's he?
  parolles. e'en a crow o' th' same nest; not altogether so great
as
    the first in goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. he
    excels his brother for a coward; yet his brother is reputed
one
    of the best that is. in a retreat he outruns any lackey:
marry,
    in coming on he has the cramp.
  first soldier. if your life be saved, will you undertake to
betray
    the florentine?
  parolles. ay, and the captain of hi
 
 ___________________________
 
eneral says you that have so traitorously discover'd the


    secrets of your army, and made such pestiferous reports of
men
    very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use;
therefore
    you must die. come, headsman, off with his head.
  parolles. o lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
  first soldier. that shall you, and take your leave of all your
    friends.  [unmuffling him]  so look about you; know you any
here?
  bertram. good morrow, noble captain.
  first lord. god bless you, captain parolles.
  second lord. god save you, noble captain.
  first lord. captain, what greeting will you to my lord lafeu? i
am
    for france.
  second lord. good captain, will you give me a copy of the
sonnet
    you writ to diana in behalf of the count rousillon? an i were
not
    a very coward i'd compel it of you; but fare you well.
                                        exeunt bertram and lords
  first soldier. you are undone, captain, all but your scarf;
t