scene:
rousillon; paris; florence; marseilles


act i. scene 1.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter bertram, the countess of rousillon, helena, and lafeu, all
in black

  countess. in delivering my son from me, i bury a second
husband.
  bertram. and i in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death
anew;
    but i must attend his majesty's command, to whom i am now in
    ward, evermore in subjection.
  lafeu. you shall find of the king a husband, madam; you, sir, a
    father. he that so generally is at all times good must of
    necessity hold his virtue to you, whose worthiness would stir
it
    up where it wanted, rathe
 
 ___________________________
 
 carries virtuous qualities,
    there commendations go with pity-they are virtues and
traitors
    too. in her they are the better for their simpleness; she
derives
    her honesty, and achieves her goodness.
  lafeu. your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
  countess. 'tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise
in.
    the remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but
the
    tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek.
no
    more of this, helena; go to, no more, lest it be rather
thought
    you affect a sorrow than to have-
  helena. i do affect a sorrow indeed, but i have it too.
  lafeu. moderate lamentation is the right of the dead: excessive
    grief the enemy to the living.
  countess. if the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes
it
    soon mortal.
  bertram. madam, i desire your holy wishes.
  lafeu. how understand we that?
  countess. be thou blest, bertram, and succeed thy father
    in manners, as in sh
 
 ___________________________
 

    under thy own life's key; be check'd for silence,
    but never tax'd for speech. what heaven more will,
    that thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,
    fall on thy head! farewell. my lord,
    'tis an unseason'd courtier; good my lord,
    advise him.
  lafeu. he cannot want the best
    that shall attend his love.
  countess. heaven bless him! farewell, bertram.            exit
  bertram. the best wishes that can be forg'd in your thoughts be
    servants to you!  [to helena]  be comfortable to my mother,
your
    mistress, and make much of her.
  lafeu. farewell, pretty lady; you must hold the credit of your
    father.                             exeunt bertram and lafeu
  helena. o, were that all! i think not on my father;
    and these great tears grace his remembrance more
    than those i shed for him. what was he like?
    i have forgot him; my imagination
    carries no favour in't but bertram's.
    i am undone; there is no living, none,
    if 
 
 ___________________________
 
atrous fancy
    must sanctify his relics. who comes here?

                       enter parolles

    [aside]  one that goes with him. i love him for his sake;
    and yet i know him a notorious liar,
    think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
    yet these fix'd evils sit so fit in him
    that they take place when virtue's steely bones
    looks bleak i' th' cold wind; withal, full oft we see
    cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
  parolles. save you, fair queen!
  helena. and you, monarch!
  parolles. no.
  helena. and no.
  parolles. are you meditating on virginity?
  helena. ay. you have some stain of soldier in you; let me ask
you a
    question. man is enemy to virginity; how may we barricado it
    against him?
  parolles. keep him out.
  helena. but he assails; and our virginity, though valiant in
the
    defence, yet is weak. unfold to us some warlike resistance.
  parolles. there is none. man, setting down before you, will
    undermine you
 
 ___________________________
 
 and blow you up.
  helena. bless our poor virginity from underminers and
blowers-up!
    is there no military policy how virgins might blow up men?
  parolles. virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be
blown
    up; marry, in blowing him down again, with the breach
yourselves
     made, you lose your city. it is not politic in the
commonwealth
    of nature to preserve virginity. loss of virginity is
rational
    increase; and there was never virgin got till virginity was
first
    lost. that you we
 
 ___________________________
 
re made of is metal to make virgins.
virginity
    by being once lost may be ten times found; by being ever
kept, it
    is ever lost. 'tis too cold a companion; away with't.
  helena. i will stand for 't a little, though therefore i die a
    virgin.
  parolles. there's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the
rule
    of nature. to speak on the part of virginity is to accuse
your
    mothers; which is most infallible disobedience. he that hangs
    himself is a virgin; virginity murders itself, and should be
    buried in highways, out of all sanctified limit, as a
desperate
    offendress against nature. virginity breeds mites, much like
a
    cheese; consum
 
 ___________________________
 
es itself to the very paring, and so dies with
    feeding his own stomach. besides, virginity is peevish,
proud,
    idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in
the
    canon. keep it not; you cannot choose but lose by't. out
with't.
    within ten year it will make itself ten, which is a goodly
    increase; and the principal itself not much the worse. away
    with't.
  helena. how might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
  parolles. let me see. marry, ill to like him that ne'er it
likes.
    'tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer
kept,
    the less worth. off with't while 'tis vendible; answer the
time
    of request. virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap
out of
    fashion, richly suited but unsuitable; just like the brooch
and
    the toothpick, which wear not now. your date is better in
your
    pie and your porr
 
 ___________________________
 
idge than in your cheek. and your virginity,
    your old virginity, is like one of our french wither'd pears:
it
    looks ill, it eats drily; marry, 'tis a wither'd pear; it was
    formerly better; marry, yet 'tis a wither'd pear. will you
    anything with it?
  helena. not my virginity yet.
    there shall your master have a thousand loves,
    a mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
    a phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
    a guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
    a counsellor, a traitress, and a dear;
    his humble ambition, proud humility,
    his jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
    his faith, his sweet disaster; with a world
    of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms
    that blinking cupid gossips. now shall he-
    i know not what
 
 ___________________________
 
 he shall. god send him well!
    the court's a learning-place, and he is one-
  parolles. what one, i' faith?
  helena. that i wish well. 'tis pity-
  parolles. what's pity?
  helena. that wishing well had not a body in't
    which might be felt; that we, the poorer born,
    whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
    might with effects of them follow our friends
    and show what we alone must think, which never
    returns us thanks.

                      enter page

  page. monsieur parolles, my lord calls for you.      exit page

  parolles. little helen, farewell; if i can remember thee, i
will
    think of thee at court.
  helena. monsieur parolles,
 
 ___________________________
 
 you were born under a charitable
star.
  parolles. under mars, i.
  helena. i especially think, under mars.
  parolles. why under mars?
  helena. the wars hath so kept you under that you must needs be
born
    under mars.
  parolles. when he was predominant.
  helena. when he was retrograde, i think, rather.
  parolles. why think you so?
  helena. you go so much backward when you fight.
  parolles. that's for advantage.
  helena. so is running away, when fear proposes the safety: but
the
    composition that your valour and fear makes in you is a
virtue of
    a good wing, and i like the wear well.
  parolles. i am so full of business i cannot answer thee
acutely. i
    will return perfect courtier; in the which my instruction
shall
    serve to naturalize thee, so thou wilt be capable of a
courtier's
    counsel, and understand what advice shall thrust upon thee;
else
    thou diest in thine unthankfulnes
 
 ___________________________
 
s, and thine ignorance makes
    thee away. farewell. when thou hast leisure, say thy prayers;
    when thou hast none, remember thy friends. get thee a good
    husband and use him as he uses thee. so, farewell.
 exit
  helena. our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
    which we ascribe to heaven. the fated sky
    gives us free scope; only doth backward pull
    our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
    what power is it which mounts my love so high,
    that makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
    the mightiest space in fortune nature brings
    to join like likes, and kiss like native things.
    impossible be strange attempts to those
    that weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose
    what
 
 ___________________________
 
 loss that may happen, it concerns
you
    something to know it.
  countess. you have discharg'd this honestly; keep it to
yourself.
    many likelihoods inform'd me of this before, which hung so
    tott'ring in the balance that i could neither believe nor
    misdoubt. pray you leave me. stall this in your bosom; and i
    thank you for your honest care. i will speak with you further
    anon.                                           exit steward

                            enter helena

    even so it was with me when i was young.
    if ever we are nature's, these are ours; this thorn
    doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
    our blood to us, this to our blood is born.
    it is the show and seal of nature's truth,
    where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth.
    by our remembrances of days foregone,
    such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
    her eye is sick on't; i observe her now.
  helena. what is your pleasure, madam?
  coun
 
 ___________________________
 
tess. you know, helen,
    i am a mother to you.
  helena. mine honourable mistress.
  countess. nay, a mother.
    why not a mother? when i said 'a mother,'
    methought you saw a serpent. what's in 'mother'
    that you start at it? i say i am your mother,
    and put you in the catalogue of those
    that were enwombed mine. 'tis often seen
    adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
    a native slip to us from foreign seeds.
    you ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
    yet i express to you a mother's care.
    god's m
 
 ___________________________
 
ercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
    to say i am thy mother? what's the matter,
    that this distempered messenger of wet,
    the many-colour'd iris, rounds thine eye?
    why, that you are my daughter?
  helena. that i am not.
  countess. i say i am your mother.
  helena. pardon, madam.
    the count rousillon cannot be my brother:
    i am from humble, he from honoured name;
    no note upon my parents, his all noble.
    my master, my dear lord he is; and i
    his servant live, and will his vassal die.
    he must not be my brother.
  countess. nor i your mother?
  helena. you are my mother, madam; would you were-
    so that my lord your son were not my brother-
    indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
    i care no more for than i do 
 
 ___________________________
 
herefore tell me true;
    but tell me then, 'tis so; for, look, thy cheeks
    confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes
    see it so grossly shown in thy behaviours
    that in their kind they speak it; only sin
    and hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
    that truth should be suspected. speak, is't so?
    if it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
    if it be not, forswear't; howe'er, i charge thee,
    as heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
    to tell me truly.
  helena. good madam, pardon me.
  countess. do you love my son?
  helena. your pardon, noble mistress.
  countess. love you my son?
  helena. do not you love him, madam?
  countess. go not about; my love hath in't a bond
    whereof the world takes note. come, come, disclose
    the state of your affection; for your passions
    have to the full appeach'd.
  helena. then i confess,
    here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
    that before you, and next unto high heaven,
    i love yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u do; but if yourself,
    whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
    did ever in so true a flame of liking
    wish chastely and love dearly that your dian
    was both herself and love; o, then, give pity
    to her whose state is such that cannot choose
    but lend and give where she is sure to lose;
    that seeks not to find that her search implies,
    but, riddle-like, lives sweetly where she dies!
  countess. had you not lately an intent-speak truly-
    to go to paris?
  helena. madam, i had.
  countess. wherefore? tell true.
  helena. i will tell truth; by grace itself i swear.
    you know my father left me some prescriptions
    of rare and prov'd effects, such as his reading
    and manifest experience had collected
    for general sovereignty; and that he will'd me
    in heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
    as notes whose faculties inclusive were
    more than they were in note. amongst the rest
    there is a remedy, approv'd, set down,
    to
 
 ___________________________
 
 cure the desperate languishings whereof
    the king is render'd lost.
  countess. this was your motive
    for paris, was it? speak.
  helena. my lord your son made me to think of this,
    else paris, and the medicine, and the king,
    had from the conversation of my thoughts
    haply been absent then.
  countess. but think you, helen,
    if you should tender your supposed aid,
    he would receive it? he and his physicians
    are of a mind: he, that they cannot help him;
    they, that they cannot help. how shall they credit
    a poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
    embowell'd of their doctrine, have let off
 
 ___________________________
 

    the danger to itself?
  helena. there's something in't
    more than my father's skill, which was the great'st
    of his profession, that his good receipt
    shall for my legacy be sanctified
    by th' luckiest stars in heaven; and, would your honour
    but give me leave to try success, i'd venture
    the well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure.
    by such a day and hour.
  countess. dost thou believe't?
  helena. ay, madam, knowingly.
  countess. why, helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
    means and attendants, and my loving greetings
    to those of mine in court. i'll stay at home,
    and pray god's blessing into thy attempt.
    be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this,
    what i can help thee to thou shalt not miss.          exeunt



<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gu
 
 ___________________________
 
 me more
    than i dare blame my weakness. will you see her,
    for that is her demand, and know her business?
    that done, laugh well at me.
  king. now, good lafeu,
    bring in the admiration, that we with the
    may spend our wonder too, or take off thine
    by wond'ring how thou took'st it.
  lafeu. nay, i'll fit you,
    and not be all day neither.                       exit lafeu
  king. thus he his special nothing ever prologues.

                   re-enter lafeu with helena

  lafeu. nay, come your ways.
  king. this haste hath wings indeed.
  lafeu. nay, come your ways;
    this is his majesty; say your mind to him.
    a traitor you do look like; but such traitors
    his majesty seldom fears. i am cressid's uncle,
    that dare leave two together. fare you well.            exit
  king. now, fair one, does your business follow us?
  helena. ay, my good lord.
    gerard de narbon was my father,
    in what he did profess, well found.
  king. i knew h
 
 ___________________________
 
im.
  helena. the rather will i spare my praises towards him;
    knowing him is enough. on's bed of death
    many receipts he gave me; chiefly one,
    which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
    and of his old experience th' only darling,
    he bade me store up as a triple eye,
    safer than mine own two, more dear. i have so:
    and, hearing your high majesty is touch'd
    with that malignant cause wherein the honour
    of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
    i come to te
 
 ___________________________
 
umbleness.
  king. we thank you, maiden;
    but may not be so credulous of cure,
    when our most learned doctors leave us, and
    the congregated college have concluded
    that labouring art can never ransom nature
    from her inaidable estate-i say we must not
    so stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
    to prostitute our past-cure malady
    to empirics; or to dissever so
    our great self and our credit to esteem
    a senseless help, when help past sense we deem.
  helena. my duty then shall pay me for my pains.
    i will no more enforce mine office on you;
    humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
    a modest one to bear me back again.
  king. i cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful.
    thou thought'st to help me; and such thanks i give
    as one near death to those that wish him live.
    but what at full i know, thou know'st no part;
    i knowing all my peril, thou no art.
  helena. what i can do can do no hurt to try,
    since you
 
 ___________________________
 
n babes hath judgment shown,
    when judges have been babes. great floods have flown
    from simple sources, and great seas have dried
    when miracles have by the greatest been denied.
    oft expectation fails, and most oft there
    where most it promises; and oft it hits
    where hope is coldest, and despair most fits.
  king. i must not hear thee. fare thee well, kind maid;
    thy pains, not us'd, must by thyself be paid;
    proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
  helena. inspired merit so by breath is barr'd.
    it is not so with him that all things knows,
    as 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
    but most it is presumption in us when
    the help of heaven we count the act of men.
    dear sir, to my endeavours give consent;
    of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
    i am not an impostor, that proclaim
    myself against the level of mine aim;
    but know i think, and think i know most sure,
    my art is not past power nor you p
 
 ___________________________
 
ast cure.
  king. art thou so confident? within what space
    hop'st thou my cure?
  helena. the greatest grace lending grace.
    ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
    their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
    ere twice in murk and occidental damp
    moist hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp,
    or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
    hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
    what is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
    health shall live free, and sickness freely die.
  king. upon thy certainty and confidence
    what dar'st thou venture
 
 ___________________________
 
?
  helena. tax of impudence,
    a strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame,
    traduc'd by odious ballads; my maiden's name
    sear'd otherwise; ne worse of worst-extended
    with vilest torture let my life be ended.
  king. methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
    his powerful sound within an organ weak;
    and what impossibility would slay
    in common sense, sense saves another way.
    thy life is dear; for all that life can rate
    worth name of life in thee hath estimate:

 
 ___________________________
 
    youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
    that happiness and prime can happy call.
    thou this to hazard needs must intimate
    skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
    sweet practiser, thy physic i will try,
    that ministers thine own death if i die.
  helena. if i break time, or flinch in property
    of what i spoke, unpitied let me die;
    and well deserv'd. not helping, death's my fee;
    but, if i help, what do you promise me?
  king. make thy demand.
  helena. but will you make it even?
  king. ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.
  helena. then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
    what husband in thy power i will command.
    exempted be from me the arrogance
    to choose from forth the royal blood of france,
    my low and humble name to propagate
    with any branch or image of thy state;
    but such a one, thy vassal, whom i know
    is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
  king. here is my hand; the premises observ'd,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
s. nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the
brief
    and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinerious spirit
that
    will not acknowledge it to be the-
  lafeu. very hand of heaven.
  parolles. ay; so i say.
  lafeu. in a most weak-
  parolles. and debile minister, great power, great
transcendence;
    which should, indeed, give us a further use to be made than
alone
    the recov'ry of the king, as to be-
  lafeu. generally thankful.

                 enter king, helena, and attendants

  parolles. i would have said it; you say well. here comes the
king.
  lafeu. lustig, as the dutchman says. i'll like a maid the
better,
    whilst i have a tooth in my head. why, he's able to lead her
a
    coranto.
  parolles. mort du vinaigre! is not this helen?
  lafeu. 'fore god, i think so.
  king. go, call before me all the lords in court.
                                               exit an attendant
    sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side;
    and 
 
 ___________________________
 
with this healthful hand, whose banish'd sense
    thou has repeal'd, a second time receive
    the confirmation of my promis'd gift,
    which but attends thy naming.

                     enter three or four lords

    fair maid, send forth thine eye. this youthful parcel
    of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
    o'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
    i have to use. thy frank election make;
    thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
  helena. to each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
    fall, when love please. marry, to each but one!
  lafeu. i'd give bay curtal and his furniture
    my mouth no more were broken than these boys',
    and writ as little beard.
  king. peruse them well.
    not one of those but had a noble father.
  helena. gentlemen,
    heaven hath through me restor'd the king to health.
  all. we understand it, and thank heaven for you.
  helena. i am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
    that 
 
 ___________________________
 
i protest i simply am a maid.
    please it your majesty, i have done already.
    the blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
    'we blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused,
    let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
    we'll ne'er come there again.'
  king. make choice and see:
    who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
  helena. now, dian, from thy altar do i fly,
    and to imperial love, that god most high,
    do my sighs stream. sir, will you hear my suit?
  first lord. and grant it.
  helena. thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
  lafeu. i had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for
my
    life.
  helena. the honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
    before i speak, too threat'ningly replies.
    love make your fortunes twenty times above
    her that so wishes, and her humble love!
  sec
 
 ___________________________
 
ond lord. no better, if you please.
  helena. my wish receive,
    which great love grant; and so i take my leave.
  lafeu. do all they deny her? an they were sons of mine i'd have
    them whipt; or i would send them to th' turk to make eunuchs
of.
  helena. be not afraid that i your hand should take;
    i'll never do you wrong for your own sake.
    blessing upon your vows; and in your bed
    find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
  lafeu. these boys are boys of ice; they'll none have her.
    sure, they are bastards to the english; the french ne'er got
'em.
  helena. you are too young, too happy, and too good,
    to make yourself a son out of my blood.
  fourth lord. fair one, i think not so.
  lafeu. there's one grape yet; i am sure
 
 ___________________________
 
 thy father drunk
wine-but
    if thou be'st not an ass, i am a youth of fourteen; i have
known
    thee already.
  helena.  [to bertram]  i dare not say i take you; but i give
    me and my service, ever whilst i live,
    into your guiding power. this is the man.
  king. why, then, young bertram, take her; she's thy wife.
  bertram. my wife, my liege! i shall beseech your highness,
    in such a business give me leave to use
    the help of mine own eyes.
  king. know'st thou not, bertram,
    what she has done for me?
  bertram. yes, my good lord;
    but never hope to know why i should marry her.
  k
 
 ___________________________
 
than our fore-goers. the mere word's a slave,
    debauch'd on every tomb, on every grave
    a lying trophy; and as oft is dumb
    where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb
    of honour'd bones indeed. what should be said?
    if thou canst like this creature as a maid,
    i can create the rest. virtue and she
    is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.
  bertram. i cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't.
  king. thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
  helena. that you are well restor'd, my lord, i'm glad.
    let the rest go.
  king. my honour's at the stake; which to defeat,
    i must produce my power. here, take her hand,
    proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
    that dost in vile misprision shackle up
    my love and her desert; that canst not dream
    we, poising us in her defective scale,
    shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
    it is in us to plant thine honour where
    we please to have it grow. check 
 
 ___________________________
 
fe.
  parolles. will this capriccio hold in thee, art sure?
  bertram. go with me to my chamber and advise me.
    i'll send her straight away. to-morrow
    i'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
  parolles. why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'tis
hard:
    a young man married is a man that's marr'd.
    therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.
    the king has done you wrong; but, hush, 'tis so.      exeunt




act ii. scene 4.
paris. the king's palace

enter helena and clown

  helena. my mother greets me kindly; is she well?
  clown. she is not well, but yet she has her health; she's very
    merry, but yet she is not well. but thanks be given, she's
very
    well, and wants nothing i' th' world; but yet she is not
well.
  helena. if she be very well, what does she ail that she's not
very
    well?
  clown. truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
  helena. what two things?
  clown. one, that she's not in heaven, whither god send h
 
 ___________________________
 
er
quickly!
    the other, that she's in earth, from whence god send her
quickly!

                        enter parolles

  parolles. bless you, my fortunate lady!
  helena. i hope, sir, i have your good will to have mine own
good
    fortunes.
  parolles. you had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them
on,
    have them still. o, my knave, how does my old lady?
  clown. so that you had her wrinkles and i her money, i would
she
    did as you say.
  parolles. why, i say nothing.
  clown. marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's tongue
shakes
    out his master's undoing. to say nothing, to do nothing, to
know
    nothing, and to have nothi
 
 ___________________________
 
ease of
    laughter.
  parolles. a good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
    madam, my lord will go away to-night:
    a very serious business calls on him.
    the great prerogative and rite of love,
    which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge;
    but puts it off to a compell'd restraint;
    whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets,
    which they distil now in the curbed time,
    to make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
    and pleasure drown the brim.
  helena. what's his else?
  parolles. that you will take your instant leave o' th' king,
    and make this haste as your own good proceeding,
    strength'ned with what apology you think
    may make it probable need.
  helena. what more commands he?
  parolles. that, having this obtain'd, you presently
    attend his further pleasure.
  helena. in everything i wait upon his will.
  parolles. i shall report it so.
  helena. i pray you.                              exit parolles
    come, sir
 
 ___________________________
 
in matter of heavy consequence; i have kept of
them
    tame, and know their natures. farewell, monsieur; i have
spoken
    better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand;
but we
    must do good against evil.                              exit
  parolles. an idle lord, i swear.
  bertram. i think so.
  parolles. why, do you not know him?
  bertram. yes, i do know him well; and common speech
    gives him a worthy pass. here comes my clog.

                          enter helena

  helena. i have, sir, as i was commanded from you,
    spoke with the king, and have procur'd his leave
    for present parting; only he desires
    some private speech with you.
  bertram. i shall obey his will.
    you must not marvel, helen, at my course,
    which holds not colour with the time, nor does
    the ministration and required office
    on my particular. prepar'd i was not
    for such a business; therefore am i found
    so much unsettled. this drives me to entrea
 
 ___________________________
 
t you
    that presently you take your way for home,
    and rather muse than ask why i entreat you;
    for my respects are better than they seem,
    and my appointments have in them a need
    greater than shows itself at the first view
    to you that know them not. this to my mother.
                                               [giving a letter]
    'twill be two days ere i shall see you; so
    i leave you to your wisdom.
  helena. sir, i can nothing say
    but that i am your most obedient servant.
  bertram. come, come, no more of that.
  helena. and ever shall
    with true observance seek to eke out that
    wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd
    to equal my great fortune.
  bertram. let that go.
    my haste is very great. farewell; hie home.
  helena. pray, sir, your pardon.
  bertram. well, what would you say?
  helena. i am not worthy of the wealth i owe,
    nor dare i say 'tis mine, and y
 
 ___________________________
 
et it is;
    but, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
    what law does vouch mine own.
  bertram. what would you have?
  helena. something; and scarce so much; nothing, indeed.
    i would not tell you what i would, my lord.
    faith, yes:
    strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.
  bertram. i pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
  helena. i shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
  bertram. where are my other men, monsieur?
    farewell!                                        exit helena

    go thou toward home, where i will never come
    whilst i can shake my sword or hear the drum.
    away, and for our flight.
  parolles. bravely, coragio!                             exeunt



<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provid
 
 ___________________________
 

  countess. what is the -matter?
  clown. nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort;
your
    son will not be kill'd so soon as i thought he would.
  countess. why should he be kill'd?
  clown. so say i, madam, if he run away, as i hear he does the
    danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss of men, though
it be
    the getting of children. here they come will tell you more.
for my
    part, i only hear your son was run away.                exit

              enter helena and the two french gentlemen

  second gentleman. save you, good madam.
  helena. madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
  first gentleman. do not say so.
  countess. think upon patience. pray you, gentlemen-
    i have felt so many quirks of joy and grief
    that the first face of neither, on the start,
    can woman me unto 't. where is my son, i pray you?
  first gentleman. madam, he's gone to serve the duke of
florence.
    we met him thitherward; for thence we came,
    and, a
 
 ___________________________
 
fter some dispatch in hand at court,
    thither we bend again.
  helena. look on this letter, madam; here's my passport.
    [reads]  'when thou canst get the ring upon my finger, which
    never shall come off, and show me a child begotten of thy
body
    that i am father to, then call me husband; but in such a
"then" i
    write a "never."
    this is a dreadful sentence.
  countess. brought you this letter, gentlemen?
  first gentleman. ay, madam;
    and for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains.
  countess. i prithee, lady, have a better cheer;
 
 ___________________________
 
 engrossest all the griefs are thine,
    thou robb'st me of a moiety. he was my son;
    but i do wash his name out of my blood,
    and thou art all my child. towards florence is he?
  first gentleman. ay, madam.
  countess. and to be a soldier?
  first gentleman. such is his noble purpose; and, believe 't,
    the duke will lay upon him all the honour
    that good convenience claims.
  countess. return you thither?
  second gentleman. ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
  helena.  [reads]  'till i have no wife, i have nothing in
france.'
    'tis bitter.
  countess. find you that there?
  helena. ay, madam.
  second gentleman. 'tis but the boldness of his hand haply,
which
    his heart was not consenting to.
  countess. nothing in france until he have no wife!
    there's nothing here that is too good for him
    but only she; and she deserves a lord
    that twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
    and call her hourly mistress. who was with him?
  seco
 
 ___________________________
 

    the fellow has a deal of that too much
    which holds him much to have.
  countess. y'are welcome, gentlemen.
    i will entreat you, when you see my son,
    to tell him that his sword can never win
    the honour that he loses. more i'll entreat you
    written to bear along.
  first gentleman. we serve you, madam,
    in that and all your worthiest affairs.
  countess. not so, but as we change our courtesies.
    will you draw near?            exeunt countess and gentlemen
  helena. 'till i have no wife, i have nothing in france.'
    nothing in france until he has no wife!
    thou shalt have none, rousillon, none in france
    then hast thou all again. poor lord! is't i
    that chase thee from thy country, and expose
    those tender limbs of thine to the event
    of the non-sparing war? and is it i
    that drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
    wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
    of smoky muskets? o you leaden messengers,
    that r
 
 ___________________________
 
 go under; many
a
    maid hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, example,
that
    so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood, cannot for all
that
    dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs
that
    threatens them. i hope i need not to advise you further; but
i
    hope your own grace will keep you where you are, though there
    were no further danger known but the modesty which is so
lost.
  diana. you shall not need to fear me.

            enter helena in the dress of a pilgrim

  widow. i hope so. look, here comes a pilgrim. i know she will
lie
    at my house: thither they send one another. i'll question
her.
    god save you, pilgrim! whither are bound?
  helena. to saint jaques le grand.
    where do the palmers lodge, i do beseech you?
  widow. at the saint francis here, beside the port.
  helena. is this the way?
                                                  [a march afar]

  widow. ay, marry, is't. hark you! they come 
 
 ___________________________
 
this way.
    if you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
    but till the troops come by,
    i will conduct you where you shall be lodg'd;
    the rather for i think i know your hostess
    as ample as myself.
  helena. is it yourself?
  widow. if you shall please so, pilgrim.
  helena. i thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.
  widow. you came, i think, from france?
  helena. i did so.
  widow. here you shall see a countryman of yours
    that has done worthy service.
  helena. his name, i pray you.
  diana. the count rousillon. know you such a one?
  helena. but by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
    his face i know not.
  diana. what some'er he is,
    he's bravely taken here. he stole from france,
    as 'tis reported, for the king had married him
    against his liking. think you it is so?
  helena. ay, surely, mere the truth; i know his lady.
  diana. there is a gentleman that serves the count
    reports but coarsely of her.
  helena. what's h
 
 ___________________________
 
is name?
  diana. monsieur parolles.
  helena. o, i believe with him,
    in argument of praise, or to the worth
    of the great count himself, she is too mean
    to have her name repeated; all her deserving
    is a reserved honesty, and that
    i have not heard examin'd.
  diana. alas, poor lady!
    'tis a hard bondage to become the wife
    of a detesting lord.
  widow. i sweet, good creature, wheresoe'er she is
    her heart weighs sadly. this young maid might do her
    a shrewd turn, if she pleas'd.
  helena. how do y
 
 ___________________________
 
 may be the amorous count solicits her
    in the unlawful purpose.
  widow. he does, indeed;
    and brokes with all that can in such a suit
    corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
    but she is arm'd for him, and keeps her guard
    in honestest defence.

    enter, with drum and colours, bertram, parolles, and the
                          whole army

  mariana. the gods forbid else!
  widow. so, now they come.
    that is antonio, the duke's eldest son;
    that, escalus.
  helena. which is the frenchman?
  diana. he-
    that with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
    i would he lov'd his wife; if he were honester
    he were much goodlier. is't not a handsome gentleman?
  helena. i like him well.
  diana. 'tis pity he is not honest. yond's that same knave
    that leads him to these places; were i his lady
    i would poison that vile rascal.
  helena. which is he?
  diana. that jack-an-apes with scarfs. why is he melancholy?
  helena. perchance he's hu
 
 ___________________________
 
rt i' th' battle.
  parolles. lose our drum! well.
  mariana. he's shrewdly vex'd at something.
    look, he has spied us.
  widow. marry, hang you!
  mariana. and your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
                              exeunt bertram, parolles, and army
  widow. the troop is past. come, pilgrim, i will bring you
    where you shall host. of enjoin'd penitents
    there's four or five, to great saint jaques bound,
    already at my house.
  helena. i humbly thank you.
    please it this matron and this gentle maid
    to eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
    i will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
    worthy the note.
    both. we'll take your offer kindly.                   exeunt




act iii. scene 6.
camp before florence

enter bertram, and the two french lords

  second lord. nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his
way.
  first lord. if your
 
 ___________________________
 
w you
    the lass i spoke of.
  first lord. but you say she's honest.
  bertram. that's all the fault. i spoke with her but once,
    and found her wondrous cold; but i sent to her,
    by this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
    tokens and letters which she did re-send;
    and this is all i have done. she's a fair creature;
    will you go see her?
  first lord. with all my heart, my lord.                 exeunt




act iii. scene 7.
florence. the widow's house

enter helena and widow

  helena. if you misdoubt me that i am not she,
    i know not how i shall assure you further
    but i shall lose the grounds i work upon.
  widow. though my estate be fall'n, i was well born,
    nothing acquainted with these businesses;
    and would not put my reputation now
    in any staining act.
  helena. nor would i wish you.
  first give me trust the count he is my husband,
    and what to your sworn counsel i have spoken
    is so from word to word; and then yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u cannot,
    by the good aid that i of you shall borrow,
    err in bestowing it.
  widow. i should believe you;
    for you have show'd me that which well approves
    y'are great in fortune.
  helena. take this purse of gold,
    and let me buy your friendly help thus far,
    which i will over-pay and pay again
    when i have found it. the count he woos your daughter
    lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
    resolv'd to carry her. let her in fine consent,
    as we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
    now his important blood will nought deny
    that she'll demand. a ring the county wears
    that downward hath succeeded in his house
    from son to son some f
 
 ___________________________
 
our or five descents
    since the first father wore it. this ring he holds
    in most rich choice; yet, in his idle fire,
    to buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
    howe'er repented after.
  widow. now i see
    the bottom of your purpose.
  helena. you see it lawful then. it is no more
    but that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
    desires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
    in fine, delivers me to fill the time,
    herself most chastely absent. after this,
    to marry her, i'll add three thousand crowns
    to what is pass'd already.
  widow. i have yielded.
    instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
    that time and place with this deceit so lawful
    may prove coherent. every night he comes
    with m
 
 ___________________________
 
usics of all sorts, and songs compos'd
    to her unworthiness. it nothing steads us
    to chide him from our eaves, for he persists
    as if his life lay on 't.
  helena. why then to-night
    let us assay our plot; which, if it speed,
    is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
    and lawful meaning in a lawful act;
    where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
    but let's about it.                                   exeunt



<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and ma
 
 ___________________________
 
 drink, and sleep as soft
    as captain shall. simply the thing i am
    shall make me live. who knows himself a braggart,
    let him fear this; for it will come to pass
    that every braggart shall be found an ass.
    rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, parolles, live
    safest in shame. being fool'd, by fool'ry thrive.
    there's place and means for every man alive.
    i'll after them.                                        exit




act iv scene 4.
the widow's house

enter helena, widow, and diana

  helena. that you may well perceive i have not wrong'd you!
    one of the greatest in the christian world
    shall be my surety; fore whose throne 'tis needful,
    ere i can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
    time was i did him a desired office,
    dear almost as his life; which gratitude
    through flinty tartar's bosom would peep forth,
    and answer 'thanks.' i duly am inform'd
    his grace is at marseilles, to which place
    we have convenient convoy.
 
 ___________________________
 
 you must know
    i am supposed dead. the army breaking,
    my husband hies him home; where, heaven aiding,
    and by the leave of my good lord the king,
    we'll be before our welcome.
  widow. gentle madam,
    you never had a servant to whose trust
    your business was more welcome.
  helena. nor you, mistress,
    ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
    to recompense your love. doubt not but heaven
    hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
    as it hath fated her to be my motive
    and helper to a husband. but, o strange men!
    that can such sweet use make of what they hate,
    when saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
    defiles the pitchy night. so lust doth play
    with what it loathes, for that which is away.
    but more of this hereaft
 
 ___________________________
 
er. you, diana,
    under my poor instructions yet must suffer
    something in my behalf.
  diana. let death and honesty
    go with your impositions, i am yours
    upon your will to suffer.
  helena. yet, i pray you:
    but with the word the time will bring on summer,
    when briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
    and be as sweet as sharp. we must away;
    our waggon is prepar'd, and time revives us.
    all's well that ends well. still the fine's the crown.
    whate'er the course, the end is the renown.           exeunt




act iv scene 5.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess, lafeu, and clown

  lafeu. no, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taff
 
 ___________________________
 
hakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act v. scene 1.
marseilles. a street

enter helena, widow, and diana, with two attendants

  helena. but this exceeding posting day and night
    must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it.
    but since you have made the days and nights as one,
    to wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
    be bold you do so grow in my requital
    as nothing can unroot you.

                      enter a gentleman

    in happy time!
    this man may help me to his majesty's ear,
    if he would spend his power. god save you, sir.
  gentlem
 
 ___________________________
 
an. and you.
  helena. sir, i have seen you in the court of france.
  gentleman. i have been sometimes there.
  helena. i do presume, sir, that you are not fall'n
    from the report that goes upon your goodness;
    and therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions,
    which lay nice manners by, i put you to
    the use of your own virtues, for the which
    i shall continue thankful.
  gentleman. what's your will?
  helena. that it will please you
    to give this poor petition to the king;
    and aid me with that store of power you have
    to come into his presence.
  gentleman. the king's not here.
  helena. not here, sir?
  gentleman. not indeed.
    he hence remov'd last night, and with more haste
    than is his use.
  widow. lord, how we lose our pains!
  helena. all's well that ends well yet,
    though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
    i do beseech you, whither is he gone?
  gentlem
 
 ___________________________
 
an. marry, as i take it, to rousillon;
    whither i am going.
  helena. i do beseech you, sir,
    since you are like to see the king before me,
    commend the paper to his gracious hand;
    which i presume shall render you no blame,
    but rather make you thank your pains for it.
    i will come after you with what good speed
    our means will make us means.
  gentleman. this i'll do for you.
  helena. and you shall find yourself to be well thank'd,
    whate'er falls more. we must to horse again;
    go, go, provide.                                      exeunt




act v scene 2.
rousillon. the inner court of the count's palace

enter clown and parolles

  parolles. good monsieur lavache, give my lord lafeu this
letter. i
    have ere now, sir, been better known to you, when i have held
    familiarity with fresher clothes; but i am now, sir, muddied
in
    fortune's mood, a
 
 ___________________________
 
             exit widow
    the jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
    and he shall surety me. but for this lord
    who hath abus'd me as he knows himself,
    though yet he never harm'd me, here i quit him.
    he knows himself my bed he hath defil'd;
    and at that time he got his wife with child.
    dead though she be, she feels her young one kick;
    so there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick-
    and now behold the meaning.

                     re-enter widow with helena

  king. is there no exorcist
    beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
    is't real that i see?
  helena. no, my good lord;
    'tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
    the name and not the thing.
  bertram. both, both; o, pardon!
  helena. o, my good lord, when i was like this maid,
    i found you wondrous kind. there is your ring,
    and, look you, here's your letter. this it says:
    'when from my finger you can get this ring,
    and are by me with child,' etc. this is
 
 ___________________________
 
 done.
    will you be mine now you are doubly won?
  bertram. if she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
    i'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
  helena. if it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
    deadly divorce step between me and you!
    o my dear mother, do i see you living?
  lafeu. mine eyes smell onions; i shall weep anon. [to parolles]
    good tom drum, lend me a handkercher. so, i
    thank thee. wait on me home, i'll make sport with thee;
    let thy curtsies alone, they are scurvy ones.
  king. let us from point to point this story know,
    to make the even truth in pleasure flow.
    [to diana]  if thou beest yet a fre