be comforted, not in his sphere.
    th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
    the hind that would be mated by the lion
    must die for love. 'twas pretty, though a plague,
    to see him every hour; to sit and draw
    his arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
    in our heart's table-heart too capable
    of every line and trick of his sweet favour.
    but now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
    must sanctify his relics. who comes here?

                       enter parolles

    [aside]  one that goes with him. i love him for his sake;
    and yet i know him a notorious liar,
    think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
    yet these fix'd evils sit so fit in him
    that they take place when virtue's steely bones
    looks bleak i' th' cold wind; withal, full oft we see
    cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
  parolles. save you, fair queen!
  helena. and you, monarch!
  parolles. no.
  helena. and no.
  parolles. are you meditating on vir
 
 ___________________________
 
ginity?
  helena. ay. you have some stain of soldier in you; let me ask
you a
    question. man is enemy to virginity; how may we barricado it
    against him?
  parolles. keep him out.
  helena. but he assails; and our virginity, though valiant in
the
    defence, yet is weak. unfold to us some warlike resistance.
  parolles. there is none. man, setting down before you, will
    undermine you and blow you up.
  helena. bless our poor virginity from underminers and
blowers-up!
    is there no military policy how virgins might blow up men?
  parolles. virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be
blown
    up; marry, in blowing him down again, with the breach
yourselves
     made, you lose your city. it is not politic in the
commonwealth
    of nature to preserve virginity. loss of virginity is
ration
 
 ___________________________
 
al
    increase; and there was never virgin got till virginity was
first
    lost. that you were made of is metal to make virgins.
virginity
    by being once lost may be ten times found; by being ever
kept, it
    is ever lost. 'tis too cold a companion; away with't.
  helena. i will stand for 't a little, though therefore i die a
    virgin.
  parolles. there's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the
rule
    of nature. to speak on the part of virginity is to accuse
your
    mothers; which is most infallible disobedience. he that hangs
    himself is a virgin; virginity murders itself, and should be
    buried in highways, out of all sanctified limit, as a
desperate
    offendress against nature. virginity breeds mites, much like
a
    cheese; consumes itself to the very paring, and so dies with
    feeding his own stomach. besi
 
 ___________________________
 
des, virginity is peevish,
proud,
    idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in
the
    canon. keep it not; you cannot choose but lose by't. out
with't.
    within ten year it will make itself ten, which is a goodly
    increase; and the principal itself not much the worse. away
    with't.
  helena. how might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
  parolles. let me see. marry, ill to like him that ne'er it
likes.
    'tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer
kept,
    the less worth. off with't while 'tis vendible; answer the
time
    of request. virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap
out of
    fashion, richly suited but unsuitable; just like the brooch
and
    the toothpick, which wear not now. your date is better in
your
    pie and your porridge than in your cheek. and your virginity,
    your old virgini
 
 ___________________________
 
mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
    a phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
    a guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
    a counsellor, a traitress, and a dear;
    his humble ambition, proud humility,
    his jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
    his faith, his sweet disaster; with a world
    of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms
    that blinking cupid gossips. now shall he-
    i know not what he shall. god send him well!
    the court's a learning-place, and he is one-
  parolles. what one, i' faith?
  helena. that i wish well. 'tis pity-
  parolles. what's pity?
  helena. that wishing well had not a body in't
    which might be felt; that we, the poorer born,
    whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
    might with effects of them follow our friends
    and show what we alone must think, which never
    returns us thanks.

                      enter page

  page. monsieur parolles, my lord calls for you.      exit page

  parolles. little helen, far
 
 ___________________________
 
ewell; if i can remember thee, i
will
    think of thee at court.
  helena. monsieur parolles, you were born under a charitable
star.
  parolles. under mars, i.
  helena. i especially think, under mars.
  parolles. why under mars?
  helena. the wars hath so kept you under that you must needs be
born
    under mars.
  parolles. when he was predominant.
  helena. when he was retrograde, i think, rather.
  parolles. why think you so?
  helena. you go so much backward when you fight.
  parolles. that's for advantage.
  helena. so is running away, when fear proposes the safety: but
the
    composition that your valour and fear makes in you is a
virtue of
    a good wing, and i like the wear well.
  parolles. i am so full of business i cannot answer thee
acutely. i
    will return perfect courtier; in the which my instruction
shall
    serve to naturalize thee, so thou wilt be capable of a
court
 
 ___________________________
 
enial.
  first lord. his love and wisdom,
    approv'd so to your majesty, may plead
    for amplest credence.
  king. he hath arm'd our answer,
    and florence is denied before he comes;
    yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
    the tuscan service, freely have they leave
    to stand on either part.
  second lord. it well may serve
    a nursery to our gentry, who are sick
    for breathing and exploit.
  king. what's he comes here?

              enter bertram, lafeu, and parolles

  first lord. it is the count rousillon, my good lord,
    young bertram.
  king. youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
    frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
    hath well compos'd thee. thy father's moral parts
    mayst thou inherit too! welcome to paris.
  bertram. my thanks and duty are your majesty's.
  king. i would i had that corporal soundness now,
    as when thy father and myself in friendship
    first tried our soldiership. he did look far
    into the servic
 
 ___________________________
 
gie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act ii. scene 1.
paris. the king's palace

flourish of cornets. enter the king with divers young lords
taking leave
for the florentine war; bertram and parolles; attendants

  king. farewell, young lords; these war-like principles
    do not throw from you. and you, my lords, farewell;
    share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all,
    the gift doth stretch itself as 'tis receiv'd,
    and is enough for both.
  first lord. 'tis our hope, sir,
    after well-ent'red soldiers, to return
    and find your grace in health.
  king. no, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
    will not confess he owes the malady
    that doth my life besiege. 
 
 ___________________________
 
fame may cry you aloud. i say farewell.
  second lord. health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
  king. those girls of italy, take heed of them;
    they say our french lack language to deny,
    if they demand; beware of being captives
    before you serve.
    both. our hearts receive your warnings.
  king. farewell.  [to attendants]  come hither to me.
                                       the king retires attended
  first lord. o my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
  parolles. 'tis not his fault, the spark.
    second lord. o, 'tis brave wars!
  parolles. most admirable! i have seen those wars.
  bertram. i am commanded here and kept a coil with
    'too young' and next year' and "tis too early.'
  parolles. an thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.
  bertram. i shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
    creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
    till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
    but one to dance with. by heaven, i'll steal away.

 
 ___________________________
 
  first lord. there's honour in the theft.
  parolles. commit it, count.
  second lord. i am your accessary; and so farewell.
  bertram. i grow to you, and our parting is a tortur'd body.
  first lord. farewell, captain.
  second lord. sweet monsieur parolles!
  parolles. noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. good sparks
and
    lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment
of
    the spinii one captain spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem
of
    war, here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword
    entrench'd it. say to him i live; and observe his reports for
me.
  first lord. we shall, noble captain.
  parolles. mars dote on you for his novices!       exeunt lords
    what will ye do?

                            re-ent
 
 ___________________________
 
er the king

  bertram. stay; the king!
  parolles. use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you
have
    restrain'd yourself within the list of too cold an adieu. be
more
    expressive to them; for they wear themselves in the cap of
the
    time; there do muster true gait; eat, speak, and move, under
the
    influence of the most receiv'd star; and though the devil
lead
    the measure, such are to be followed. after them, and take a
more
    dilated farewell.
  bertram. and i will do so.
  parolles. worthy fellows; and 
 
 ___________________________
 
like to prove most sinewy
sword-men.
                                     exeunt bertram and parolles

                              enter lafeu

  lafeu.  [kneeling]  pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
  king. i'll fee thee to stand up.
  lafeu. then here's a man stands that has brought his pardon.
    i would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy;
    and that at my bidding you could so stand up.
  king. i would i had; so i had broke thy pate,
    and ask'd thee mercy for't.
  lafeu. good faith, across!
    but, my good lord, 'tis thus: will you be cur'd
    of your 
 
 ___________________________
 
why, there't serves well again.
  countess. an end, sir! to your business: give helen this,
    and urge her to a present answer back;
    commend me to my kinsmen and my son. this is not much.
  clown. not much commendation to them?
  countess. not much employment for you. you understand me?
  clown. most fruitfully; i am there before my legs.
  countess. haste you again.                              exeunt




act ii. scene 3.
paris. the king's palace

enter bertram, lafeu, and parolles

  lafeu. they say miracles are past; and we have our
philosophical
    persons to make modern and familiar things supernatural and
    causeless. hence is it that we make trifles of terrors,
    ensconcing ourselves into seeming knowledge when we should
submit
    ourselves to an unknown fear.
  parolles. why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath
shot
    out in our latter times.
  bertram. and so 'tis.
  lafeu. to be relinquish'd of the artists-
  parolles. so i say-both
 
 ___________________________
 
 of galen and paracelsus.
  lafeu. of all the learned and authentic fellows-
  parolles. right; so i say.
  lafeu. that gave him out incurable-
  parolles. why, there 'tis; so say i too.
  lafeu. not to be help'd-
  parolles. right; as 'twere a man assur'd of a-
  lafeu. uncertain life and sure death.
  parolles. just; you say well; so would i have said.
  lafeu. i may truly say it is a novelty to the world.
  parolles. it is indeed. if you will have it in showing, you
shall
    read it in what-do-ye-call't here.
  lafeu.  [reading the ballad title]  'a showing of a heavenly
    effect in an earthly actor.'
  parolles. that's it; i would have said the very same.
  lafeu. why, your dolphin is not lustier. 'fore me, i speak in
    respect-
  parolles. nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the
brief
    and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinerious spirit
that
    will not acknowledge
 
 ___________________________
 
 it to be the-
  lafeu. very hand of heaven.
  parolles. ay; so i say.
  lafeu. in a most weak-
  parolles. and debile minister, great power, great
transcendence;
    which should, indeed, give us a further use to be made than
alone
    the recov'ry of the king, as to be-
  lafeu. generally thankful.

                 enter king, helena, and attendants

  parolles. i would have said it; you say well. here comes the
king.
  lafeu. lustig, as the dutchman says. i'll like a maid the
better,
    whilst i have a tooth in my head. why, he's able to lead her
a
    coranto.
  parolles. mort du vinaigre! is not this helen?
  lafeu. 'fore god, i think so.
  king. go, call before me all the lords in court.
                                               exit an attendant
    sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side;
    and with this healthful hand, whos
 
 ___________________________
 
e; to whom i promise
    a counterpoise, if not to thy estate
    a balance more replete.
  bertram. i take her hand.
  king. good fortune and the favour of the king
    smile upon this contract; whose ceremony
    shall seem expedient on the now-born brief,
    and be perform'd to-night. the solemn feast
    shall more attend upon the coming space,
    expecting absent friends. as thou lov'st her,
    thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
              exeunt all but lafeu and parolles who stay behind,
                                      commenting of this wedding
  lafeu. do you hear, monsieur? a word with you.
  parolles. your pleasure, sir?
  lafeu. your lord and master did well to make his recantation.
  parolles. recantation! my lord! my master!
  lafeu. ay; is it not a language i speak?
  parolles. a most harsh one, and not to be understood without
bloody
    succeeding. my master!
  lafeu. are you companion to the count rousillon?
  parolles. to any count;
 
 ___________________________
 
 to all counts; to what is man.
  lafeu. to what is count's man: count's master is of another
style.
  parolles. you are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too
    old.
  lafeu. i must tell thee, sirrah, i write man; to which title
age
    cannot bring thee.
  parolles. what i dare too well do, i dare not do.
  lafeu. i did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty
wise
    fellow; thou didst make tolerable vent of thy travel; it
might
    pass. yet the scarfs and the bannerets about thee did
manifoldly
    dissuade me from believing thee a vessel of too great a
burden. i
    have now found thee; when i lose thee again i care not; yet
art
    thou good for nothing but taking up; and that thou'rt scarce
    worth.
  parolles. hadst thou not t
 
 ___________________________
 
he privilege of antiquity upon thee-
  lafeu. do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou hasten
thy
    trial; which if-lord have mercy on thee for a hen! so, my
good
    window of lattice, fare thee well; thy casement i need not
open,
    for i look through thee. give me thy hand.
  parolles. my lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
  lafeu. ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy of it.
  parolles. i have not, my lord, deserv'd it.
  lafeu. yes, good faith, ev'ry dram of it; and i will not bate
thee
    a scruple.
  parolles. well, i shall be wiser.
  lafeu. ev'n as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at a
smack
    o' th' contrary. if ever thou be'st bound in thy scarf and
    beaten, thou shalt find what it is to be proud of thy
bondage. i
    have a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or rather my
    knowledge, that i may say in the default 'he is a man i
know
 
 ___________________________
 
.'
  parolles. my lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.
  lafeu. i would it were hell pains for thy sake, and my poor
doing
    eternal; for doing i am past, as i will by thee, in what
motion
    age will give me leave.                                 exit

  parolles. well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off
me:
    scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! well, i must be patient;
there
    is no fettering of authority. i'll beat him, by my life, if i
can
    meet him with any convenience, an he were double and double a
    lord. i'll have no more pity of his age than i would have of-
    i'll beat him, and if i could but meet him again.

                         re-enter lafeu

  lafeu. sirrah, your lord and master's married; there's news fo
 
 ___________________________
 
r
    you; you have a new mistress.
  parolles. i most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make some
    reservation of your wrongs. he is my good lord: whom i serve
    above is my master.
  lafeu. who? god?
  parolles. ay, sir.
  lafeu. the devil it is that's thy master. why dost thou garter
up
    thy arms o' this fashion? dost make hose of thy sleeves? do
other
    servants so? thou wert best set thy lower part where thy nose
    stands. by mine honour, if i were but two hours younger, i'd
beat
    thee. methink'st thou art a general offence, and every man
should
    beat thee. i think thou wast created for men to breathe
    themselves upon thee.
  parolles. this is hard and undeserved measure
 
 ___________________________
 
, my lord.
  lafeu. go to, sir; you were beaten in italy for picking a
kernel
    out of a pomegranate; you are a vagabond, and no true
traveller;
    you are more saucy with lords and honourable personages than
the
    commission of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry. you
are
    not worth another word, else i'd call you knave. i leave you.
 exit

                           enter bertram

  parolles. good, very, good, it is so then. good, very good; let
it
    be conceal'd awhile.
  bertram. undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
  parolles. what's the matter, sweetheart?
  bertram. although before the solemn priest i have sworn,
    i will not bed her.
  parolles. what, what, sweetheart?
  bertram. o my parolles, they have married me!
    i'll to the tuscan wars, and never bed her.
  parolles. france is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
    the tread of a man's foot. to th' w
 
 ___________________________
 
ars!
  bertram. there's letters from my mother; what th' import is i
know
    not yet.
  parolles. ay, that would be known. to th' wars, my boy, to th'
      wars!
    he wears his honour in a box unseen
    that hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
    spending his manly marrow in her arms,
    which should sustain the bound and high curvet
    of mars's fiery steed. to other regions!
    france is a stable; we that dwell in't jades;
    therefore, to th' war!
  bertram. it shall be so; i'll send her to my house,
    acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
    and wherefore i am f
 
 ___________________________
 
led; write to the king
    that which i durst not speak. his present gift
    shall furnish me to those italian fields
    where noble fellows strike. war is no strife
    to the dark house and the detested wife.
  parolles. will this capriccio hold in thee, art sure?
  bertram. go with me to my chamber and advise me.
    i'll send her straight away. to-morrow
    i'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
  parolles. why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'tis
hard:
    a young man married is a man that's marr'd.
    therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.
    the king has done you wrong; but, hush, 'tis so.      exeunt




act ii. scene 4.
paris. the king's palace

enter helena and clown

  helena. my mother greets me kindly; is she well?
  clown. she is not well, but yet she has her health; she's very
    merry, but yet she is not well. but thanks be given, she's
very
    well,
 
 ___________________________
 
 and wants nothing i' th' world; but yet she is not
well.
  helena. if she be very well, what does she ail that she's not
very
    well?
  clown. truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
  helena. what two things?
  clown. one, that she's not in heaven, whither god send her
quickly!
    the other, that she's in earth, from whence god send her
quickly!

                        enter parolles

  parolles. bless you, my fortunate lady!
  helena. i hope, sir, i have your good will to have mine own
good
    fortunes.
  parolles. you had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them
on,
    have them still. o, my knave, how does my old lady?
  clown. so that you had her wrinkles and i her money, i would
she
    did as you say.
  parolles. why, i say nothing.
  clown. marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's tongue
shakes
    out his master's undoing. to say nothing, to do nothing,
 
 ___________________________
 
 to
know
    nothing, and to have nothing, is to be a great part of your
    title, which is within a very little of nothing.
  parolles. away! th'art a knave.
  clown. you should have said, sir, 'before a knave th'art a
knave';
    that's 'before me th'art a knave.' this had been truth, sir.
  parolles. go to, thou art a witty fool; i have found thee.
  clown. did you find me in yourself, sir, or were you taught to
find
    me? the search, sir, was profitable; and much fool may you
find
    in you, even to the world's pleasure and the increase of
    laughter.
  parolles. a good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
    madam, my lord will go away to-night:
    a very serious business calls on him.
    the great prerogative and rite of love,
    which, as your due, time claims, he does ac
 
 ___________________________
 
knowledge;
    but puts it off to a compell'd restraint;
    whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets,
    which they distil now in the curbed time,
    to make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
    and pleasure drown the brim.
  helena. what's his else?
  parolles. that you will take your instant leave o' th' king,
    and make this haste as your own good proceeding,
    strength'ned with what apology you think
    may make it probable need.
  helena. what more commands he?
  parolles. that, having this obtain'd, you presently
    attend his further pleasure.
  helena. in everything i wait upon his will.
  parolles. i shall report it so.
  helena. i pray you.                              exit parolles
    come, sirrah.                          
 
 ___________________________
 
am. and by other warranted testimony.
  lafeu. then my dial goes not true; i took this lark for a
bunting.
  bertram. i do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
knowledge,
    and accordingly valiant.
  lafeu. i have then sinn'd against his experience and
transgress'd
    against his valour; and my state that way is dangerous, since
i
    cannot yet find in my heart to repent. here he comes; i pray
you
    make us friends; i will pursue the amity

                         enter parolles

  parolles.  [to bertram]  these things shall be done, sir.
  lafeu. pray you, sir, who's his tailor?
  parolles. sir!
  lafeu. o, i know him well. ay, sir; he, sir, 's a good workman,
a
    very good tailor.
  bertram.  [aside to parolles]  is she gone to the king?
  parolles. she is.
  bertram. will she away to-night?
  parolles. as you'll have her.
  bertram. i have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
    given order for our horses; and to-night,
    when i should take poss
 
 ___________________________
 
ession of the bride,
    end ere i do begin.
  lafeu. a good traveller is something at the latter end of a
dinner;
    but one that lies three-thirds and uses a known truth to pass
a
    thousand nothings with, should be once heard and thrice
beaten.
    god save you, captain.
  bertram. is there any unkindness between my lord and you,
monsieur?
  parolles. i know not how i have deserved to run into my lord's
    displeasure.
  lafeu. you have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs and
all,
    like him that leapt into the custard; and out of it you'll
run
    again, rather than suffer question for your residence.
  bertram. it may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
  lafeu. and shall do so ever, though i took him at's prayers.
    fare you well, my lord; and believe this of me: there can be
no
    kernal in this light nut; the sou
 
 ___________________________
 
l of this man is his
clothes;
    trust him not in matter of heavy consequence; i have kept of
them
    tame, and know their natures. farewell, monsieur; i have
spoken
    better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand;
but we
    must do good against evil.                              exit
  parolles. an idle lord, i swear.
  bertram. i think so.
  parolles. why, do you not know him?
  bertram. yes, i do know him well; and common speech
    gives him a worthy pass. here comes my clog.

                          enter helena

  helena. i have, sir, as i was commanded from you,
    spoke with the king, and have procur'd his leave
    for present parting; only he desires
    some private speech with you.
  bertram. i shall obey his will.
    you must not marvel, helen, at my course,
    which holds not colour with the time, nor does
    
 
 ___________________________
 
much; nothing, indeed.
    i would not tell you what i would, my lord.
    faith, yes:
    strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.
  bertram. i pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
  helena. i shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
  bertram. where are my other men, monsieur?
    farewell!                                        exit helena

    go thou toward home, where i will never come
    whilst i can shake my sword or hear the drum.
    away, and for our flight.
  parolles. bravely, coragio!                             exeunt



<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes b
 
 ___________________________
 
find you that there?
  helena. ay, madam.
  second gentleman. 'tis but the boldness of his hand haply,
which
    his heart was not consenting to.
  countess. nothing in france until he have no wife!
    there's nothing here that is too good for him
    but only she; and she deserves a lord
    that twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
    and call her hourly mistress. who was with him?
  second gentleman. a servant only, and a gentleman
    which i have sometime known.
  countess. parolles, was it not?
  second gentleman. ay, my good lady, he.
  countess. a very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
    my son corrupts a well-derived nature
    with his inducement.
  second gentleman. indeed, good lady,
    the fellow has a deal of that too much
    which holds him much to have.
  countess. y'are welcome, gentlemen.
    i will entreat you, when you see my son,
    to tell him that his sword can never win
    the honour that he loses. more i'll entreat you
    writte
 
 ___________________________
 
s oft it loses all. i will be gone.
    my being here it is that holds thee hence.
    shall i stay here to do 't? no, no, although
    the air of paradise did fan the house,
    and angels offic'd all. i will be gone,
    that pitiful rumour may report my flight
    to consolate thine ear. come, night; end, day.
    for with the dark, poor thief, i'll steal away.         exit




act iii. scene 3.
florence. before the duke's palace

flourish. enter the duke of florence, bertram, parolles,
soldiers,
drum and trumpets

  duke. the general of our horse thou art; and we,
    great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
    upon thy promising fortune.
  bertram. sir, it is
    a charge too heavy for my strength; but yet
    we'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
    to th' extreme edge of hazard.
  duke. then go thou forth;
    and fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
    as thy auspicious mistress!
  bertram. this very day,
    great mars, i put myself i
 
 ___________________________
 
he slew the duke's brother.
[tucket]
    we have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary way. hark!
you
    may know by their trumpets.
  mariana. come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with
the
    report of it. well, diana, take heed of this french earl; the
    honour of a maid is her name, and no legacy is so rich as
    honesty.
  widow. i have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by
a
    gentleman his companion.
  mariana. i know that knave, hang him! one parolles; a filthy
    officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl. beware
of
    them, diana: their promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and
all
    these engines of lust, are not the things they go under; many
a
    maid hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, example,
that
    so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood, cannot for all
that
    dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs
that
    threatens them. i hope i need not to advise you further; b
 
 ___________________________
 
iana. the count rousillon. know you such a one?
  helena. but by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
    his face i know not.
  diana. what some'er he is,
    he's bravely taken here. he stole from france,
    as 'tis reported, for the king had married him
    against his liking. think you it is so?
  helena. ay, surely, mere the truth; i know his lady.
  diana. there is a gentleman that serves the count
    reports but coarsely of her.
  helena. what's his name?
  diana. monsieur parolles.
  helena. o, i believe with him,
    in argument of praise, or to the worth
    of the great count himself, she is too mean
    to have her name repeated; all her deserving
    is a reserved honesty, and that
    i have not heard examin'd.
  diana. alas, poor lady!
    'tis a hard bondage to become the wife
    of a detesting lord.
  widow. i sweet, good creature, wheresoe'er she is
    her heart weighs sadly. this young maid might do her
    a shrewd turn, if she pleas'd.
  helen
 
 ___________________________
 
a. how do you mean?
    may be the amorous count solicits her
    in the unlawful purpose.
  widow. he does, indeed;
    and brokes with all that can in such a suit
    corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
    but she is arm'd for him, and keeps her guard
    in honestest defence.

    enter, with drum and colours, bertram, parolles, and the
                          whole army

  mariana. the gods forbid else!
  widow. so, now they come.
    that is antonio, the duke's eldest son;
    that, escalus.
  helena. which is the frenchman?
  diana. he-
    that with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
    i would he lov'd his wife; if he were honester
    he were much goodlier. is't not a handsome gentleman?
  helena. i like him well.
  diana. 'tis pity he is not honest. yond's that same knave
    that leads him
 
 ___________________________
 
 to these places; were i his lady
    i would poison that vile rascal.
  helena. which is he?
  diana. that jack-an-apes with scarfs. why is he melancholy?
  helena. perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.
  parolles. lose our drum! well.
  mariana. he's shrewdly vex'd at something.
    look, he has spied us.
  widow. marry, hang you!
  mariana. and your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
                              exeunt bertram, parolles, and army
  widow. the troop is past. come, pilgrim, i will bring you
    where you shall host. of enjoin'd penitents
    there's four or five, to great saint jaques bound,
    already at my house.
  helena. i humbly thank you.
    please it this matron and this gentle maid
    to eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
    i will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
    worthy the note.
    both. we'll take your offer kindly.  
 
 ___________________________
 
 his power against you, and
that
    with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my
    judgment in anything.
  first lord. o, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his
drum; he
    says he has a stratagem for't. when your lordship sees the
bottom
    of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump
of
    ore will be melted, if you give him not john drum's
    entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. here he
comes.

                      enter parolles

  second lord. o, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour
of
    his design; let him fetch off his drum in any hand.
  bertram. how now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your
    disposition.
  first lord. a pox on 't; let it go; 'tis but a drum.
  parolles. but a drum! is't but a drum? a drum so lost! there
was
    excellent command: to charge in with our horse upon our own
    wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
  first lord. that was not to be blam'd in the command 
 
 ___________________________
 
of the
    service; it was a disaster of war that caesar himself could
not
    have prevented, if he had been there to command.
  bertram. well, we cannot greatly condemn our success.
    some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it is not
to
    be recovered.
  parolles. it might have been recovered.
  bertram. it might, but it is not now.
  parolles. it is to be recovered. but that the merit of service
is
    seldom attributed to the true and exact performer, i would
have
    that drum or another, or 'hic jacet.'
  bertram. why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur. if you
think
    your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour
    again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the
enterprise,
    and go on; i will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit. if
you
    speed well in it, the duke shall both speak 
 
 ___________________________
 
of it and extend
to
    you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost
    syllable of our worthiness.
  parolles. by the hand of a soldier, i will undertake it.
  bertram. but you must not now slumber in it.
  parolles. i'll about it this evening; and i will presently pen
    down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put
myself
    into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear
further
    from me.
  bertram. may i be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about
it?
  parolles. i know not what the success will be, my lord, but the
    attempt i vow.
  bertram. i know th' art valiant; and, to the possibility of thy
soldiership,
    will subscribe for thee. farewell.
  parolles
 
 ___________________________
 
tertainment. now he hath a smack of all
    neighbouring languages, therefore we must every one be a man
of
    his own fancy; not to know what we speak one to another, so
we
    seem to know, is to know straight our purpose: choughs'
language,
    gabble enough, and good enough. as for you, interpreter, you
must
    seem very politic. but couch, ho! here he comes; to beguile
two
    hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies he
forges.

                         enter parolles

  parolles. ten o'clock. within these three hours 'twill be time
    enough to go home. what shall i say i have done? it must be a
    very plausive invention that carries it. they begin to smoke
me;
    and disgraces have of late knock'd to often at my door. i
find my
    tongue is too foolhardy; but my heart hath the fear of mars
    before it, and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my
    tongue.
  second lord. this is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue
was
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 guilty of.
  parolles. what the devil should move me to undertake the
recovery
    of this drum, being not ignorant of the impossibility, and
    knowing i had no such purpose? i must give myself some hurts,
and
    say i got them in exploit. yet slight ones will not carry it.
    they will say 'came you off with so little?' and great ones i
    dare not give. wherefore, what's the instance? tongue, i must
put
    you into a butterwoman's mouth, and buy myself another of
    bajazet's mule, if you prattle 
 
 ___________________________
 
me into these perils.
  second lord. is it possible he should know what he is, and be
that
    he is?
  parolles. i would the cutting of my garments would serve the
turn,
    or the breaking of my spanish sword.
  second lord. we cannot afford you so.
  parolles. or the baring of my beard; and to say it was in
    stratagem.
  second lord. 'twould not do.
  parolles. or to drown my clothes, and say i was stripp'd.
  second lord. hardly serve.
  parolles. though i swore i leap'd from the window of the
citadel-
  second lord. how deep?
  parolles. thirty fathom.
  second lord. three great oaths would scarce make that be
believed.
  parolles. i would i had any drum of the enemy's; i would swear
i
    recover'd it.
  second lord. you shall hear one anon.          [alarum within]
  parolles. a drum now of the enemy's!
  second lord. throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
  all. cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.
  parolles
 
 ___________________________
 
. o, ransom, ransom! do not hide mine eyes.
                                            [they blindfold him]
  first soldier. boskos thromuldo boskos.
  parolles. i know you are the muskos' regiment,
    and i shall lose my life for want of language.
    if there be here german, or dane, low dutch,
    italian, or french, let him speak to me;
    i'll discover that which shall undo the florentine.
  first soldier. boskos vauvado. i understand thee, and can speak
thy
    tongue. kerely-bonto, sir, betake thee to thy faith, for
    seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.
  parolles. o!
  first soldier. o, pray, pray, pray! manka revania dulche.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
second lord. oscorbidulchos volivorco.
  first soldier. the general is content to spare thee yet;
    and, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on
    to gather from thee. haply thou mayst inform
    something to save thy life.
  parolles. o, let me live,
    and all the secrets of our camp i'll show,
    their force, their purposes. nay, i'll speak that
    which you will wonder at.
  first soldier. but wilt thou faithfully?
  parolles. if i do not, damn me.
  first soldier. acordo linta.
    come on; thou art granted space.
                   exit, parolles guarded. a short alarum within
  second lord. go, tell the count rousillon and my brother
    we have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
    till we do hear from them.
  second soldier. captain, i will.
  second lord. 'a will betray us all unto ourselves-
    inform on that.
  second soldier. so i will, sir.
  second lord. till then i'll keep him da
 
 ___________________________
 
eps
like
    a wench that had shed her milk; he hath confess'd himself to
    morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time of his
    remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i'
th'
    stocks. and what think you he hath confess'd?
  bertram. nothing of me, has 'a?
  second lord. his confession is taken, and it shall be read to
his
    face; if your lordship be in't, as i believe you are, you
must
    have the patience to hear it.

                   enter parolles guarded, and
                  first soldier as interpreter

  bertram. a plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of me.
  second lord. hush, hush! hoodman comes. portotartarossa.
  first soldier. he calls for the tortures. what will you say
without
    'em?
  parolles. i will confess what i know without constraint; if ye
    pinch me like a pasty, i can say no more.
  first soldier. bosko chimurcho.
  second lord. boblibindo chicurmurco.
  first soldier. you are a merciful gen
 
 ___________________________
 
eral. our general bids you
    answer to what i shall ask you out of a note.
  parolles. and truly, as i hope to live.
  first soldier. 'first demand of him how many horse the duke is
    strong.' what say you to that?
  parolles. five or six thousand; but very weak and
unserviceable.
    the troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor
    rogues, upon my reputation and credit, and as i hope to live.
  first soldier. shall i set down your answer so?
  parolles. do; i'll take the sacrament on 't, how and which way
you
    will.
  bertram. all's one to him. what a past-saving slave is this!
  second lord. y'are deceiv'd, my lord; this is monsieur
parolles,
    the gallant militarist-that was his own phrase-that had the
whole
    theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in
the
    chape of his dagger.
  first lord. i will never trust a man again for keeping his
sword
    clean; nor believe he can have everything in him by w
 
 ___________________________
 
earing
his
    apparel neatly.
  first soldier. well, that's set down.
  parolles. 'five or six thousand horse' i said-i will say true-
'or
    thereabouts' set down, for i'll speak truth.
  second lord. he's very near the truth in this.
  bertram. but i con him no thanks for't in the nature he
delivers it.
  parolles. 'poor rogues' i pray you say.
  first soldier. well, that's set down.
  parolles. i humbly thank you, sir. a truth's a truth-the rogues
are
    marvellous poor.
  first soldier. 'demand of him of what strength they are
a-foot.'
    what say you to that?
  parolles. by my troth, sir, if i were to live this present
hour, i
    will tell true. let me see: spurio, a hundred and fifty;
    sebastian, so many; corambus, so many; jaques, so many;
guiltian,
    cosmo, lodowick, and gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine own
    company, chitopher, vaumond, bentii, two hun
 
 ___________________________
 
 lord. nothing, but let him have thanks. demand of him my
    condition, and what credit i have with the duke.
  first soldier. well, that's set down. 'you shall demand of him
    whether one captain dumain be i' th' camp, a frenchman; what
his
    reputation is with the duke, what his valour, honesty,
expertness
    in wars; or whether he thinks it were not possible, with
    well-weighing sums of gold, to corrupt him to a revolt.' what
say
    you to this? what do you know of it?
  parolles. i beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the
    inter'gatories. demand them singly.
  first soldier. do you know this captain dumain?
  parolles. i know him: 'a was a botcher's prentice in paris,
from
    whence he was whipt for getting the shrieve's fool with
child-a
    dumb innocent that could not say him nay.
  bertram. nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though i know his
    brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
  first soldier. well, is this captain in the
 
 ___________________________
 
 duke of florence's
    camp?
  parolles. upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
  second lord. nay, look not so upon me; we shall hear of your
    lordship anon.
  first soldier. what is his reputation with the duke?
  parolles. the duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of
    mine; and writ to me this other day to turn him out o' th'
band.
    i think i have his letter in my pocket.
  first soldier. marry, we'll search.
  parolles. in good sadness, i do not know; either it is there or
it
    is upon a file with the duke's other letters in my tent.
  first soldier. here 'tis; here's a paper. shall i read it to
you?
  parolles. i do not know if it be it or no.
  bertram. our interpreter does it well.
  second lord. excellently.
  first soldier.  [reads]  'dian, the count's a fool, and full of
    gold.'
  parolles. that is not the duke's letter, sir; that is an
    advertisement to a proper maid in florence, one
 
 ___________________________
 
 diana, to
take
    heed of the allurement of one count rousillon, a foolish idle
    boy, but for all that very ruttish. i pray you, sir, put it
up
    again.
  first soldier. nay, i'll read it first by your favour.
  parolles. my meaning in't, i protest, was very honest in the
behalf
    of the maid; for i knew the young count to be a dangerous and
    lascivious boy, who is a whale to virginity, and devours up
all
    the fry it finds.
  bertram. damnable both-sides rogue!
  first soldier.                                         [reads]
    'when he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it;
    after he scores, he never pays the score.
    half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
    he 
 
 ___________________________
 
ne'er pays after-debts, take it before.
    and say a soldier, dian, told thee this:
    men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
    for count of this, the count's a fool, i know it,
    who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
    thine, as he vow'd to thee in thine ear,
                                                   parolles.'
  bertram. he shall be whipt through the army with this rhyme
in's
    forehead.
  first lord. this is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
    linguist, and the amnipotent soldier.
  bertram. i could endure anything before but a cat, and now he's
a
    cat to me.
  first soldier. i perceive, sir, by our general's looks we shall
be
    fain to hang you.
  parolles. my life, sir, in any case! not that i am afraid to
die,
    but that, my offences being many, i would repent out 
 
 ___________________________
 
the
    remainder of nature. let me live, sir, in a dungeon, i' th'
    stocks, or anywhere, so i may live.
  first soldier. we'll see what may be done, so you confess
freely;
    therefore, once more to this captain dumain: you have
answer'd to
    his reputation with the duke, and to his valour; what is his
    honesty?
  parolles. he will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister; for
rapes
    and ravishments he parallels nessus. he professes not keeping
of
    oaths; in breaking 'em he is stronger than hercules. he will
lie,
    sir, with such volubility that you would think truth were a
fool.
    drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk;
and
    in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bedclothes
about
    him; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw. i
have
    but little mo
 
 ___________________________
 
re to say, sir, of his honesty. he has
everything
    that an honest man should not have; what an honest man should
    have he has nothing.
  second lord. i begin to love him for this.
  bertram. for this description of thine honesty? a pox upon him!
for
    me, he's more and more a cat.
  first soldier. what say you to his expertness in war?
  parolles. faith, sir, has led the drum before the english
    tragedians-to belie him i will not-and more of his
soldier-ship
    i know not, except in that country he had the honour to be
the
    officer at a place there called mile-end to instruct for the
    doubling of files-i would do the man what honour i can-but of
    this i am not certain.
  second lord. he hath out-villain'd villainy so far that the
rarity
    redeems him.
  bertram. a pox on him! he's a cat still.
  first soldier.
 
 ___________________________
 
 his qualities being at this poor price, i need
not
    to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
  parolles. sir, for a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of
his
    salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut th' entail from all


    remainders and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.
  first soldier. what's his brother, the other captain dumain?
  first lord. why does he ask him of me?
  first soldier. what's he?
  parolles. e'en a crow o' th' same nest; not altogether so great
as
    the first in goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. he
    excels his brother for a coward; yet his brother is reputed
one
    of the best that is. in a retreat he outruns any lackey:
marry,
    in coming on he has the cramp.
  first soldier. if your life be saved, will you undertake to
betray
    the florentine?
  parolles. ay, and the captain of his horse, count rousillon.
  first soldier. i'll whisper with the gen
 
 ___________________________
 
eral, and know his
    pleasure.
  parolles.  [aside]  i'll no more drumming. a plague of all
drums!
    only to seem to deserve well, and to beguile the supposition
of
    that lascivious young boy the count, have i run into this
danger.
    yet who would have suspected an ambush where i was taken?
  first soldier. there is no remedy, sir, but you must die.
    the general says you that have so traitorously discover'd the


    secrets of your army, and made such pestiferous reports of
men
    very nobly held, can serve the
 
 ___________________________
 
 world for no honest use;
therefore
    you must die. come, headsman, off with his head.
  parolles. o lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
  first soldier. that shall you, and take your leave of all your
    friends.  [unmuffling him]  so look about you; know you any
here?
  bertram. good morrow, noble captain.
  first lord. god bless you, captain parolles.
  second lord. god save you, noble captain.
  first lord. captain, what greeting will you to my lord lafeu? i
am
    for france.
  second lord. good captain, will you give me a copy of the
sonnet
    you writ to diana in behalf of the count rousillon? an i were
not
    a very coward i'd compel it of you; but fare you well.
                                        exeunt bertram and lords
  first soldier. you are undone, captain, all but your scarf;
that
    has a knot on 't yet.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 parolles. who cannot be crush'd with a plot?
  first soldier. if you could find out a country where but women
were
    that had received so much shame, you might begin an impudent

    nation. fare ye well, sir; i am for france too; we shall
speak of
    you there.                                exit with soldiers
  parolles. yet am i thankful. if my heart were great,
    'twould burst at this. captain i'll be no more;
    but i will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
    as captain shall. simply the thing i am
    shall make me live. who knows himself a braggart,
    let him fear this; for it will come to pass
    that every braggart shall be found an ass.
    rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, parolles, live
    safest in shame. being fool'd, by fool'ry thrive.
    there's place and means for every man aliv
 
 ___________________________
 
gracious hand;
    which i presume shall render you no blame,
    but rather make you thank your pains for it.
    i will come after you with what good speed
    our means will make us means.
  gentleman. this i'll do for you.
  helena. and you shall find yourself to be well thank'd,
    whate'er falls more. we must to horse again;
    go, go, provide.                                      exeunt




act v scene 2.
rousillon. the inner court of the count's palace

enter clown and parolles

  parolles. good monsieur lavache, give my lord lafeu this
letter. i
    have ere now, sir, been better known to you, when i have held
    familiarity with fresher clothes; but i am now, sir, muddied
in
    fortune's mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong
    displeasure.
  clown. truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it
smell
    so strongly as thou speak'st of. i will henceforth eat no
fish
    of fortune's butt'ring. prithee, allow the wind.
  parolles. nay, 
 
 ___________________________
 
you need not to stop your nose, sir; i spake but
by
    a metaphor.
  clown. indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, i will stop my
nose; or
    against any man's metaphor. prithee, get thee further.
  parolles. pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
  clown. foh! prithee stand away. a paper from fortune's
close-stool
    to give to a nobleman! look here he comes himself.

                           enter lafeu

    here is a pur of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's cat, but not
    a musk-cat, that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond of her
    displeasure, and, as he says, is muddied withal. pray you,
sir,
    use the carp as you may; for he looks like a poor, decayed,
    ingenious, fooli
 
 ___________________________
 
sh, rascally knave. i do pity his distress
    in my similes of comfort, and leave him to your lordship.
 exit
  parolles. my lord, i am a man whom fortune hath cruelly
scratch'd.
  lafeu. and what would you have me to do? 'tis too late to pare
her
    nails now. wherein have you played the knave with fortune,
that
    she should scratch you, who of herself is a good lady and
would
    not have knaves thrive long under her? there's a cardecue for
    you. let the justices make you and fortune friends; i am for
    other business.
  parolles. i beseech your honour to hear me one single word.
  lafeu. yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u beg a single penny more; come, you shall ha't; save
your
    word.
  parolles. my name, my good lord, is parolles.
  lafeu. you beg more than word then. cox my passion! give me
your
    hand. how does your drum?
  parolles. o my good lord, you were the first that found me.
  lafeu. was i, in sooth? and i was the first that lost thee.
  parolles. it lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace,
for
    you did bring me out.
  lafeu. out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once both
the
    office of god and the devil? one brings the in grace, and the
    other brings thee out.    [trumpets sound]  the king's
coming; i
    know by his trumpets. sirrah, inquire further after me; i had
    talk of you last night. though you are a fool and a knave,
you
    shall eat. go to; follow.
  parolles. i praise god for you.   
 
 ___________________________
 
ch validity
    did lack a parallel; yet, for all that,
    he gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
    if i be one.
  countess. he blushes, and 'tis it.
    of six preceding ancestors, that gem
    conferr'd by testament to th' sequent issue,
    hath it been ow'd and worn. this is his wife:
    that ring's a thousand proofs.
  king. methought you said
    you saw one here in court could witness it.
  diana. i did, my lord, but loath am to produce
    so bad an instrument; his name's parolles.
  lafeu. i saw the man to-day, if man he be.
  king. find him, and bring him hither.        exit an attendant
  bertram. what of him?
    he's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
    with all the spots o' th' world tax'd and debauch'd,
    whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
    am i or that or this for what he'll utter
    that will speak anything?
  king. she hath that ring of yours.
  bertram. i think she has. certain it is i lik'd her,
    and boarded her i' th' wanton wa
 
 ___________________________
 
 since you lack virtue, i will lose a husband-
    send for your ring, i will return it home,
    and give me mine again.
  bertram. i have it not.
  king. what ring was yours, i pray you?
  diana. sir, much like
    the same upon your finger.
  king. know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
  diana. and this was it i gave him, being abed.
  king. the story, then, goes false you threw it him
    out of a casement.
  diana. i have spoke the truth.

                       enter parolles

  bertram. my lord, i do confess the ring was hers.
  king. you boggle shrewdly; every feather starts you.
    is this the man you speak of?
  diana. ay, my lord.
  king. tell me, sirrah-but tell me true i charge you,
    not fearing the displeasure of your master,
    which, on your just proceeding, i'll keep off-
    by him and by this woman here what know you?
  parolles. so please your majesty, my master hath been an
honourable
    gentleman; tricks he hath had in him, which ge
 
 ___________________________
 
ntlemen have.
  king. come, come, to th' purpose. did he love this woman?
  parolles. faith, sir, he did love her; but how?
  king. how, i pray you?
  parolles. he did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.
  king. how is that?
  parolles. he lov'd her, sir, and lov'd her not.
  king. as thou art a knave and no knave.
    what an equivocal companion is this!
  parolles. i am a poor man, and at your majesty's command.
  lafeu. he's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.
  diana. do you know he promis'd me marriage?
  parolles. faith, i know more than i'll speak.
  king. but wilt thou not speak all thou know'st?
  parolles. yes, so please your majesty. i did go between them,
as i
    said; but more than that, he loved her-for indeed he was mad
for
    her, and talk'd of satan, and of limbo, and of furies, and i
know
    not what. yet i was in th
 
 ___________________________
 
nd, look you, here's your letter. this it says:
    'when from my finger you can get this ring,
    and are by me with child,' etc. this is done.
    will you be mine now you are doubly won?
  bertram. if she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
    i'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
  helena. if it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
    deadly divorce step between me and you!
    o my dear mother, do i see you living?
  lafeu. mine eyes smell onions; i shall weep anon. [to parolles]
    good tom drum, lend me a handkercher. so, i
    thank thee. wait on me home, i'll make sport with thee;
    let thy curtsies alone, they are scurvy ones.
  king. let us from point to point this story know,
    to make the even truth in pleasure flow.
    [to diana]  if thou beest yet a fresh uncropped flower,
    choose thou thy husband, and i'll pay thy dower;
    for i can guess that by thy honest aid
    thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.-
    of that and all the pro