enger.
    when haply he shall hear that she is gone
    he will return; and hope i may that she,
    hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
    led hither by pure love. which of them both
    is dearest to me i have no skill in sense
    to make distinction. provide this messenger.
    my heart is heavy, and mine age is weak;
    grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.     exeunt




act iii. scene 5.

without the walls of florence
a tucket afar off. enter an old widow of florence, her daughter
diana,
violenta, and mariana, with other citizens

  widow. nay, come; for if they do approach the city we shall
lose
    all the sight.
  diana. they say the french count has done most honourable
service.
  widow. it is reported that he has taken their great'st
commander;
    and that with his own hand he slew the duke's brother.
[tucket]
    we have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary way. hark!
you
    may know by their trumpets.
  mariana. com
 
 ___________________________
 
e, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with
the
    report of it. well, diana, take heed of this french earl; the
    honour of a maid is her name, and no legacy is so rich as
    honesty.
  widow. i have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by
a
    gentleman his companion.
  mariana. i know that knave, hang him! one parolles; a filthy
    officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl. beware
of
    them, diana: their promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and
all
    these engines of lust, are not the things they go under; many
a
    maid hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, example,
that
    so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood, cannot for 
 
 ___________________________
 
all
that
    dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs
that
    threatens them. i hope i need not to advise you further; but
i
    hope your own grace will keep you where you are, though there
    were no further danger known but the modesty which is so
lost.
  diana. you shall not need to fear me.

            enter helena in the dress of a pilgrim

  widow. i hope so. look, here comes a pilgrim. i know she will
lie
    at my house: thither they send one another. i'll question
her.
    god save you, pilgrim! whither are bound?
  helena. to saint jaques le grand.
    where do the palmers lodge, i do beseech you?
  widow. at the saint francis here, beside the port.
  helena. is this the way?
                                                  [a march afar]

  widow. ay, marry, is't. hark you! they come this way.
    if you will tarry, hol
 
 ___________________________
 
y pilgrim,
    but till the troops come by,
    i will conduct you where you shall be lodg'd;
    the rather for i think i know your hostess
    as ample as myself.
  helena. is it yourself?
  widow. if you shall please so, pilgrim.
  helena. i thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.
  widow. you came, i think, from france?
  helena. i did so.
  widow. here you shall see a countryman of yours
    that has done worthy service.
  helena. his name, i pray you.
  diana. the count rousillon. know you such a one?
  helena. but by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
    his face i know not.
  diana. what some'er he is,
    he's bravely taken here. he stole from france,
    as 'tis reported, for the king had married him
    against his liking. think you it is so?
  helena. ay, surely, mere the truth; i know his lady.
  diana. there is 
 
 ___________________________
 
a gentleman that serves the count
    reports but coarsely of her.
  helena. what's his name?
  diana. monsieur parolles.
  helena. o, i believe with him,
    in argument of praise, or to the worth
    of the great count himself, she is too mean
    to have her name repeated; all her deserving
    is a reserved honesty, and that
    i have not heard examin'd.
  diana. alas, poor lady!
    'tis a hard bondage to become the wife
    of a detesting lord.
  widow. i sweet, good creature, wheresoe'er she is
    her heart weighs sadly. this young maid might do her
    a shrewd turn, if she pleas'd.
  helena. how do you mean?
    may be the amorous count solicits her
    in the unlawful purpose.
  widow. he does, indeed;
    and brokes with all that can in such a suit
    corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
    but she is arm'd for him, and keeps her guard
    in honestest defence.

    enter, with drum and colours, bertram, parolles, and the
 
 ___________________________
 

                          whole army

  mariana. the gods forbid else!
  widow. so, now they come.
    that is antonio, the duke's eldest son;
    that, escalus.
  helena. which is the frenchman?
  diana. he-
    that with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
    i would he lov'd his wife; if he were honester
    he were much goodlier. is't not a handsome gentleman?
  helena. i like him well.
  diana. 'tis pity he is not honest. yond's that same knave
    that leads him to these places; were i his lady
    i would poison that vile rascal.
  helena. which is 
 
 ___________________________
 
he?
  diana. that jack-an-apes with scarfs. why is he melancholy?
  helena. perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.
  parolles. lose our drum! well.
  mariana. he's shrewdly vex'd at something.
    look, he has spied us.
  widow. marry, hang you!
  mariana. and your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
                              exeunt bertram, parolles, and army
  widow. the troop is past. come, pilgrim, i will bring you
    where you shall host. of enjoin'd penitents
    there's four or five, to great saint jaques bound,
    already at my house.
  helena. i humbly thank you.
    please it this matron and this gentle maid
    to eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
    i will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
    worthy the note.
    both. we'll take your offer kindly.                   ex
 
 ___________________________
 
u to the house, and show you
    the lass i spoke of.
  first lord. but you say she's honest.
  bertram. that's all the fault. i spoke with her but once,
    and found her wondrous cold; but i sent to her,
    by this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
    tokens and letters which she did re-send;
    and this is all i have done. she's a fair creature;
    will you go see her?
  first lord. with all my heart, my lord.                 exeunt




act iii. scene 7.
florence. the widow's house

enter helena and widow

  helena. if you misdoubt me that i am not she,
    i know not how i shall assure you further
    but i shall lose the grounds i work upon.
  widow. though my estate be fall'n, i was well born,
    nothing acquainted with these businesses;
    and would not put my reputation now
    in any staining act.
  helena. nor would i wish you.
  first give me trust the count he is my husband,
    and what to your sworn counsel i have spoken
    is so from w
 
 ___________________________
 
ord to word; and then you cannot,
    by the good aid that i of you shall borrow,
    err in bestowing it.
  widow. i should believe you;
    for you have show'd me that which well approves
    y'are great in fortune.
  helena. take this purse of gold,
    and let me buy your friendly help thus far,
    which i will over-pay and pay again
    when i have found it. the count he woos your daughter
    lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
    resolv'd to carry her. let her in fine consent,
    as we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
    now his important blood will nought deny
    tha
 
 ___________________________
 
t she'll demand. a ring the county wears
    that downward hath succeeded in his house
    from son to son some four or five descents
    since the first father wore it. this ring he holds
    in most rich choice; yet, in his idle fire,
    to buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
    howe'er repented after.
  widow. now i see
    the bottom of your purpose.
  helena. you see it lawful then. it is no more
    but that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
    desires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
    in fine, delivers me to fill the time,
    herself most chastely absent. after this,
    to marry her, i'll add three thousand crowns
    to what is pass'd already.
  widow. i have yielded.
    instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
    that time and place with this deceit so lawful
  
 
 ___________________________
 
guarded. a short alarum within
  second lord. go, tell the count rousillon and my brother
    we have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
    till we do hear from them.
  second soldier. captain, i will.
  second lord. 'a will betray us all unto ourselves-
    inform on that.
  second soldier. so i will, sir.
  second lord. till then i'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
                                                          exeunt




act iv. scene 2.
florence. the widow's house

enter bertram and diana

  bertram. they told me that your name was fontibell.
  diana. no, my good lord, diana.
  bertram. titled goddess;
    and worth it, with addition! but, fair soul,
    in your fine frame hath love no quality?
    if the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
    you are no maiden, but a monument;
    when you are dead, you should be such a one
    as you are now, for you are cold and stern;
    and now you should be as your mother was
    when y
 
 ___________________________
 
    but i will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
    as captain shall. simply the thing i am
    shall make me live. who knows himself a braggart,
    let him fear this; for it will come to pass
    that every braggart shall be found an ass.
    rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, parolles, live
    safest in shame. being fool'd, by fool'ry thrive.
    there's place and means for every man alive.
    i'll after them.                                        exit




act iv scene 4.
the widow's house

enter helena, widow, and diana

  helena. that you may well perceive i have not wrong'd you!
    one of the greatest in the christian world
    shall be my surety; fore whose throne 'tis needful,
    ere i can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
    time was i did him a desired office,
    dear almost as his life; which gratitude
    through flinty tartar's bosom would peep forth,
    and answer 'thanks.' i duly am inform'd
    his grace is at marseilles, to which place
    we
 
 ___________________________
 
 have convenient convoy. you must know
    i am supposed dead. the army breaking,
    my husband hies him home; where, heaven aiding,
    and by the leave of my good lord the king,
    we'll be before our welcome.
  widow. gentle madam,
    you never had a servant to whose trust
    your business was more welcome.
  helena. nor you, mistress,
    ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
    to recompense your love. doubt not but heaven
    hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
    as it hath fated her to be my motive
    and helper to a husband. but, o strange men!
    that can such sweet use make of what they hate,
    when saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
    defiles the pitchy
 
 ___________________________
 
re is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act v. scene 1.
marseilles. a street

enter helena, widow, and diana, with two attendants

  helena. but this exceeding posting day and night
    must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it.
    but since you have made the days and nights as one,
    to wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
    be bold you do so grow in my requital
    as nothing can unroot you.

                      enter a gentleman

    in happy time!
    this man may help me to his majesty's ear,
    if he would spend his power. god save you, sir.
  gentleman. and
 
 ___________________________
 
arp occasions,
    which lay nice manners by, i put you to
    the use of your own virtues, for the which
    i shall continue thankful.
  gentleman. what's your will?
  helena. that it will please you
    to give this poor petition to the king;
    and aid me with that store of power you have
    to come into his presence.
  gentleman. the king's not here.
  helena. not here, sir?
  gentleman. not indeed.
    he hence remov'd last night, and with more haste
    than is his use.
  widow. lord, how we lose our pains!
  helena. all's well that ends well yet,
    though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
    i do beseech you, whither is he gone?
  gentleman. marry, as i take it, to rousillon;
    whither i am going.
  helena. i do beseech you, sir,
    since you are like to see the king before me,
    commend the paper to his gracious hand;
    which i presume shall render you no blame,
    but rather make you thank your pains for it.
    i will come after you with 
 
 ___________________________
 
one.' our rash faults
    make trivial price of serious things we have,
    not knowing them until we know their grave.
    oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
    destroy our friends, and after weep their dust;
    our own love waking cries to see what's done,
    while shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
    be this sweet helen's knell. and now forget her.
    send forth your amorous token for fair maudlin.
    the main consents are had; and here we'll stay
    to see our widower's second marriage-day.
  countess. which better than the first, o dear heaven, bless!
    or, ere they meet, in me, o nature, cesse!
  lafeu. come on, my son, in whom my house's name
    must be digested; give a favour from you,
    to sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
    that she may quickly come.
                                          [bertram gives a ring]
    by my old beard,
    and ev'ry hair that's on 't, helen, that's dead,
    was a sweet creature; such a ring as t
 
 ___________________________
 
es, come short
    to tender it herself. i undertook it,
    vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech
    of the poor suppliant, who by this, i know,
    is here attending; her business looks in her
    with an importing visage; and she told me
    in a sweet verbal brief it did concern
    your highness with herself.
  king.  [reads the letter]  'upon his many protestations to
marry me
    when his wife was dead, i blush to say it, he won me. now is
the
    count rousillon a widower; his vows are forfeited to me, and
my
    honour's paid to him. he stole from florence, taking no
leave,
    and i follow him to his country for justice. grant it me, o
king!
    in you it best lies; otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a
poor
    maid is undone.
                                                diana capilet.'
  lafeu. i will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for this.
    i'll none of him.
  king. the heavens have thought well on thee, lafeu,
    to bring fo
 
 ___________________________
 
th this discov'ry. seek these suitors.
    go speedily, and bring again the count.
                                               exeunt attendants
    i am afeard the life of helen, lady,
    was foully snatch'd.
  countess. now, justice on the doers!

                       enter bertram, guarded

  king. i wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you.
    and that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
    yet you desire to marry.
                                           enter widow and diana
    what woman's that?
  diana. i am, my lord, a wretched florentine,
    derived from the ancient capilet.
    my suit, as i do understand, you know,
    and therefore know how far i may be pitied.
  widow. i am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
    both suffer under this complaint we bring,
    and both shall cease, without your remedy.
  king. come hither, count; do you know these women?
  bertram. my lord, i neither can nor will deny
    but that i know them. do the
 
 ___________________________
 
all this while?
  diana. because he's guilty, and he is not guilty.
    he knows i am no maid, and he'll swear to't:
    i'll swear i am a maid, and he knows not.
    great king, i am no strumpet, by my life;
    i am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
                                             [pointing to lafeu]
  king. she does abuse our ears; to prison with her.
  diana. good mother, fetch my bail. stay, royal sir;
                                                      exit widow
    the jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
    and he shall surety me. but for this lord
    who hath abus'd me as he knows himself,
    though yet he never harm'd me, here i quit him.
    he knows himself my bed he hath defil'd;
    and at that time he got his wife with child.
    dead though she be, she feels her young one kick;
    so there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick-
    and now behold the meaning.

                     re-enter widow with helena

  king. is th