shall be paid her than she'll demand.
  steward. madam, i was very late more near her than i think she
    wish'd me. alone she was, and did communicate to herself her
own
    words to her own ears; she thought, i dare vow for her, they
    touch'd not any stranger sense. her matter was, she loved
your
    son. fortune, she said, was no goddess, that had put such
    difference betwixt their two estates; love no god, that would
not
    extend his might only where qualities were level; diana no
queen
    of virgins, that would suffer her poor knight surpris'd
without
    rescue in the first assault, or ransom afterward. this she
    deliver'd in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er i
heard
    virgin exclaim in; which i held my duty speedily to acquaint
you
    withal; sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns
you
    something to know it.
  countess. you have discharg'd this honestly; keep it to
yourself.
    many likelihoods inform'd me of this before,
 
 ___________________________
 
ear that she is gone
    he will return; and hope i may that she,
    hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
    led hither by pure love. which of them both
    is dearest to me i have no skill in sense
    to make distinction. provide this messenger.
    my heart is heavy, and mine age is weak;
    grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.     exeunt




act iii. scene 5.

without the walls of florence
a tucket afar off. enter an old widow of florence, her daughter
diana,
violenta, and mariana, with other citizens

  widow. nay, come; for if they do approach the city we shall
lose
    all the sight.
  diana. they say the french count has done most honourable
service.
  widow. it is reported that he has taken their great'st
commander;
    and that with his own hand he slew the duke's brother.
[tucket]
    we have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary way. hark!
you
    may know by their trumpets.
  mariana. come, let's return again, and suffic
 
 ___________________________
 
e ourselves with
the
    report of it. well, diana, take heed of this french earl; the
    honour of a maid is her name, and no legacy is so rich as
    honesty.
  widow. i have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by
a
    gentleman his companion.
  mariana. i know that knave, hang him! one parolles; a filthy
    officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl. beware
of
    them, diana: their promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and
all
    these engines of lust, are not the things they go under; many
a
    maid hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, example,
that
    so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood, cannot for all
that
    dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs
that
    threatens them. i hope i need not to advise you further; but
i
    hope your own grace will keep you where you are, though there
    were no further dang
 
 ___________________________
 
er known but the modesty which is so
lost.
  diana. you shall not need to fear me.

            enter helena in the dress of a pilgrim

  widow. i hope so. look, here comes a pilgrim. i know she will
lie
    at my house: thither they send one another. i'll question
her.
    god save you, pilgrim! whither are bound?
  helena. to saint jaques le grand.
    where do the palmers lodge, i do beseech you?
  widow. at the saint francis here, beside the port.
  helena. is this the way?
                                                  [a m
 
 ___________________________
 
you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
    but till the troops come by,
    i will conduct you where you shall be lodg'd;
    the rather for i think i know your hostess
    as ample as myself.
  helena. is it yourself?
  widow. if you shall please so, pilgrim.
  helena. i thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.
  widow. you came, i think, from france?
  helena. i did so.
  widow. here you shall see a countryman of yours
    that has done worthy service.
  helena. his name, i pray you.
  diana. the count rousillon. know you such a one?
  helena. but by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
    his face i know not.
  diana. what some'er he is,
    he's bravely taken here. he stole from france,
    as 'tis reported, for the king had married him
    against his liking. think you it is so?
  helena. ay, surely, mere the truth; i know his lady.
  diana. there is a gentleman that serves the count
    reports but coarsely of her.
  helena. what's his name?
  diana. monsieur paro
 
 ___________________________
 
lles.
  helena. o, i believe with him,
    in argument of praise, or to the worth
    of the great count himself, she is too mean
    to have her name repeated; all her deserving
    is a reserved honesty, and that
    i have not heard examin'd.
  diana. alas, poor lady!
    'tis a hard bondage to become the wife
    of a detesting lord.
  widow. i sweet, good creature, wheresoe'er she is
    her heart weighs sadly. this young maid might do her
    a shrewd turn, if she pleas'd.
  helena. how do you mean?
    may be the amorous count solicits her
    in the unlawful purpose.
  widow. he does, indeed;
    and brokes with all that can in such a suit
    corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
    but she is arm'd for him, and keeps her 
 
 ___________________________
 
guard
    in honestest defence.

    enter, with drum and colours, bertram, parolles, and the
                          whole army

  mariana. the gods forbid else!
  widow. so, now they come.
    that is antonio, the duke's eldest son;
    that, escalus.
  helena. which is the frenchman?
  diana. he-
    that with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
    i would he lov'd his wife; if he were honester
    he were much goodlier. is't not a handsome gentleman?
  helena. i like him well.
  diana. 'tis pity he is not honest. yond's that same knave
    that leads him to these places; were i his lady
    i would poison that vile rascal.
  helena. which is he?
  diana. that jack-an-apes with scarfs. why is he melancholy?
  helena. perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.
  parolles. los
 
 ___________________________
 
econd lord. go, tell the count rousillon and my brother
    we have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
    till we do hear from them.
  second soldier. captain, i will.
  second lord. 'a will betray us all unto ourselves-
    inform on that.
  second soldier. so i will, sir.
  second lord. till then i'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
                                                          exeunt




act iv. scene 2.
florence. the widow's house

enter bertram and diana

  bertram. they told me that your name was fontibell.
  diana. no, my good lord, diana.
  bertram. titled goddess;
    and worth it, with addition! but, fair soul,
    in your fine frame hath love no quality?
    if the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
    you are no maiden, but a monument;
    when you are dead, you should be such a one
    as you are now, for you are cold and stern;
    and now you should be as your mother was
    when your sweet self was got.
  diana. s
 
 ___________________________
 
he then was honest.
  bertram. so should you be.
  diana. no.
    my mother did but duty; such, my lord,
    as you owe to your wife.
  bertram. no more o'that!
    i prithee do not strive against my vows.
    i was compell'd to her; but i love thee
    by love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever
    do thee all rights of service.
  diana. ay, so you serve us
    till we serve you; but when you have our roses
    you barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
    and mock us with our bareness.
  bertram. how have i sworn!
  diana. 'tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
    but the plain single vow that is vow'd true.
    what is not holy, that we swear not by,
    but take the high'st to witness. then, pray you, tell me:
    if i should swear by jove's great attributes
    i lov'd you dearly, would you believe 
 
 ___________________________
 
ing,
    to swear by him whom i protest to love
    that i will work against him. therefore your oaths
    are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd-
    at least in my opinion.
  bertram. change it, change it;
    be not so holy-cruel. love is holy;
    and my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
    that you do charge men with. stand no more off,
    but give thyself unto my sick desires,
    who then recovers. say thou art mine, and ever
    my love as it begins shall so persever.
  diana. i see that men make hopes in such a case
    that we'll forsake ourselves. give me that ring.
  bertram. i'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
    to give it from me.
  diana. will you not, my lord?
  bertram. it is an honour 'longing to our house,
    bequeathed down from many ancestors;
    which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
    in me to lose.
  diana. mine honour's such a ring:
    my chastity's the jewel of our house,
    bequeathed down from many ancestors;
 
 
 ___________________________
 
   which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
    in me to lose. thus your own proper wisdom
    brings in the champion honour on my part
    against your vain assault.
  bertram. here, take my ring;
    my house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,
    and i'll be bid by thee.
  diana. when midnight comes, knock at my chamber window;
    i'll order take my mother shall not hear.
    now will i charge you in the band of truth,
    when you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed,
    remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
    my reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
    when back again this ring shall be deliver'd.
    and on your finger in the night i'll put
    another ring, that what in time proceeds
    may token to the future our past deeds.
    adieu t
 
 ___________________________
 
ill then; then fail not. you have won
    a wife of me, though there my hope be done.
  bertram. a heaven on earth i have won by wooing thee.
 exit
  diana. for which live long to thank both heaven and me!
    you may so in the end.
    my mother told me just how he would woo,
    as if she sat in's heart; she says all men
    have the like oaths. he had sworn to marry me
    when his wife's dead; therefore i'll lie with him
    when i am buried. since frenchmen are so braid,
    marry that will, i live and die a maid.
    only, in this disguise, i think't no sin
    to cozen him that would unjustly win.                   exit




ac
 
 ___________________________
 
 in good sadness, i do not know; either it is there or
it
    is upon a file with the duke's other letters in my tent.
  first soldier. here 'tis; here's a paper. shall i read it to
you?
  parolles. i do not know if it be it or no.
  bertram. our interpreter does it well.
  second lord. excellently.
  first soldier.  [reads]  'dian, the count's a fool, and full of
    gold.'
  parolles. that is not the duke's letter, sir; that is an
    advertisement to a proper maid in florence, one diana, to
take
    heed of the allurement of one count rousillon, a foolish idle
    boy, but for all that very ruttish. i pray you, sir, put it
up
    again.
  first soldier. nay, i'll read it first by your favour.
  parolles. my meaning in't, i protest, was very honest in the
behalf
    of the maid; for i knew the young count to be a dangerous and
    lascivious boy, who is a whale to virginity, and devours up
all
    the fry it finds.
  bertram. damnable both-sides rogue!
  first sol
 
 ___________________________
 
les. o lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
  first soldier. that shall you, and take your leave of all your
    friends.  [unmuffling him]  so look about you; know you any
here?
  bertram. good morrow, noble captain.
  first lord. god bless you, captain parolles.
  second lord. god save you, noble captain.
  first lord. captain, what greeting will you to my lord lafeu? i
am
    for france.
  second lord. good captain, will you give me a copy of the
sonnet
    you writ to diana in behalf of the count rousillon? an i were
not
    a very coward i'd compel it of you; but fare you well.
                                        exeunt bertram and lords
  first soldier. you are undone, captain, all but your scarf;
that
    has a knot on 't yet.
  parolles. who cannot be crush'd with a plot?
  first soldier. if you could find out a country where but women
were
    that had received so much shame, you might begin an impudent

    nation. fare ye well, sir; i am for
 
 ___________________________
 
s soft
    as captain shall. simply the thing i am
    shall make me live. who knows himself a braggart,
    let him fear this; for it will come to pass
    that every braggart shall be found an ass.
    rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, parolles, live
    safest in shame. being fool'd, by fool'ry thrive.
    there's place and means for every man alive.
    i'll after them.                                        exit




act iv scene 4.
the widow's house

enter helena, widow, and diana

  helena. that you may well perceive i have not wrong'd you!
    one of the greatest in the christian world
    shall be my surety; fore whose throne 'tis needful,
    ere i can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
    time was i did him a desired office,
    dear almost as his life; which gratitude
    through flinty tartar's bosom would peep forth,
    and answer 'thanks.' i duly am inform'd
    his grace is at marseilles, to which place
    we have convenient convoy. you must know
  
 
 ___________________________
 
, mistress,
    ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
    to recompense your love. doubt not but heaven
    hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
    as it hath fated her to be my motive
    and helper to a husband. but, o strange men!
    that can such sweet use make of what they hate,
    when saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
    defiles the pitchy night. so lust doth play
    with what it loathes, for that which is away.
    but more of this hereafter. you, diana,
    under my poor instructions yet must suffer
    something in my behalf.
  diana. let death and honesty
    go with your impositions, i am yours
    upon your will to suffer.
  helena. yet, i pray you:
    but with the word the time will bring on summer,
    when briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
    and be as sweet as sharp. we must away;
    our waggon is prepar'd, and time revives us.
    all's well that ends well. still the fine's the crown.
    whate'er the course, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ight 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act v. scene 1.
marseilles. a street

enter helena, widow, and diana, with two attendants

  helena. but this exceeding posting day and night
    must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it.
    but since you have made the days and nights as one,
    to wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
    be bold you do so grow in my requital
    as nothing can unroot you.

                      enter a gentleman

    in happy time!
    this man may help me to his majesty's ear,
    if he would spend his power. god save you, sir.
  gentleman. and you.
  he
 
 ___________________________
 
self.
  king.  [reads the letter]  'upon his many protestations to
marry me
    when his wife was dead, i blush to say it, he won me. now is
the
    count rousillon a widower; his vows are forfeited to me, and
my
    honour's paid to him. he stole from florence, taking no
leave,
    and i follow him to his country for justice. grant it me, o
king!
    in you it best lies; otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a
poor
    maid is undone.
                                                diana capilet.'
  lafeu. i will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for this.
    i'll none of him.
  king. the heavens have thought well on thee, lafeu,
    to bring forth this discov'ry. seek these suitors.
    go speedily, and bring again the count.
                                               exeunt attendants
    i am afeard the life of helen, lady,
    was foully snatch'd.
  countess. now, justice on the doers!

                       enter bertram, guarded

  king. i wonder,
 
 ___________________________
 
 sir, sith wives are monsters to you.
    and that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
    yet you desire to marry.
                                           enter widow and diana
    what woman's that?
  diana. i am, my lord, a wretched florentine,
    derived from the ancient capilet.
    my suit, as i do understand, you know,
    and therefore know how far i may be pitied.
  widow. i am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
    both suffer under this complaint we bring,
    and both shall cease, without your remedy.
  king. come hither, count; do you know these women?
  bertram. my lord, i neither can nor will deny
    but that i know them. do they charge me further?
  diana. why do you l
 
 ___________________________
 
ook so strange upon your wife?
  bertram. she's none of mine, my lord.
  diana. if you shall marry,
    you give away this hand, and that is mine;
    you give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
    you give away myself, which is known mine;
    for i by vow am so embodied yours
    that she which marries you must marry me,
    either both or none.
  lafeu.  [to bertram]  your reputation comes too short for
    my daughter; you are no husband for her.
  bertram. my lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
    whom sometime i have laugh'd with. let your h
 
 ___________________________
 
ighness
    lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
    than for to think that i would sink it here.
  king. sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
    till your deeds gain them. fairer prove your honour
    than in my thought it lies!
  diana. good my lord,
    ask him upon his oath if he does think
    he had not my virginity.
  king. what say'st thou to her?
  bertram. she's impudent, my lord,
    and was a common gamester to the camp.
  diana. he does me wrong, my lord; if i were so
    he might have bought me at a common price.
    do not believe him. o, behold this ring,
    whose high respect and rich validity
    did lack a parallel; yet, for all that,
    he gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
    if i be one.
  countess. he blushes, and 'tis it.
    of six preceding ancestors, that gem
    conferr'd by testament to th' sequent issue,
    hath it been ow'd and worn. this is his wife:
    that ring's a thousand proofs.
 
 ___________________________
 

  king. methought you said
    you saw one here in court could witness it.
  diana. i did, my lord, but loath am to produce
    so bad an instrument; his name's parolles.
  lafeu. i saw the man to-day, if man he be.
  king. find him, and bring him hither.        exit an attendant
  bertram. what of him?
    he's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
    with all the spots o' th' world tax'd and debauch'd,
    whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
    am i or that or this for what he'll utter
    that will speak anything?
  king. she hath that ring of yours.
  be
 
 ___________________________
 
rtram. i think she has. certain it is i lik'd her,
    and boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
    she knew her distance, and did angle for me,
    madding my eagerness with her restraint,
    as all impediments in fancy's course
    are motives of more fancy; and, in fine,
    her infinite cunning with her modern grace
    subdu'd me to her rate. she got the ring;
    and i had that which any inferior might
    at market-price have bought.
  diana. i must be patient.
    you that have turn'd off a first so noble wife
    may justly diet me. i pray you yet-
    since you lack virtue, i will lose a husband-
    send for your ring, i will return it home,
    and give me mine again.
  bertram. i have it not.
  king. what ring was yours, i pray you?
  diana. sir, much like
    the same upon your finger.
  king. know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
  diana. and this was it i gave him, being abed.
  king. the story, then, 
 
 ___________________________
 
goes false you threw it him
    out of a casement.
  diana. i have spoke the truth.

                       enter parolles

  bertram. my lord, i do confess the ring was hers.
  king. you boggle shrewdly; every feather starts you.
    is this the man you speak of?
  diana. ay, my lord.
  king. tell me, sirrah-but tell me true i charge you,
    not fearing the displeasure of your master,
    which, on your just proceeding, i'll keep off-
    by him and by this woman here what know you?
  parolles. so please your majesty, my master hath been an
honourable
    gentleman; tricks he hath had in him, which gentlemen have.
  king. come, come, to th' purpose. did he love this woman?
  parolles. faith, sir, he did love her; but how?
  king. how, i pray you?
  
 
 ___________________________
 
parolles. he did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.
  king. how is that?
  parolles. he lov'd her, sir, and lov'd her not.
  king. as thou art a knave and no knave.
    what an equivocal companion is this!
  parolles. i am a poor man, and at your majesty's command.
  lafeu. he's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.
  diana. do you know he promis'd me marriage?
  parolles. faith, i know more than i'll speak.
  king. but wilt thou not speak all thou know'st?
  parolles. yes, so please your majesty. i did go between them,
as i
    said; but more than that, he loved her-for indeed he was mad
for
    her, and talk'd of satan, and of limbo, and of furies, and i
know
    not what. yet i was in that credit with them at that time
that i
    knew of their going to bed; and of other motions, as
promising
    he
 
 ___________________________
 
r marriage, and things which would derive me ill will to
speak
    of; therefore i will not speak what i know.
  king. thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say they
are
    married; but thou art too fine in thy evidence; therefore
stand
    aside.
    this ring, you say, was yours?
  diana. ay, my good lord.
  king. where did you buy it? or who gave it you?
  diana. it was not given me, nor i did not buy it.
  king. who lent it you?
  diana. it was not lent me neither.
  king. where did you find it then?
  diana. i found it not.
  king. if it were yours by none of all these ways,
    how could you give it him?
  diana. i never gave it him.
  lafeu. this woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes off and on
at
    pleasure.
  king. this ring was mine, i gave it his first wife.
  diana. it might be yours or hers, for aught i know.
  king. take her away, i do not like her now;
    to prison with her. and away with him.
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
    thou diest within this hour.
  diana. i'll never tell you.
  king. take her away.
  diana. i'll put in bail, my liege.
  king. i think thee now some common customer.
  diana. by jove, if ever i knew man, 'twas you.
  king. wherefore hast thou accus'd him all this while?
  diana. because he's guilty, and he is not guilty.
    he knows i am no maid, and he'll swear to't:
    i'll swear i am a maid, and he knows not.
    great king, i am no strumpet, by my life;
    i am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
                                             [pointing to lafeu]
  king. she does abuse our ears; to prison with her.
  diana. good mother, fetch my bail. stay, royal sir;
                                                      exit widow
    the jeweller 
 
 ___________________________
 
y, ever, ever dearly.
  helena. if it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
    deadly divorce step between me and you!
    o my dear mother, do i see you living?
  lafeu. mine eyes smell onions; i shall weep anon. [to parolles]
    good tom drum, lend me a handkercher. so, i
    thank thee. wait on me home, i'll make sport with thee;
    let thy curtsies alone, they are scurvy ones.
  king. let us from point to point this story know,
    to make the even truth in pleasure flow.
    [to diana]  if thou beest yet a fresh uncropped flower,
    choose thou thy husband, and i'll pay thy dower;
    for i can guess that by thy honest aid
    thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.-
    of that and all the progress, more and less,
    resolvedly more leisure shall express.
    all yet seems well; and if it end so meet,
    the bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.       [flourish]

epilogue
                             epilogue.

  king. the king's a beggar, now the play