scene:
rousillon; paris; florence; marseilles


act i. scene 1.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter bertram, the countess of rousillon, helena, and lafeu, all
in black

  countess. in delivering my son from me, i bury a second
husband.
  bertram. and i in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death
anew;
    but i must attend his majesty's command, to whom i am now in
    ward, evermore in subjection.
  lafeu. you shall find of the king a husband, madam; you, sir, a
    father. he that so generally is at all times good must of
    necessity hold his virtue to you, whose worthiness would stir
it
    up where it wanted, rather than lack it where there is such
    abundance.
  countess. what hope is there of his majesty's amendmen
 
 ___________________________
 
r lack of work. would,
for
    the king's sake, he were living! i think it would be the
death of
    the king's disease.
  lafeu. how call'd you the man you speak of, madam?
  countess. he was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was his
    great right to be so- gerard de narbon.
  lafeu. he was excellent indeed, madam; the king very lately
spoke
    of him admiringly and mourningly; he was skilful enough to
have
    liv'd still, if knowledge could be set up against mortality.
  bertram. what is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
  lafeu. a fistula, my lord.
  bertram. i heard not of it before.
  lafeu. i would it were not notorious. was this gentlewoman the
    daughter of gerard de narbon?
  countess. his sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
    overlooking. i have those hopes of her good that her
education
    promises; her dispositions she inherits, which makes fair
gifts
    fairer; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities,
    there com
 
 ___________________________
 
  the remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but
the
    tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek.
no
    more of this, helena; go to, no more, lest it be rather
thought
    you affect a sorrow than to have-
  helena. i do affect a sorrow indeed, but i have it too.
  lafeu. moderate lamentation is the right of the dead: excessive
    grief the enemy to the living.
  countess. if the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes
it
    soon mortal.
  bertram. madam, i desire your holy wishes.
  lafeu. how understand we that?
  countess. be thou blest, bertram, and succeed thy father
    in manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue
    contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
    share with thy birthright! love all, trust a few,
    do wrong to none; be able for thine enemy
    rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
    under thy own life's key; be check'd for silence,
    but never tax'd for speech. what heaven more will,
    
 
 ___________________________
 
that thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,
    fall on thy head! farewell. my lord,
    'tis an unseason'd courtier; good my lord,
    advise him.
  lafeu. he cannot want the best
    that shall attend his love.
  countess. heaven bless him! farewell, bertram.            exit
  bertram. the best wishes that can be forg'd in your thoughts be
    servants to you!  [to helena]  be comfortable to my mother,
your
    mistress, and make much of her.
  lafeu. farewell, pretty lady; you must hold the credit of your
    father.                             exeunt bertram and lafeu
  helena. o, were that all! i think not on my father;
    and these great tears grace his remembrance more
    than those i shed for him. what was he like?
    i have forgot him; my imagination
    
 
 ___________________________
 
carries no favour in't but bertram's.
    i am undone; there is no living, none,
    if bertram be away. 'twere all one
    that i should love a bright particular star
    and think to wed it, he is so above me.
    in his bright radiance and collateral light
    must i be comforted, not in his sphere.
    th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
    the hind that would be mated by the lion
    must die for love. 'twas pretty, though a plague,
    to see him every hour; to sit and draw
    his arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
    in our heart's table-heart too capab
 
 ___________________________
 
   to have us make denial.
  first lord. his love and wisdom,
    approv'd so to your majesty, may plead
    for amplest credence.
  king. he hath arm'd our answer,
    and florence is denied before he comes;
    yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
    the tuscan service, freely have they leave
    to stand on either part.
  second lord. it well may serve
    a nursery to our gentry, who are sick
    for breathing and exploit.
  king. what's he comes here?

              enter bertram, lafeu, and parolles

  first lord. it is the count rousillon, my good lord,
    young bertram.
  king. youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
    frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
    hath well compos'd thee. thy father's moral parts
    mayst thou inherit too! welcome to paris.
  bertram. my thanks and duty are your majesty's.
  king. i would i had that corporal soundness now,
    as when thy father and myself in friendship
    first tried our soldiership. he did look far
 
 ___________________________
 
his equal had awak'd them; and his honour,
    clock to itself, knew the true minute when
    exception bid him speak, and at this time
    his tongue obey'd his hand. who were below him
    he us'd as creatures of another place;
    and bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks,
    making them proud of his humility
    in their poor praise he humbled. such a man
    might be a copy to these younger times;
    which, followed well, would demonstrate them now
    but goers backward.
  bertram. his good remembrance, sir,
    lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
    so in approof lives not his epitaph
    as in your royal speech.
  king. would i were with him! he would always say-
    methinks i hear him now; his plausive words
    he scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them
    to grow there, and to bear- 'let me not live'-
    this his good melancholy oft began,
    on the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
    when it was out-'let me not live' quoth he
    'after 
 
 ___________________________
 
are
    mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
    expire before their fashions.' this he wish'd.
    i, after him, do after him wish too,
    since i nor wax nor honey can bring home,
    i quickly were dissolved from my hive,
    to give some labourers room.
  second lord. you're loved, sir;
    they that least lend it you shall lack you first.
  king. i fill a place, i know't. how long is't, count,
    since the physician at your father's died?
    he was much fam'd.
  bertram. some six months since, my lord.
  king. if he were living, i would try him yet-
    lend me an arm-the rest have worn me out
    with several applications. nature and sickness
    debate it at their leisure. welcome, count;
    my son's no dearer.
  bertram. thank your majesty.                 exeunt [flourish]




act i. scene 3.
rousillon. the count's palace

enter countess, steward, and clown

  countess. i will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?
  steward. madam, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act ii. scene 1.
paris. the king's palace

flourish of cornets. enter the king with divers young lords
taking leave
for the florentine war; bertram and parolles; attendants

  king. farewell, young lords; these war-like principles
    do not throw from you. and you, my lords, farewell;
    share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all,
    the gift doth stretch itself as 'tis receiv'd,
    and is enough for both.
  first lord. 'tis our hope, sir,
    after well-ent'red soldiers, to return
    and find your grace in health.
  king. no, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
    will not confess he owes the malady
    that doth my l
 
 ___________________________
 
e heed of them;
    they say our french lack language to deny,
    if they demand; beware of being captives
    before you serve.
    both. our hearts receive your warnings.
  king. farewell.  [to attendants]  come hither to me.
                                       the king retires attended
  first lord. o my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
  parolles. 'tis not his fault, the spark.
    second lord. o, 'tis brave wars!
  parolles. most admirable! i have seen those wars.
  bertram. i am commanded here and kept a coil with
    'too young' and next year' and "tis too early.'
  parolles. an thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.
  bertram. i shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
    creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
    till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
    but one to dance with. by heaven, i'll steal away.
  first lord. there's honour in the theft.
  parolles. commit it, count.
  second lord. i am your accessary; and so farewell.
  ber
 
 ___________________________
 
y sword and yours are kin. good sparks
and
    lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment
of
    the spinii one captain spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem
of
    war, here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword
    entrench'd it. say to him i live; and observe his reports for
me.
  first lord. we shall, noble captain.
  parolles. mars dote on you for his novices!       exeunt lords
    what will ye do?

                            re-enter the king

  bertram. stay; the king!
  parolles. use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you
have
    restrain'd yourself within the list of too cold an adieu. be
more
    expressive to them; for they wear themselves in the cap of
the
    time; there do muster true gait; eat, speak, and move, under
the
    influence of the most receiv'd star; and though the devil
lead
    the measure, such are to be followed. after them, and take a
more
    dilated farewell.
  bertram. and i will do so.
  p
 
 ___________________________
 
arolles. worthy fellows; and like to prove most sinewy
sword-men.
                                     exeunt bertram and parolles

                              enter lafeu

  lafeu.  [kneeling]  pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
  king. i'll fee thee to stand up.
  lafeu. then here's a man stands that has brought his pardon.
    i would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy;
    and that at my bidding you could so stand up.
  king. i would i had; so i had broke thy pate,
    and ask'd thee mercy for't.
  lafeu. good faith, across!
    but, my good lord, 'tis thus: will you be cur'd
 
 ___________________________
 
clown. o lord, sir!-why, there't serves well again.
  countess. an end, sir! to your business: give helen this,
    and urge her to a present answer back;
    commend me to my kinsmen and my son. this is not much.
  clown. not much commendation to them?
  countess. not much employment for you. you understand me?
  clown. most fruitfully; i am there before my legs.
  countess. haste you again.                              exeunt




act ii. scene 3.
paris. the king's palace

enter bertram, lafeu, and parolles

  lafeu. they say miracles are past; and we have our
philosophical
    persons to make modern and familiar things supernatural and
    causeless. hence is it that we make trifles of terrors,
    ensconcing ourselves into seeming knowledge when we should
submit
    ourselves to an unknown fear.
  parolles. why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath
shot
    out in our latter times.
  bertram. and so 'tis.
  lafeu. to be relinquish'd of the artists-
  pa
 
 ___________________________
 
r bed
    find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
  lafeu. these boys are boys of ice; they'll none have her.
    sure, they are bastards to the english; the french ne'er got
'em.
  helena. you are too young, too happy, and too good,
    to make yourself a son out of my blood.
  fourth lord. fair one, i think not so.
  lafeu. there's one grape yet; i am sure thy father drunk
wine-but
    if thou be'st not an ass, i am a youth of fourteen; i have
known
    thee already.
  helena.  [to bertram]  i dare not say i take you; but i give
    me and my service, ever whilst i live,
    into your guiding power. this is the man.
  king. why, then, young bertram, take her; she's thy wife.
  bertram. my wife, my liege! i shall beseech your highness,
    in such a business give me leave to use
    the help of mine own eyes.
  king. know'st thou not, bertram,
    what she has done for me?
  bertram. yes, my good lord;
    but never hope to know why i should marry her.
  king. thou know
 
 ___________________________
 
'st she has rais'd me from my sickly bed.
  bertram. but follows it, my lord, to bring me down
    must answer for your raising? i know her well:
    she had her breeding at my father's charge.
    a poor physician's daughter my wife! disdain
    rather corrupt me ever!
  king. 'tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
    i can build up. strange is it that our bloods,
    of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together,
    would quite confound distinction, yet stand off
    in differences so mighty. if she be
    all that is
 
 ___________________________
 
es itself as honour's born
    and is not like the sire. honours thrive
    when rather from our acts we them derive
    than our fore-goers. the mere word's a slave,
    debauch'd on every tomb, on every grave
    a lying trophy; and as oft is dumb
    where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb
    of honour'd bones indeed. what should be said?
    if thou canst like this creature as a maid,
    i can create the rest. virtue and she
    is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.
  bertram. i cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't.
  king. thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
  helena. that you are well restor'd, my lord, i'm glad.
    let the rest go.
  king. my honour's at the stake; which to defeat,
    i must produce my power. here, take her hand,
    proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
    that dost in vile misprision shackle up
    my love and her desert; that canst not dream
    we, poising us in her defective scale,
    shall wei
 
 ___________________________
 
where
    we please to have it grow. check thy contempt;
    obey our will, which travails in thy good;
    believe not thy disdain, but presently
    do thine own fortunes that obedient right
    which both thy duty owes and our power claims;
    or i will throw thee from my care for ever
    into the staggers and the careless lapse
    of youth and ignorance; both my revenge and hate
    loosing upon thee in the name of justice,
    without all terms of pity. speak; thine answer.
  bertram. pardon, my gracious lord; for i submit
    my fancy to your eyes. when i consider
    what great creation and what dole of honour
    flies where you bid it, i find that she which late
    was in my nobler thoughts most base is now
    the praised of the king; who, so ennobled,
    is as 'twere born so.
  king. take her by the hand,
    and tell her she is thine; to whom i promise
    a counterpoise, if not to thy estate
    a balance more replete.
  bertram. i take her hand.
  kin
 
 ___________________________
 
ted for men to breathe
    themselves upon thee.
  parolles. this is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
  lafeu. go to, sir; you were beaten in italy for picking a
kernel
    out of a pomegranate; you are a vagabond, and no true
traveller;
    you are more saucy with lords and honourable personages than
the
    commission of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry. you
are
    not worth another word, else i'd call you knave. i leave you.
 exit

                           enter bertram

  parolles. good, very, good, it is so then. good, very good; let
it
    be conceal'd awhile.
  bertram. undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
  parolles. what's the matter, sweetheart?
  bertram. although before the solemn priest i have sworn,
    i will not bed her.
  parolles. what, what, sweetheart?
  bertram. o my parolles, they have married me!
    i'll to the tuscan wars, and never bed her.
  parolles. france is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
    the tread of a man's 
 
 ___________________________
 
foot. to th' wars!
  bertram. there's letters from my mother; what th' import is i
know
    not yet.
  parolles. ay, that would be known. to th' wars, my boy, to th'
      wars!
    he wears his honour in a box unseen
    that hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
    spending his manly marrow in her arms,
    which should sustain the bound and high curvet
    of mars's fiery steed. to other regions!
    france is a stable; we that dwell in't jades;
    therefore, to th' war!
  bertram. it shall be so; i'll send her to my house,
    acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
    and wherefore i am fled; write to the king
    that which i durst not speak. his present gift
    shall furnish me to those italian fields
    where noble fellows strike. war is no strife
    to the dark house and the detested wife.
  parolles. will this capriccio hold in thee, art sure?
  bertram. go with me to my chamber and advise me.
    i'll send her straight away. to-morrow
    i'll to th
 
 ___________________________
 
d proceeding,
    strength'ned with what apology you think
    may make it probable need.
  helena. what more commands he?
  parolles. that, having this obtain'd, you presently
    attend his further pleasure.
  helena. in everything i wait upon his will.
  parolles. i shall report it so.
  helena. i pray you.                              exit parolles
    come, sirrah.                                         exeunt




act ii. scene 5.
paris. the king's palace

enter lafeu and bertram

  lafeu. but i hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
  bertram. yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
  lafeu. you have it from his own deliverance.
  bertram. and by other warranted testimony.
  lafeu. then my dial goes not true; i took this lark for a
bunting.
  bertram. i do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
knowledge,
    and accordingly valiant.
  lafeu. i have then sinn'd against his experience and
transgress'd
    against his valour; and my state that way
 
 ___________________________
 
 is dangerous, since
i
    cannot yet find in my heart to repent. here he comes; i pray
you
    make us friends; i will pursue the amity

                         enter parolles

  parolles.  [to bertram]  these things shall be done, sir.
  lafeu. pray you, sir, who's his tailor?
  parolles. sir!
  lafeu. o, i know him well. ay, sir; he, sir, 's a good workman,
a
    very good tailor.
  bertram.  [aside to parolles]  is she gone to the king?
  parolles. she is.
  bertram. will she away to-night?
  parolles. as you'll have her.
  bertram. i have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
    given order for our horses; and to-night,
    when i should take possession of the bride,
    end ere i do begin.
  lafeu. a good traveller is something at the latter end of a
dinner;
    but one that lies three-thirds and uses a known truth to pass
a
    thousand nothings with, should be once heard and thrice
beaten.
    god save you, captain.
  bertram. is there a
 
 ___________________________
 
ny unkindness between my lord and you,
monsieur?
  parolles. i know not how i have deserved to run into my lord's
    displeasure.
  lafeu. you have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs and
all,
    like him that leapt into the custard; and out of it you'll
run
    again, rather than suffer question for your residence.
  bertram. it may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
  lafeu. and shall do so ever, though i took him at's prayers.
    fare you well, my lord; and believe this of me: there can be
no
    kernal in this light nut; the soul of this man is his
clothes;
    trust him not in matter of heavy consequence; i have kept of
them
    tame, and know their natures. farewell, monsieur; i have
spoken
    better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand;
but we
    must do good against evil.        
 
 ___________________________
 
                      exit
  parolles. an idle lord, i swear.
  bertram. i think so.
  parolles. why, do you not know him?
  bertram. yes, i do know him well; and common speech
    gives him a worthy pass. here comes my clog.

                          enter helena

  helena. i have, sir, as i was commanded from you,
    spoke with the king, and have procur'd his leave
    for present parting; only he desires
    some private speech with you.
  bertram. i shall obey his will.
    you must not marvel, helen, at my course,
    which holds not colour with the time, nor does
    the ministration and required office
    on my particular. prepar'd i was not
    for such a business; therefore am i found
    so much unsettled. this drives me to entreat you
    that presently you take your way for home,
    and rather muse than ask why i entreat you;
    for my respects are better than they seem,
    and my appointments have in them a need

 
 ___________________________
 
    greater than shows itself at the first view
    to you that know them not. this to my mother.
                                               [giving a letter]
    'twill be two days ere i shall see you; so
    i leave you to your wisdom.
  helena. sir, i can nothing say
    but that i am your most obedient servant.
  bertram. come, come, no more of that.
  helena. and ever shall
    with true observance seek to eke out that
    wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd
    to equal my great fortune.
  bertram. let that go.
    my haste is very great. farewell; hie home.
  helena. pray, sir, your pardon.
  bertram. well, what would you say?
  helena. i am not worthy of the wealth i owe,
    nor dare i say 'tis mine, and yet it is;
    but, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
    what law doe
 
 ___________________________
 
s vouch mine own.
  bertram. what would you have?
  helena. something; and scarce so much; nothing, indeed.
    i would not tell you what i would, my lord.
    faith, yes:
    strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.
  bertram. i pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
  helena. i shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
  bertram. where are my other men, monsieur?
    farewell!                                        exit helena

    go thou toward home, where i will never come
    whilst i can shake my sword or hear the drum.
    away, and for our flight.
  parolles. bravely, coragio!                             exeunt



<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon universit
 
 ___________________________
 
                         exit

  countess.  [reads]  'i have sent you a daughter-in-law; she
hath
    recovered the king and undone me. i have wedded her, not
bedded
    her; and sworn to make the "not" eternal. you shall hear i am
run
    away; know it before the report come. if there be breadth
enough
    in the world, i will hold a long distance. my duty to you.
                                           your unfortunate son,
                                                       bertram.'
    this is not well, rash and unbridled boy,
    to fly the favours of so good a king,
    to pluck his indignation on thy head
    by the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
    for the contempt of empire.

                           re-enter clown

  clown. o madam, yonder is heavy news within between two
soldiers
    and my young lady.
  countess. what is the -matter?
  clown. nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort;
your
    son will not be kill'd so soon as i t
 
 ___________________________
 
r,
    as oft it loses all. i will be gone.
    my being here it is that holds thee hence.
    shall i stay here to do 't? no, no, although
    the air of paradise did fan the house,
    and angels offic'd all. i will be gone,
    that pitiful rumour may report my flight
    to consolate thine ear. come, night; end, day.
    for with the dark, poor thief, i'll steal away.         exit




act iii. scene 3.
florence. before the duke's palace

flourish. enter the duke of florence, bertram, parolles,
soldiers,
drum and trumpets

  duke. the general of our horse thou art; and we,
    great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
    upon thy promising fortune.
  bertram. sir, it is
    a charge too heavy for my strength; but yet
    we'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
    to th' extreme edge of hazard.
  duke. then go thou forth;
    and fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
    as thy auspicious mistress!
  bertram. this very day,
    great mars, i pu
 
 ___________________________
 
 a detesting lord.
  widow. i sweet, good creature, wheresoe'er she is
    her heart weighs sadly. this young maid might do her
    a shrewd turn, if she pleas'd.
  helena. how do you mean?
    may be the amorous count solicits her
    in the unlawful purpose.
  widow. he does, indeed;
    and brokes with all that can in such a suit
    corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
    but she is arm'd for him, and keeps her guard
    in honestest defence.

    enter, with drum and colours, bertram, parolles, and the
                          whole army

  mariana. the gods forbid else!
  widow. so, now they come.
    that is antonio, the duke's eldest son;
    that, escalus.
  helena. which is the frenchman?
  diana. he-
    that with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
    i would he lov'd his wife; if he were honester
    he were much goodlier. is't not a handsome gentleman?
  helena. i like him well.
  diana. 'tis pity he is not honest. yond's that same knave
    that
 
 ___________________________
 
 leads him to these places; were i his lady
    i would poison that vile rascal.
  helena. which is he?
  diana. that jack-an-apes with scarfs. why is he melancholy?
  helena. perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.
  parolles. lose our drum! well.
  mariana. he's shrewdly vex'd at something.
    look, he has spied us.
  widow. marry, hang you!
  mariana. and your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
                              exeunt bertram, parolles, and army
  widow. the troop is past. come, pilgrim, i will bring you
    where you shall host. of enjoin'd penitents
    there's four or five, to great saint jaques bound,
    already at my house.
  helena. i humbly thank you.
    please it this matron and this gentle maid
    to eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
    i will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
    worthy the note.
    both. we'll take your offer
 
 ___________________________
 
 kindly.                   exeunt




act iii. scene 6.
camp before florence

enter bertram, and the two french lords

  second lord. nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his
way.
  first lord. if your lordship find him not a hiding, hold me no
more
    in your respect.
  second lord. on my life, my lord, a bubble.
  bertram. do you think i am so far deceived in him?
  second lord. believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
    without any malice, but to speak of him as my kinsman, he's a
    most notable coward, an infinite and endless liar, an hourly
    promise-breaker, the owner of no one good quality worthy your
    lordship's entertainment.
  first lord. it were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in
his
    virtue, which he hath not, he might at some great and trusty
    business in a m
 
 ___________________________
 
ain danger fail you.
  bertram. i would i knew in what particular action to try him.
  first lord. none better than to let him fetch off his drum,
which
    you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
  second lord. i with a troop of florentines will suddenly
surprise
    him; such i will have whom i am sure he knows not from the
enemy.
    we will bind and hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no
other
    but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries
when
    we bring him to our own tents. be but 
 
 ___________________________
 
 o, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his
drum; he
    says he has a stratagem for't. when your lordship sees the
bottom
    of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump
of
    ore will be melted, if you give him not john drum's
    entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. here he
comes.

                      enter parolles

  second lord. o, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour
of
    his design; let him fetch off his drum in any hand.
  bertram. how now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your
    disposition.
  first lord. a pox on 't; let it go; 'tis but a drum.
  parolles. but a drum! is't but a drum? a drum so lost! there
was
    excellent command: to charge in with our horse upon our own
    wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
  first lord. that was not to be blam'd in the command of the
    service; it was a disaster of war that caesar himself could
not
    have prevented, if he had been there to command.
  bertram
 
 ___________________________
 
. well, we cannot greatly condemn our success.
    some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it is not
to
    be recovered.
  parolles. it might have been recovered.
  bertram. it might, but it is not now.
  parolles. it is to be recovered. but that the merit of service
is
    seldom attributed to the true and exact performer, i would
have
    that drum or another, or 'hic jacet.'
  bertram. why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur. if you
think
    your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour
    again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the
enterprise,
    and go on; i will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit. if
you
    speed well in it, the duke shall both speak of it and extend
to
    you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost
    syllable of our worthiness.
  parolles. by the hand of a soldier, i will undertake it.
  b
 
 ___________________________
 
ertram. but you must not now slumber in it.
  parolles. i'll about it this evening; and i will presently pen
    down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put
myself
    into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear
further
    from me.
  bertram. may i be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about
it?
  parolles. i know not what the success will be, my lord, but the
    attempt i vow.
  bertram. i know th' art valiant; and, to the possibility of thy
soldiership,
    will subscribe for thee. farewell.
  parolles. i love not many words.                          exit
  second lord. no more than a fish loves water. is not this a
strange
    fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems to undertake this
    business, which he knows is not to be done; damns himself to
do,
    and dares better be damn'd than to do 't.
  first lord. you do not know him, my lord, as we do. certain it

 
 ___________________________
 
is
    that he will steal himself into a man's favour, and for a
week
    escape a great deal of discoveries; but when you find him
out,
    you have him ever after.
  bertram. why, do you think he will make no deed at all of this
that
    so seriously he does address himself unto?
  second lord. none in the world; but return with an invention,
and
    clap upon you two or three probable lies. but we have almost
    emboss'd him. you shall see his fall to-night; for indeed he
is
    not for your lordship's respect.
  first lord. we'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case
him.
    he was first smok'd by the old lord lafeu. when his disguise
and
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him; which
you
    shall see this very night.
  second lord. i must go look my twigs; he shall be caught.
  bertram. your brother, he shall go along with me.
  second lord. as't please your lordship. i'll leave you.   exit
  bertram. now will i lead you to the house, and show you
    the lass i spoke of.
  first lord. but you say she's honest.
  bertram. that's all the fault. i spoke with her but once,
    and found her wondrous cold; but i sent to her,
    by this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
    tokens and letters which she did re-send;
    and this is all i have done. she's a fair creature;
    will you go see her?
  first lord. with all my heart, my lord.                 exeunt




act iii. scene 7.
florence. the widow's house

enter helena and widow

  helena. if you misdoubt me that i am not she,
    i know not
 
 ___________________________
 
 within
  second lord. go, tell the count rousillon and my brother
    we have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
    till we do hear from them.
  second soldier. captain, i will.
  second lord. 'a will betray us all unto ourselves-
    inform on that.
  second soldier. so i will, sir.
  second lord. till then i'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
                                                          exeunt




act iv. scene 2.
florence. the widow's house

enter bertram and diana

  bertram. they told me that your name was fontibell.
  diana. no, my good lord, diana.
  bertram. titled goddess;
    and worth it, with addition! but, fair soul,
    in your fine frame hath love no quality?
    if the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
    you are no maiden, but a monument;
    when you are dead, you should be such a one
    as you are now, for you are cold and stern;
    and now you should be as your mother was
    when your sweet self was got.

 
 ___________________________
 
  diana. she then was honest.
  bertram. so should you be.
  diana. no.
    my mother did but duty; such, my lord,
    as you owe to your wife.
  bertram. no more o'that!
    i prithee do not strive against my vows.
    i was compell'd to her; but i love thee
    by love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever
    do thee all rights of service.
  diana. ay, so you serve us
    till we serve you; but when you have our roses
    you barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
    and mock us with our bareness.
  bertram. how have i sworn!
  diana. 'tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
    but the plain single vow that is vow'd
 
 ___________________________
 
 true.
    what is not holy, that we swear not by,
    but take the high'st to witness. then, pray you, tell me:
    if i should swear by jove's great attributes
    i lov'd you dearly, would you believe my oaths
    when i did love you ill? this has no holding,
    to swear by him whom i protest to love
    that i will work against him. therefore your oaths
    are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd-
    at least in my opinion.
  bertram. change it, change it;
    be not so holy-cruel. love is holy;
    and my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
    that you do charge men with. stand no more off,
    but give thyself unto my sick desires,
    who then recovers. say thou art mine, and ever
    my love as it begins shall so persever.
  diana. i see that men make hopes in such a case
    that we'll forsake ourselves. give me that ring.
  bertram. i'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
    to give it from me.
  diana.
 
 ___________________________
 
 will you not, my lord?
  bertram. it is an honour 'longing to our house,
    bequeathed down from many ancestors;
    which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
    in me to lose.
  diana. mine honour's such a ring:
    my chastity's the jewel of our house,
    bequeathed down from many ancestors;
    which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
    in me to lose. thus your own proper wisdom
    brings in the champion honour on my part
    against your vain assault.
  bertram. here, take my ring;
    my house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,
    and i'll be bid by thee.
  diana. when midnight comes, knock at my chamber window;
    i'll order take my mother shall not hear.
    now will i charge you in the band of truth,
    when you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed,
    remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
    my reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
    when back again this ring shall be deliver'd.
    and on your finger in the night 
 
 ___________________________
 
i'll put
    another ring, that what in time proceeds
    may token to the future our past deeds.
    adieu till then; then fail not. you have won
    a wife of me, though there my hope be done.
  bertram. a heaven on earth i have won by wooing thee.
 exit
  diana. for which live long to thank both heaven and me!
    you may so in the end.
    my mother told me just how he would woo,
    as if she sat in's heart; she says all men
    have the like oaths. he had sworn to marry me
    when his wife's dead; therefore i'll lie with him
    when i am buried. since frenchmen are so braid,
    marry that will, i live and die a maid.
    only, in this disguise, i think't no sin
    to cozen h
 
 ___________________________
 
       enter a messenger

    how now? where's your master?
  servant. he met the duke in the street, sir; of whom he hath
taken
    a solemn leave. his lordship will next morning for france.
the
    duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the king.
  second lord. they shall be no more than needful there, if they
were
    more than they can commend.
  first lord. they cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness.
    here's his lordship now.

                        enter bertram

    how now, my lord, is't not after midnight?
  bertram. i have to-night dispatch'd sixteen businesses, a
month's
    length apiece; by an abstract of success: i have congied with
the
    duke, done my adieu with his nearest; buried a wife, mourn'd
for
    her; writ to my lady mother i am returning; entertain'd my
    convoy; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected
many
    nicer needs. the last was the greatest, but that i have not
ended
    yet.
  second lord. if 
 
 ___________________________
 
the business be of any difficulty and this
morning
    your departure hence, it requires haste of your lordship.
  bertram. i mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear
of it
    hereafter. but shall we have this dialogue between the fool
and
    the soldier? come, bring forth this counterfeit module has
    deceiv'd me like a double-meaning prophesier.
  second lord. bring him forth.  [exeunt soldiers]  has sat i'
th'
    stocks all night, poor gallant knave.
  bertram. no matter; his heels have deserv'd it, in usurping his
    spurs so long. how does he carry himself?
  second lord. i have told your lordship already the stocks carry


    him. but to answer you as you would be understood: he weeps
like
    a wench that had shed her milk; he hath confess'd himself to
    morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time of his
    remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i'
th'
    stocks. and what think you he hath confess'd?

 
 ___________________________
 
  bertram. nothing of me, has 'a?
  second lord. his confession is taken, and it shall be read to
his
    face; if your lordship be in't, as i believe you are, you
must
    have the patience to hear it.

                   enter parolles guarded, and
                  first soldier as interpreter

  bertram. a plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of me.
  second lord. hush, hush! hoodman comes. portotartarossa.
  first soldier. he calls for the tortures. what will you say
without
    'em?
  parolles. i will confess what i know without constraint; if ye
    pinch me like a pasty, i can say no more.
  first soldier. bosko chimurcho.
  second lord. boblibindo chicurmurco.
  first soldier. you are a merciful general. our general bids you
    answer to what i shall ask you out of a no
 
 ___________________________
 
te.
  parolles. and truly, as i hope to live.
  first soldier. 'first demand of him how many horse the duke is
    strong.' what say you to that?
  parolles. five or six thousand; but very weak and
unserviceable.
    the troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor
    rogues, upon my reputation and credit, and as i hope to live.
  first soldier. shall i set down your answer so?
  parolles. do; i'll take the sacrament on 't, how and which way
you
    will.
  bertram. all's one to him. what a past-saving slave is this!
  second lord. y'are deceiv'd, my lord; this is monsieur
parolles,
    the gallant militarist-that was his own phrase-that had the
whole
    theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in
the
    chape of his dagger.
  first lord. i will never trust a man again for keeping his
sword
    clean; nor believe he can have everything in him by wearing
his
    apparel neatly.
  first soldier. well, that's set down.
  paro
 
 ___________________________
 
lles. 'five or six thousand horse' i said-i will say true-
'or
    thereabouts' set down, for i'll speak truth.
  second lord. he's very near the truth in this.
  bertram. but i con him no thanks for't in the nature he
delivers it.
  parolles. 'poor rogues' i pray you say.
  first soldier. well, that's set down.
  parolles. i humbly thank you, sir. a truth's a truth-the rogues
are
    marvellous poor.
  first soldier. 'demand of him of what strength they are
a-foot.'
    what say you to that?
  parolles. by my troth, sir, if i were to live this present
hour, i
    will tell true. let me see: spurio, a hundred and fifty;
    sebastian, so many; coram
 
 ___________________________
 
bus, so many; jaques, so many;
guiltian,
    cosmo, lodowick, and gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine own
    company, chitopher, vaumond, bentii, two hundred fifty each;
so
    that the muster-file, rotten and sound, upon my life, amounts
not
    to fifteen thousand poll; half of the which dare not shake
the
    snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves to
    pieces.
  bertram. what shall be done to him?
  second lord. nothing, but let him have thanks. demand of him my
    condition, and what credit i have with the duke.
  first soldier. well, that's set down. 'you shall demand of him
    whether one captain dumain be i' th' camp, a frenchman; what
his
    reputation is with the duke, what his valour, honesty,
expertness
    in wars; or whether he thinks it were not possible, with
    well-weighing sums of gold, to corrupt him to a revolt.' what
say
    yo
 
 ___________________________
 
u to this? what do you know of it?
  parolles. i beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the
    inter'gatories. demand them singly.
  first soldier. do you know this captain dumain?
  parolles. i know him: 'a was a botcher's prentice in paris,
from
    whence he was whipt for getting the shrieve's fool with
child-a
    dumb innocent that could not say him nay.
  bertram. nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though i know his
    brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
  first soldier. well, is this captain in the duke of florence's
    camp?
  parolles. upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
  second lord. nay, look not so upon me; we shall hear of your
    lordship anon.
  first soldier. what is his reputation with the duke?
  parolles. the duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of
    mine; and writ to me this other day to turn him out
 
 ___________________________
 
 o' th'
band.
    i think i have his letter in my pocket.
  first soldier. marry, we'll search.
  parolles. in good sadness, i do not know; either it is there or
it
    is upon a file with the duke's other letters in my tent.
  first soldier. here 'tis; here's a paper. shall i read it to
you?
  parolles. i do not know if it be it or no.
  bertram. our interpreter does it well.
  second lord. excellently.
  first soldier.  [reads]  'dian, the count's a fool, and full of
    gold.'
  parolles. that is not the duke's letter, sir; that is an
    advertisement to a proper maid in florence, one diana, to
take
    heed of the allurement of one count rousillon, a foolish idle
    boy, but for all that very ruttish. i pray you, sir, put it
up
    again.
  first soldier. nay, i'll read it first by your favour.
  parolles. my meaning i
 
 ___________________________
 
n't, i protest, was very honest in the
behalf
    of the maid; for i knew the young count to be a dangerous and
    lascivious boy, who is a whale to virginity, and devours up
all
    the fry it finds.
  bertram. damnable both-sides rogue!
  first soldier.                                         [reads]
    'when he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it;
    after he scores, he never pays the score.
    half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
    he ne'er pays after-debts, take it before.
    and say a soldier, dian, told thee this:
    men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
    for count of this, the count's a fool, i know it,
    who pays before, but not when he doe
 
 ___________________________
 
s owe it.
    thine, as he vow'd to thee in thine ear,
                                                   parolles.'
  bertram. he shall be whipt through the army with this rhyme
in's
    forehead.
  first lord. this is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
    linguist, and the amnipotent soldier.
  bertram. i could endure anything before but a cat, and now he's
a
    cat to me.
  first soldier. i perceive, sir, by our general's looks we shall
be
    fain to hang you.
  parolles. my life, sir, in any case! not that i am afraid to
die,
    but that, my offences being many, i would repent out the
    remainder of nature. let me live, sir, in a dungeon, i' th'
    stocks, or anywhere, so i may live.
  first soldier. we'll see what may be done, so you confess
freely;
    therefore, once m
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
lie,
    sir, with such volubility that you would think truth were a
fool.
    drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk;
and
    in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bedclothes
about
    him; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw. i
have
    but little more to say, sir, of his honesty. he has
everything
    that an honest man should not have; what an honest man should
    have he has nothing.
  second lord. i begin to love him for this.
  bertram. for this description of thine honesty? a pox upon him!
for
    me, he's more and more a cat.
  first soldier. what say you to his expertness in war?
  parolles. faith, sir, has led the drum before the english
    tragedians-to belie him i will not-and more of his
soldier-ship
    i know not, except in that country he had the honour to be
the
    officer at a place there called mile-end to instruct for the
    doubling of files-i would do the man what honour i can-but of
    this i a
 
 ___________________________
 
m not certain.
  second lord. he hath out-villain'd villainy so far that the
rarity
    redeems him.
  bertram. a pox on him! he's a cat still.
  first soldier. his qualities being at this poor price, i need
not
    to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
  parolles. sir, for a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of
his
    salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut th' entail from all


    remainders and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.
  first soldier. what's his brother, the other captain dumain?
  first lord. why does he ask him of me?
  first soldier. what's he?
  par
 
 ___________________________
 
emedy, sir, but you must die.
    the general says you that have so traitorously discover'd the


    secrets of your army, and made such pestiferous reports of
men
    very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use;
therefore
    you must die. come, headsman, off with his head.
  parolles. o lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
  first soldier. that shall you, and take your leave of all your
    friends.  [unmuffling him]  so look about you; know you any
here?
  bertram. good morrow, noble captain.
  first lord. god bless you, captain parolles.
  second lord. god save you, noble captain.
  first lord. captain, what greeting will you to my lord lafeu? i
am
    for france.
  second lord. good captain, will you give me a copy of the
sonnet
    you writ to diana in behalf of the count rousillon? an i were
not
    a very coward i'd compel it of you; but fare you well.
                                        exeunt bertram and lords
  first soldier. you 
 
 ___________________________
 
 great offence is dead,
    and deeper than oblivion do we bury
    th' incensing relics of it; let him approach,
    a stranger, no offender; and inform him
    so 'tis our will he should.
  gentleman. i shall, my liege.                 exit gentleman
  king. what says he to your daughter? have you spoke?
  lafeu. all that he is hath reference to your highness.
  king. then shall we have a match. i have letters sent me
    that sets him high in fame.

                          enter bertram

  lafeu. he looks well on 't.
  king. i am not a day of season,
    for thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
    in me at once. but to the brightest beams
    distracted clouds give way; so stand thou forth;
    the time is fair again.
  bertram. my high-repented blames,
    dear sovereign, pardon to me.
  king. all is whole;
    not one word more of the consumed time.
    let's take the instant by the forward top;
    for we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
    th' inaudible
 
 ___________________________
 
 and noiseless foot of time
    steals ere we can effect them. you remember
    the daughter of this lord?
  bertram. admiringly, my liege. at first
    i stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
    durst make too bold herald of my tongue;
    where the impression of mine eye infixing,
    contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
    which warp'd the line of every other favour,
    scorn'd a fair colour or express'd it stol'n,
    extended or contracted all proportions
    to a most hideous object. thence it came
    that she whom all men prais'd, and whom myself,
    since i have lost, have lo
 
 ___________________________
 
ow forget her.
    send forth your amorous token for fair maudlin.
    the main consents are had; and here we'll stay
    to see our widower's second marriage-day.
  countess. which better than the first, o dear heaven, bless!
    or, ere they meet, in me, o nature, cesse!
  lafeu. come on, my son, in whom my house's name
    must be digested; give a favour from you,
    to sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
    that she may quickly come.
                                          [bertram gives a ring]
    by my old beard,
    and ev'ry hair that's on 't, helen, that's dead,
    was a sweet creature; such a ring as this,
    the last that e'er i took her leave at court,
    i saw upon her finger.
  bertram. hers it was not.
  king. now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye,
    while i was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't.
    this ring was mine; and when i gave it helen
    i bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
    necessitied to help, that by this token
    i woul
 
 ___________________________
 
d relieve her. had you that craft to reave her
    of what should stead her most?
  bertram. my gracious sovereign,
    howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
    the ring was never hers.
  countess. son, on my life,
    i have seen her wear it; and she reckon'd it
    at her life's rate.
  lafeu. i am sure i saw her wear it.
  bertram. you are deceiv'd, my lord; she never saw it.
    in florence was it from a casement thrown me,
    wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
    of her that threw it. noble she was, and thought
    i stood engag'd; but when i had subscrib'd
    to mine own fortune, and inform'd her fully
    i could not answer in that course of honour
    as she had made the overture, she ceas'd,
    in heavy satisfaction, and would never
    receive the ring again.
  king. plutus himself,
    th
 
 ___________________________
 
plying med'cine,
    hath not in nature's mystery more science
    than i have in this ring. 'twas mine, 'twas helen's,
    whoever gave it you. then, if you know
    that you are well acquainted with yourself,
    confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
    you got it from her. she call'd the saints to surety
    that she would never put it from her finger
    unless she gave it to yourself in bed-
    where you have never come- or sent it us
    upon her great disaster.
  bertram. she never saw it.
  king. thou speak'st it falsely, as i love mine honour;
    and mak'st conjectural fears to come into me
    which i would fain shut out. if it should prove
    that thou art so inhuman- 'twill not prove so.
    and yet i know not- thou didst hate her deadly,
    and she is dead; which nothing, but to close
    her eyes myself, could win me to believe
    more than to see this ring. take him away.
                                          [guards seize bertram]
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 my fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
    shall tax my fears of little vanity,
    having vainly fear'd too little. away with him.
    we'll sift this matter further.
  bertram. if you shall prove
    this ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
    prove that i husbanded her bed in florence,
    where she yet never was.                       exit, guarded
  king. i am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings.

                        enter a gentleman

  gentleman. gracious sovereign,
    whether i have been to blame or no, i know not:
    here's a petition from a florentine,
    who hath, for four or five removes, come short
    to tender it herself. i undertook it,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
                                diana capilet.'
  lafeu. i will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for this.
    i'll none of him.
  king. the heavens have thought well on thee, lafeu,
    to bring forth this discov'ry. seek these suitors.
    go speedily, and bring again the count.
                                               exeunt attendants
    i am afeard the life of helen, lady,
    was foully snatch'd.
  countess. now, justice on the doers!

                       enter bertram, guarded

  king. i wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you.
    and that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
    yet you desire to marry.
                                           enter widow and diana
    what woman's that?
  diana. i am, my lord, a wretched florentine,
    derived from the ancient capilet.
    my suit, as i do understand, you know,
    and therefore know how far i may be pitied.
  widow. i am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
    both suffer under t
 
 ___________________________
 
his complaint we bring,
    and both shall cease, without your remedy.
  king. come hither, count; do you know these women?
  bertram. my lord, i neither can nor will deny
    but that i know them. do they charge me further?
  diana. why do you look so strange upon your wife?
  bertram. she's none of mine, my lord.
  diana. if you shall marry,
    you give away this hand, and that is mine;
    you give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
    you give away myself, which is known mine;
    for i by vow am so embodied yours
    that she which marries you must marry me,
    either both or none.
  lafeu.  [to bertram]  your reputation comes too short for
    my daughter; you are no husband for her.
  bertram. my lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
    whom s
 
 ___________________________
 
ometime i have laugh'd with. let your highness
    lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
    than for to think that i would sink it here.
  king. sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
    till your deeds gain them. fairer prove your honour
    than in my thought it lies!
  diana. good my lord,
    ask him upon his oath if he does think
    he had not my virginity.
  king. what say'st thou to her?
  bertram. she's impudent, my lord,
    and was a common gamester to the camp.
  diana. he does me wrong, my lord; if i were so
    he might have bought me at a common price.
    do not believe him. o, behold this ring,
    whose high respect and rich validity
    did lack a parallel; yet, for all that,
    he gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
    if i be one.
  countess. he blushes, and 'tis it.
    of six preceding ancestors, that gem
    conferr'd by testament to th' sequent issue,
    ha
 
 ___________________________
 
th it been ow'd and worn. this is his wife:
    that ring's a thousand proofs.
  king. methought you said
    you saw one here in court could witness it.
  diana. i did, my lord, but loath am to produce
    so bad an instrument; his name's parolles.
  lafeu. i saw the man to-day, if man he be.
  king. find him, and bring him hither.        exit an attendant
  bertram. what of him?
    he's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
    with all the spots o' th' world tax'd and debauch'd,
    whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
    am i or that or this for what he'll utter
    that will speak anything?
  king. she hath that ring of yours.
  bertram. i think she has. certain it is i lik'd her,
    and boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
    she knew her distance, and did angle for me,
    madding my eagerness with her restraint,
    as all impe
 
 ___________________________
 
diments in fancy's course
    are motives of more fancy; and, in fine,
    her infinite cunning with her modern grace
    subdu'd me to her rate. she got the ring;
    and i had that which any inferior might
    at market-price have bought.
  diana. i must be patient.
    you that have turn'd off a first so noble wife
    may justly diet me. i pray you yet-
    since you lack virtue, i will lose a husband-
    send for your ring, i will return it home,
    and give me mine again.
  bertram. i have it not.
  king. what ring was yours, i pray you?
  diana. sir, much like
    the same upon your finger.
  king. know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
  diana. and this was it i gave him, being abed.
  king. the story, then, goes false you threw it him
    out of a casement.
  diana. i have spoke the truth.

                       enter parolles

  bertram. my lord, i do confess the ring was hers.
  king. you boggle shrewdly; every feather starts you.
    is this t
 
 ___________________________
 
    he knows himself my bed he hath defil'd;
    and at that time he got his wife with child.
    dead though she be, she feels her young one kick;
    so there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick-
    and now behold the meaning.

                     re-enter widow with helena

  king. is there no exorcist
    beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
    is't real that i see?
  helena. no, my good lord;
    'tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
    the name and not the thing.
  bertram. both, both; o, pardon!
  helena. o, my good lord, when i was like this maid,
    i found you wondrous kind. there is your ring,
    and, look you, here's your letter. this it says:
    'when from my finger you can get this ring,
    and are by me with child,' etc. this is done.
    will you be mine now you are doubly won?
  bertram. if she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
    i'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
  helena. if it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
    dea