n austria,
    with caution, that the florentine will move us
    for speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
    prejudicates the business, and would seem
    to have us make denial.
  first lord. his love and wisdom,
    approv'd so to your majesty, may plead
    for amplest credence.
  king. he hath arm'd our answer,
    and florence is denied before he comes;
    yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
    the tuscan service, freely have they leave
    to stand on either part.
  second lord. it well may serve
    a nursery to our gentry, who are sick
    for breathing and exploit.
  king. what's he comes here?

              enter bertram, lafeu, and parolles

  first lord. it is the count rousillon, my good lord,
    young bertram.
  king. youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
    frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
    hath well compos'd thee. thy father's moral parts
    mayst thou inherit too! welcome to paris.
  bertram. my thanks and duty are your majes
 
 ___________________________
 
e and heel of pastime,
    when it was out-'let me not live' quoth he
    'after my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
    of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
    all but new things disdain; whose judgments are
    mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
    expire before their fashions.' this he wish'd.
    i, after him, do after him wish too,
    since i nor wax nor honey can bring home,
    i quickly were dissolved from my hive,
    to give some labourers room.
  second lord. you're loved, sir;
    they that least lend it you shall lack you first.
  king. i fill a place, i know't. how long is't, count,
    since the physician at your father's died?
    he was much fam'd.
  bertram. some six months since, my lord.
  king. if he were living, i would try him yet-
    lend me an arm-the rest have worn me out
    with several applications. nature and sickness
    debate it at their leisure. welcome, count;
    my son's no dearer.
  bertram. thank your majesty
 
 ___________________________
 
d find your grace in health.
  king. no, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
    will not confess he owes the malady
    that doth my life besiege. farewell, young lords;
    whether i live or die, be you the sons
    of worthy frenchmen; let higher italy-
    those bated that inherit but the fall
    of the last monarchy-see that you come
    not to woo honour, but to wed it; when
    the bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
    that fame may cry you aloud. i say farewell.
  second lord. health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
  king. those girls of italy, take heed of them;
    they say our french lack language to deny,
    if they demand; beware of being captives
    before you serve.
    both. our hearts receive your warnings.
  king. farewell.  [to attendants]  come hither to me.
                                       the king retires attended
  first lord. o my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
  parolles. 'tis not his fault, the spark.
    second l
 
 ___________________________
 
olles. most admirable! i have seen those wars.
  bertram. i am commanded here and kept a coil with
    'too young' and next year' and "tis too early.'
  parolles. an thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.
  bertram. i shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
    creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
    till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
    but one to dance with. by heaven, i'll steal away.
  first lord. there's honour in the theft.
  parolles. commit it, count.
  second lord. i am your accessary; and so farewell.
  bertram. i grow to you, and our parting is a tortur'd body.
  first lord. farewell, captain.
  second lord. sweet monsieur parolles!
  parolles. noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. good sparks
and
    lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment
of
    the spinii one captain spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem
of
    war, here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword
    entrench'd it. say to him i live; and obser
 
 ___________________________
 
ena. now, dian, from thy altar do i fly,
    and to imperial love, that god most high,
    do my sighs stream. sir, will you hear my suit?
  first lord. and grant it.
  helena. thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
  lafeu. i had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for
my
    life.
  helena. the honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
    before i speak, too threat'ningly replies.
    love make your fortunes twenty times above
    her that so wishes, and her humble love!
  second lord. no better, if you please.
  helena. my wish receive,
    which great love grant; and so i take my leave.
  lafeu. do all they deny her? an they were sons of mine i'd have
    them whipt; or i would send them to th' turk to make eunuchs
of.
  helena. be not afraid that i your hand should take;
    i'll never do you wrong for your own sake.
    blessing upon your vows; and in your bed
    find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
  lafeu. these boys are boys of ice; they'll none have her.
 
 ___________________________
 
e, attended; two
               french lords, with a troop of soldiers

  duke. so that, from point to point, now have you heard
    the fundamental reasons of this war;
    whose great decision hath much blood let forth
    and more thirsts after.
  first lord. holy seems the quarrel
    upon your grace's part; black and fearful
    on the opposer.
  duke. therefore we marvel much our cousin france
    would in so just a business shut his bosom
    against our borrowing prayers.
  second lord. good my lord,
    the reasons of our state i cannot yield,
    but like a common and an outward man
    that the great figure of a council frames
    by self-unable motion; therefore dare not
    say what i think of it, since i have found
    myself in my incertain grounds to fail
    as often as i guess'd.
  duke. be it his pleasure.
  first lord. but i am sure the younger of our nature,
    that surfeit on their ease, will day by day
    come here for physic.
  duke. welcome shal
 
 ___________________________
 

    there's four or five, to great saint jaques bound,
    already at my house.
  helena. i humbly thank you.
    please it this matron and this gentle maid
    to eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
    i will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
    worthy the note.
    both. we'll take your offer kindly.                   exeunt




act iii. scene 6.
camp before florence

enter bertram, and the two french lords

  second lord. nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his
way.
  first lord. if your lordship find him not a hiding, hold me no
more
    in your respect.
  second lord. on my life, my lord, a bubble.
  bertram. do you think i am so far deceived in him?
  second lord. believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
    without any malice, but to speak of him as my kinsman, he's a
    most notable coward, an infinite and endless liar, an hourly
    promise-breaker, the owner of no one good 
 
 ___________________________
 
quality worthy your
    lordship's entertainment.
  first lord. it were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in
his
    virtue, which he hath not, he might at some great and trusty
    business in a main danger fail you.
  bertram. i would i knew in what particular action to try him.
  first lord. none better than to let him fetch off his drum,
which
    you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
  second lord. i with a troop of florentines will suddenly
surprise
    him; such i will have whom i am sure he knows not from the
enemy.
    we will bind and hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no
other
    but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries
when
    we bring him to our own tents. be but your lordship present
at
    his examination; if he do not, for the promise of his life
and in
    the highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
    deliver all the inte
 
 ___________________________
 
inst you, and
that
    with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my
    judgment in anything.
  first lord. o, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his
drum; he
    says he has a stratagem for't. when your lordship sees the
bottom
    of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump
of
    ore will be melted, if you give him not john drum's
    entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. here he
comes.

                      enter parolles

  second lord. o, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour
of
    his design; let him fetch off his drum in any hand.
  bertram. how now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your
    disposition.
  first lord. a pox on 't; let it go; 'tis but a drum.
  parolles. but a drum! is't but a drum? a drum so lost! there
was
    excellent command: to charge in with our horse upon our own
    wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
  first lord. that was not to be blam'd in the command of the
    servi
 
 ___________________________
 
  down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put
myself
    into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear
further
    from me.
  bertram. may i be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about
it?
  parolles. i know not what the success will be, my lord, but the
    attempt i vow.
  bertram. i know th' art valiant; and, to the possibility of thy
soldiership,
    will subscribe for thee. farewell.
  parolles. i love not many words.                          exit
  second lord. no more than a fish loves water. is not this a
strange
    fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems to undertake this
    business, which he knows is not to be done; damns himself to
do,
    and dares better be damn'd than to do 't.
  first lord. you do not know him, my lord, as we do. certain it
is
    that he will steal himself into a man's favour, and for a
week
    escape a great deal of discoveries; but when you find him
out,
    you have him ever after.
  bertram. why, do 
 
 ___________________________
 
you think he will make no deed at all of this
that
    so seriously he does address himself unto?
  second lord. none in the world; but return with an invention,
and
    clap upon you two or three probable lies. but we have almost
    emboss'd him. you shall see his fall to-night; for indeed he
is
    not for your lordship's respect.
  first lord. we'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case
him.
    he was first smok'd by the old lord lafeu. when his disguise
and
    he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him; which
you
    shall see this very night.
  second lord. i must g
 
 ___________________________
 
o look my twigs; he shall be caught.
  bertram. your brother, he shall go along with me.
  second lord. as't please your lordship. i'll leave you.   exit
  bertram. now will i lead you to the house, and show you
    the lass i spoke of.
  first lord. but you say she's honest.
  bertram. that's all the fault. i spoke with her but once,
    and found her wondrous cold; but i sent to her,
    by this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
    tokens and letters which she did re-send;
    and this is all i have done. she's a fair creature;
    will you go see her?
  first lord. with all my
 
 ___________________________
 
by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>




act iv. scene 1.
without the florentine camp

enter second french lord with five or six other soldiers in
ambush

  second lord. he can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.
    when you sally upon him, speak what terrible language you
will;
    though you understand it not yourselves, no matter; for we
must
    not seem to understand him, unless some one among us, whom we
    must produce for an interpreter.
  first soldier. good captain, let me be th' interpreter.
  second lord. art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy
voice?
  first soldier. no, sir, i warrant you.
  second lord. but what linsey
 
 ___________________________
 
-woolsey has thou to speak to us
again?
  first soldier. e'en such as you speak to me.
  second lord. he must think us some band of strangers i' th'
    adversary's entertainment. now he hath a smack of all
    neighbouring languages, therefore we must every one be a man
of
    his own fancy; not to know what we speak one to another, so
we
    seem to know, is to know straight our purpose: choughs'
language,
    gabble enough, and good enough. as for you, interpreter, you
must
    seem very politic. but couch, ho! here he comes; to beguile
two
    hours in a sleep, and then to retu
 
 ___________________________
 
and swear the lies he
forges.

                         enter parolles

  parolles. ten o'clock. within these three hours 'twill be time
    enough to go home. what shall i say i have done? it must be a
    very plausive invention that carries it. they begin to smoke
me;
    and disgraces have of late knock'd to often at my door. i
find my
    tongue is too foolhardy; but my heart hath the fear of mars
    before it, and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my
    tongue.
  second lord. this is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue
was
    guilty of.
  parolles. what the devil should move me to undertake the
recovery
    of this drum, being not ignorant of the impossibility, and
    knowing i had no such purpose? i must give myself some hurts,
and
    say i got them in exploit. yet slight ones will not carry it.
    they will say 'came you off with so little?' and great ones i
    dare not give. wherefore, what's the instance? tongue, i must
put
    you into 
 
 ___________________________
 
a butterwoman's mouth, and buy myself another of
    bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
  second lord. is it possible he should know what he is, and be
that
    he is?
  parolles. i would the cutting of my garments would serve the
turn,
    or the breaking of my spanish sword.
  second lord. we cannot afford you so.
  parolles. or the baring of my beard; and to say it was in
    stratagem.
  second lord. 'twould not do.
  parolles. or to drown my clothes, and say i was stripp'd.
  second lord. hardly serve.
  parolles. though i swore i leap'd from the window of the
citadel-
  second lord. how deep?
  parolles. thirty fathom.
  second lord. three great oaths would scarce make that be
believed.
  parolles. i would i had any drum of the enemy's; i would swear
i
    recover'd it.
  second lord. you shall hear one anon.          [alarum within]
  parolles. a drum now of the enemy's!
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 second lord. throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
  all. cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.
  parolles. o, ransom, ransom! do not hide mine eyes.
                                            [they blindfold him]
  first soldier. boskos thromuldo boskos.
  parolles. i know you are the muskos' regiment,
    and i shall lose my life for want of language.
    if there be here german, or dane, low dutch,
    italian, or french, let him speak to me;
    i'll discover that which shall undo 
 
 ___________________________
 
the florentine.
  first soldier. boskos vauvado. i understand thee, and can speak
thy
    tongue. kerely-bonto, sir, betake thee to thy faith, for
    seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.
  parolles. o!
  first soldier. o, pray, pray, pray! manka revania dulche.
  second lord. oscorbidulchos volivorco.
  first soldier. the general is content to spare thee yet;
    and, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on
    to gather from thee. haply thou mayst inform
    something to save thy life.
  parolles. o, let me live,
    and all the secrets of our camp i'll show,
    their force, their purposes. nay, i'll speak that
    which you will wonder at.
  first soldier. but wilt thou faithfully?
  parolles. if i do not, damn me.
  first soldier. acordo linta.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
  come on; thou art granted space.
                   exit, parolles guarded. a short alarum within
  second lord. go, tell the count rousillon and my brother
    we have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
    till we do hear from them.
  second soldier. captain, i will.
  second lord. 'a will betray us all unto ourselves-
    inform on that.
  second soldier. so i will, sir.
  second lord. till then i'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
                                                          exeunt




act iv. scene 2.
florence. the widow's house

enter bertram and diana

  bertram. they told me that your name was fontibell.
  diana. no, my good lord, diana.
  bertram. titled goddess;
    and worth it, with addition! but, fair soul,
    in your fine frame hath love no quality?
    if the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
    you are no maiden, but a mon
 
 ___________________________
 
 me just how he would woo,
    as if she sat in's heart; she says all men
    have the like oaths. he had sworn to marry me
    when his wife's dead; therefore i'll lie with him
    when i am buried. since frenchmen are so braid,
    marry that will, i live and die a maid.
    only, in this disguise, i think't no sin
    to cozen him that would unjustly win.                   exit




act iv. scene 3.
the florentine camp

enter the two french lords, and two or three soldiers

  second lord. you have not given him his mother's letter?
  first lord. i have deliv'red it an hour since. there is
something
    in't that stings his nature; for on the reading it he chang'd
    almost into another man.
  second lord. he has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking
off
    so good a wife and so sweet a lady.
  first lord. especially he hath incurred the everlasting
displeasure
    of the king, who had even tun'd his bounty to sing happiness
to
    him. i will tell you a thin
 
 ___________________________
 
g, but you shall let it dwell
darkly
    with you.
  second lord. when you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and i am the
grave
    of it.
  first lord. he hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in
florence,
    of a most chaste renown; and this night he fleshes his will
in
    the spoil of her honour. he hath given her his monumental
ring,
    and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.
  second lord. now, god delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves,


    what things are we!
  first lord. merely our own traitors. and as in the common
course of
    all treasons we still see them reveal themselves till they
attain
    to their abhorr'd ends; so he that in this action contrives
    against his own nobility, in his proper stream, o'erflows
    himself.
  second lord. is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters of
our
    unlawful intents? we shall not then have his company
t
 
 ___________________________
 
o-night?
  first lord. not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his
hour.
  second lord. that approaches apace. i would gladly have him see
his
    company anatomiz'd, that he might take a measure of his own
    judgments, wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.
  first lord. we will not meddle with him till he come; for his
    presence must be the whip of the other.
  second lord. in the meantime, what hear you of these wars?
  first lord. i hear there is an overture of peace.
  second lord. nay, i assure you, a peace concluded.
  first lord. what will count rousillon do then? will he travel
    higher, or return again into france?
  second lord. i perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether


    of his counsel.
  first lord. let it be forbid, sir! so should i be a great deal
    of his act.
  second lord. sir, his wife, some two months since, fled from
 
 ___________________________
 

his
    house. her pretence is a pilgrimage to saint jaques le grand;
    which holy undertaking with most austere sanctimony she
    accomplish'd; and, there residing, the tenderness of her
nature
    became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan of her
last
    breath, and now she sings in heaven.
  first lord. how is this justified?
  second lord. the stronger part of it by her own letters, which
    makes her story true even to the point of her death. her
death
    itself, which could not be her office to say is come, was
    faithfully confirm'd by the rector of the place.
  first lord. hath the count all this intelligence?
  second lord. ay, and the particular confirmations, point from
    point, to the full arming of the verity.
  first lord. i am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
  second lord. how mightily someti
 
 ___________________________
 
mes we make us comforts of our
    losses!
  first lord. and how mightily some other times we drown our gain
in
    tears! the great dignity that his valour hath here acquir'd
for
    him shall at home be encount'red with a shame as ample.
  second lord. the web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and
ill
    together. our virtues would be proud if our faults whipt them
    not; and our crimes would despair if they were not cherish'd
by
    our virtues.

                      enter a messenger

    how now? where's your master?
  servant. he met the duke in the street, sir; of whom he hath
taken
    a solemn leave. his lordship will next morning for france.
the
    duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the king.
 
 
 ___________________________
 
 second lord. they shall be no more than needful there, if they
were
    more than they can commend.
  first lord. they cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness.
    here's his lordship now.

                        enter bertram

    how now, my lord, is't not after midnight?
  bertram. i have to-night dispatch'd sixteen businesses, a
month's
    length apiece; by an abstract of success: i have congied with
the
    duke, done my adieu with his nearest; buried a wife, mourn'd
for
    her; 
 
 ___________________________
 
writ to my lady mother i am returning; entertain'd my
    convoy; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected
many
    nicer needs. the last was the greatest, but that i have not
ended
    yet.
  second lord. if the business be of any difficulty and this
morning
    your departure hence, it requires haste of your lordship.
  bertram. i mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear
of it
    hereafter. but shall we have this dialogue between the fool
and
    the soldier? come, bring forth this counterfeit module has
    deceiv'd me like a double-meaning prophesier.
  second lord. bring him forth.  [exeunt soldiers]  has sat i'
th'
    stocks all night, poor gallant knave.
  bertram.
 
 ___________________________
 
 no matter; his heels have deserv'd it, in usurping his
    spurs so long. how does he carry himself?
  second lord. i have told your lordship already the stocks carry


    him. but to answer you as you would be understood: he weeps
like
    a wench that had shed her milk; he hath confess'd himself to
    morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time of his
    remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i'
th'
    stocks. and what think you he hath confess'd?
  bertram. nothing of me, has 'a?
  second lord. his confession is taken, and it shall be read to
his
    face; if 
 
 ___________________________
 
your lordship be in't, as i believe you are, you
must
    have the patience to hear it.

                   enter parolles guarded, and
                  first soldier as interpreter

  bertram. a plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of me.
  second lord. hush, hush! hoodman comes. portotartarossa.
  first soldier. he calls for the tortures. what will you say
without
    'em?
  parolles. i will confess what i know without constraint; if ye
    pinch me like a pasty, i can say no more.
  first soldier. bosko chimurcho.
  second lord. boblibindo chicurmurco.
  first soldier. you are a merciful general. our general bids you
    answer to what i shall ask you out of a note.
  parolles. and truly, as i hope to live.
  first soldier. 'firs
 
 ___________________________
 
t demand of him how many horse the duke is
    strong.' what say you to that?
  parolles. five or six thousand; but very weak and
unserviceable.
    the troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor
    rogues, upon my reputation and credit, and as i hope to live.
  first soldier. shall i set down your answer so?
  parolles. do; i'll take the sacrament on 't, how and which way
you
    will.
  bertram. all's one to him. what a past-saving slave is this!
  second lord. y'are deceiv'd, my lord; this is monsieur
parolles,
    the gallant militarist-that was his own phrase-that had the
whole
    theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in
the
    chape of his dagger.
  first lord. i will never trust a man again for keeping his
sword
    clean; nor believe he can have everything in him by wearing
his
    apparel neatly.
  first soldier. well, that's set down.
  parolles. 'five or six thousand horse' i said-i will say true-
'or
   
 
 ___________________________
 
 thereabouts' set down, for i'll speak truth.
  second lord. he's very near the truth in this.
  bertram. but i con him no thanks for't in the nature he
delivers it.
  parolles. 'poor rogues' i pray you say.
  first soldier. well, that's set down.
  parolles. i humbly thank you, sir. a truth's a truth-the rogues
are
    marvellous poor.
  first soldier. 'demand of him of what strength they are
a-foot.'
    what say you to that?
  parolles. by my troth, sir, if i were to live this present
hour, i
    will tell true. let me see: spurio, a hun
 
 ___________________________
 
dred and fifty;
    sebastian, so many; corambus, so many; jaques, so many;
guiltian,
    cosmo, lodowick, and gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine own
    company, chitopher, vaumond, bentii, two hundred fifty each;
so
    that the muster-file, rotten and sound, upon my life, amounts
not
    to fifteen thousand poll; half of the which dare not shake
the
    snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves to
    pieces.
  bertram. what shall be done to him?
  second lord. nothing, but let him have thanks. demand of him my
    condition, and what credit i have with the duke.
  first soldier. well, that's set down. 'you shall demand of him
    whether one captain dumain be i' th' camp, a frenchman; what
his
    reputation is with the duke, what his valour, honesty,
expertness
    in wars; or whether he thinks it were not possible, with
    well-weighing sums of gold, to corrupt him to a revolt.' what
say
    you to this? what do you know of it?
  parol
 
 ___________________________
 
them singly.
  first soldier. do you know this captain dumain?
  parolles. i know him: 'a was a botcher's prentice in paris,
from
    whence he was whipt for getting the shrieve's fool with
child-a
    dumb innocent that could not say him nay.
  bertram. nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though i know his
    brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
  first soldier. well, is this captain in the duke of florence's
    camp?
  parolles. upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
  second lord. nay, look not so upon me; we shall hear of your
    lordship anon.
  first soldier. what is his reputation with the duke?
  parolles. the duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of
    mine; and writ to me this other day to turn him out o' th'
band.
    i think i have his letter in my pocket.
  first soldier. marry, we'll search.
  parolles. in good sadness, i do not know; either it is there or
it
    is upon a file with the duke's other letters in my tent.
  first soldier. h
 
 ___________________________
 
ere 'tis; here's a paper. shall i read it to
you?
  parolles. i do not know if it be it or no.
  bertram. our interpreter does it well.
  second lord. excellently.
  first soldier.  [reads]  'dian, the count's a fool, and full of
    gold.'
  parolles. that is not the duke's letter, sir; that is an
    advertisement to a proper maid in florence, one diana, to
take
    heed of the allurement of one count rousillon, a foolish idle
    boy, but for all that very ruttish. i pray you, sir, put it
up
    again.
  first soldier. nay, i'll read it first by your favour.
  parolles. my meaning in't, i protest, was very honest in the
behalf
 
 ___________________________
 
eaking 'em he is stronger than hercules. he will
lie,
    sir, with such volubility that you would think truth were a
fool.
    drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk;
and
    in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bedclothes
about
    him; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw. i
have
    but little more to say, sir, of his honesty. he has
everything
    that an honest man should not have; what an honest man should
    have he has nothing.
  second lord. i begin to love him for this.
  bertram. for this description of thine honesty? a pox upon him!
for
    me, he's more and more a cat.
  first soldier. what say you to his expertness in war?
  parolles. faith, sir, has led the drum before the english
    tragedians-to belie him i will not-and more of his
soldier-ship
    i know not, except in that country he had the honour to be
the
    officer at a place there called mile-end to instruct for the
    doubling of files-i would do the 
 
 ___________________________
 
man what honour i can-but of
    this i am not certain.
  second lord. he hath out-villain'd villainy so far that the
rarity
    redeems him.
  bertram. a pox on him! he's a cat still.
  first soldier. his qualities being at this poor price, i need
not
    to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
  parolles. sir, for a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of
his
    salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut th' entail from all


    remainders and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.
  first soldier. what's his brother, the other captain 
 
 ___________________________
 
er'd the


    secrets of your army, and made such pestiferous reports of
men
    very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use;
therefore
    you must die. come, headsman, off with his head.
  parolles. o lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
  first soldier. that shall you, and take your leave of all your
    friends.  [unmuffling him]  so look about you; know you any
here?
  bertram. good morrow, noble captain.
  first lord. god bless you, captain parolles.
  second lord. god save you, noble captain.
  first lord. captain, what greeting will you to my lord lafeu? i
am
    for france.
  second lord. good captain, will you give me a copy of the
sonnet
    you writ to diana in behalf of the count rousillon? an i were
not
    a very coward i'd compel it of you; but fare you well.
                                        exeunt bertram and lords
  first soldier. you are undone, captain, all but your scarf;
that
    has a knot on 't yet.
  parolles. who c