mother, whose relations were named robinson, a very good family in that
country, and from whom i was called robinson kreutznaer; but, by the
usual corruption of words in england, we are now called—nay we call
ourselves and write our name—crusoe; and so my companions always called
me.

i had two elder brothers, one of whom was lieutenant-colonel to an
english regiment of foot in flanders, formerly commanded by the famous
colonel lockhart, and was killed at the battle near dunkirk against the
spaniards.  what became of my second brother i never knew, any more than
my father or mother knew what became of me.

being the third son of the family and not bred to any trade, my head
began to be filled very early with rambling thoughts.  my father, who was
very ancient, had given me a competent share of learning, as far as
house-education and a country free school generally go, and designed me
for the law; but i would be satisfied with nothing but going to sea; and
my inclination to this led me so s
 
 ___________________________
 
 to me that
although the usage they gave one another was thus brutish and inhuman,
yet it was really nothing to me: these people had done me no injury: that
if they attempted, or i saw it necessary, for my immediate preservation,
to fall upon them, something might be said for it: but that i was yet out
of their power, and they really had no knowledge of me, and consequently
no design upon me; and therefore it could not be just for me to fall upon
them; that this would justify the conduct of the spaniards in all their
barbarities practised in america, where they destroyed millions of these
people; who, however they were idolators and barbarians, and had several
bloody and barbarous rites in their customs, such as sacrificing human
bodies to their idols, were yet, as to the spaniards, very innocent
people; and that the rooting them out of the country is spoken of with
the utmost abhorrence and detestation by even the spaniards themselves at
this time, and by all other christian nations of europe
 
 ___________________________
 
, as a mere
butchery, a bloody and unnatural piece of cruelty, unjustifiable either
to god or man; and for which the very name of a spaniard is reckoned to
be frightful and terrible, to all people of humanity or of christian
compassion; as if the kingdom of spain were particularly eminent for the
produce of a race of men who were without principles of tenderness, or
the common bowels of pity to the miserable, which is reckoned to be a
mark of generous temper in the mind.

these considerations really put me to a pause, and to a kind of a full
stop; and i began by little and little to be off my design, and to
conclude i had taken wron
 
 ___________________________
 
, it may not be improper to give some
account of my first conceptions on the subject of this foolish scheme
for my escape, and how, and upon what foundation, i acted.

i am now to be supposed retired into my castle, after my late voyage to
the wreck, my frigate laid up and secured under water, as usual, and my
condition restored to what it was before: i had more wealth, indeed, than
i had before, but was not at all the richer; for i had no more use for it
than the indians of peru had before the spaniards came there.

it was one of the nights in the rainy season in march, the
four-and-twentieth year of my first setting foot in this island of
solitude, i was lying in my bed or hammock, awake, very well in health,
had no pain, no distemper, no uneasiness of body, nor any uneasiness of
mind more than ordinary, but could by no means close my eyes, that is, so
as to sleep; no, not a wink all night long, otherwise than as follows: it
is impossible to set down the innumerable crowd of thoughts that wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ly understood that these were the caribbees, which our
maps place on the part of america which reaches from the mouth of the
river orinoco to guiana, and onwards to st. martha.  he told me that up a
great way beyond the moon, that was beyond the setting of the moon, which
must be west from their country, there dwelt white bearded men, like me,
and pointed to my great whiskers, which i mentioned before; and that they
had killed much mans, that was his word: by all which i understood he
meant the spaniards, whose cruelties in america had been spread over the
whole country, and were remembered by all the nations from father to son.

i inquired if he could tell me how i might go from this island, and get
among those white men.  he told me, “yes, yes, you may go in two canoe.”
i could not understand what he meant, or make him describe to me what he
meant by two canoe, till at last, with great difficulty, i found he meant
it must be in a large boat, as big as two canoes.  this part of friday’s
 
 ___________________________
 
here.”  “no, no,” says he, “me make they no eat you; me make
they much love you.”  he meant, he would tell them how i had killed his
enemies, and saved his life, and so he would make them love me.  then he
told me, as well as he could, how kind they were to seventeen white men,
or bearded men, as he called them who came on shore there in distress.

from this time, i confess, i had a mind to venture over, and see if i
could possibly join with those bearded men, who i made no doubt were
spaniards and portuguese; not doubting but, if i could, we might find
some method to escape from thence, being upon the continent, and a good
company together, better than i could from an island forty miles off the
shore, alone and without help.  so, after some days, i took friday to
work again by way of discourse, and told him i would give him a boat to
go back to his own nation; and, accordingly, i carried him to my frigate,
which lay on the other side of the island, and having cleared it of water
(fo
 
 ___________________________
 
to them, so the poor creatures were so much
frightened with the noise of our pieces that they fell down for mere
amazement and fear, and had no more power to attempt their own escape
than their flesh had to resist our shot; and that was the case of those
five that friday shot at in the boat; for as three of them fell with the
hurt they received, so the other two fell with the fright.

i kept my piece in my hand still without firing, being willing to keep my
charge ready, because i had given the spaniard my pistol and sword: so i
called to friday, and bade him run up to the tree from whence we first
fired, and fetch the arms which lay there that had been discharged, which
he did with great swiftness; and then giving him my musket, i sat down
myself to load all the rest again, and bade them come to me when they
wanted.  while i was loading these pieces, there happened a fierce
engagement between the spaniard and one of the savages, who made at him
with one of their great wooden swords, the weapo
 
 ___________________________
 
n that was to have killed
him before, if i had not prevented it.  the spaniard, who was as bold and
brave as could be imagined, though weak, had fought the indian a good
while, and had cut two great wounds on his head; but the savage being a
stout, lusty fellow, closing in with him, had thrown him down, being
faint, and was wringing my sword out of his hand; when the spaniard,
though undermost, wisely quitting the sword, drew the pistol from his
girdle, shot the savage through the body, and killed him upon the spot,
before i, who was running to help him, could come near him.

friday, being now left to his liberty, pursued the flying wretches, with
no weapon in his hand but his hatchet: and with that he despatched those
three who as i said before, were wounded at first, and fallen, and all
the rest he could come up with: and the spaniard coming to me for a gun,
i gav
 
 ___________________________
 
,
yet had plunged himself into the sea, and swam with all his might off to
those two who were left in the canoe; which three in the canoe, with one
wounded, that we knew not whether he died or no, were all that escaped
our hands of one-and-twenty.  the account of the whole is as follows:
three killed at our first shot from the tree; two killed at the next
shot; two killed by friday in the boat; two killed by friday of those at
first wounded; one killed by friday in the wood; three killed by the
spaniard; four killed, being found dropped here and there, of the wounds,
or killed by friday in his chase of them; four escaped in the boat,
whereof one wounded, if not dead—twenty-one in all.

those that were in the canoe worked hard to get out of gun-shot, and
though friday made two or three shots at them, i did not find that he hit
any of them.  friday would fain have had me take one of their canoes, and
pursue them; and indeed i was very anxious about their escape, lest,
carrying the news home to
 
 ___________________________
 
 their people, they should come back perhaps
with two or three hundred of the canoes and devour us by mere multitude;
so i consented to pursue them by sea, and running to one of their canoes,
i jumped in and bade friday follow me: but when i was in the canoe i was
surprised to find another poor creature lie there, bound hand and foot,
as the spaniard was, for the slaughter, and almost dead with fear, not
knowing what was the matter; for he had not been able to look up over the
side of the boat, he was tied so hard neck and heels, and had been tied
so long that he had really but little life in him.

i immediately cut the twisted flags or rushes which they had bound him
with, and would have helped him up; but he could not stand or speak, but
groaned most piteously, believing, it seems, still, that he was only
unbound in order to be killed.  w
 
 ___________________________
 
ite
home for an earthen jug or pot, to bring his father some fresh water, and
that he had got two more cakes or loaves of bread: the bread he gave me,
but the water he carried to his father; however, as i was very thirsty
too, i took a little of it.  the water revived his father more than all
the rum or spirits i had given him, for he was fainting with thirst.

when his father had drunk, i called to him to know if there was any water
left.  he said, “yes”; and i bade him give it to the poor spaniard, who
was in as much want of it as his father; and i sent one of the cakes that
friday brought to the spaniard too, who was indeed very weak, and was
reposing himself upon a green place under the shade of a tree; and whose
limbs were also very stiff, and very much swelled with the rude bandage
he had been tied with.  when i saw that upon friday’s coming to him with
the water he sat up and drank, and took the bread and began to eat, i
went to him and gave him a handful of raisins.  he looked up
 
 ___________________________
 
very two minutes, or perhaps
less, all the while he was here, turn his head about to see if his father
was in the same place and posture as he left him sitting; and at last he
found he was not to be seen; at which he started up, and, without
speaking a word, flew with that swiftness to him that one could scarce
perceive his feet to touch the ground as he went; but when he came, he
only found he had laid himself down to ease his limbs, so friday came
back to me presently; and then i spoke to the spaniard to let friday help
him up if he could, and lead him to the boat, and then he should carry
him to our dwelling, where i would take care of him.  but friday, a
lusty, strong fellow, took the spaniard upon his back, and carried him
away to the boat, and set him down softly upon the side or gunnel of the
canoe, with his feet in the inside of it; and then lifting him quite in,
he set him close to his father; and presently stepping out again,
launched the boat off, and paddled it along the shore fast
 
 ___________________________
 
w like a king i
looked.  first of all, the whole country was my own property, so that i
had an undoubted right of dominion.  secondly, my people were perfectly
subjected—i was absolutely lord and lawgiver—they all owed their lives to
me, and were ready to lay down their lives, if there had been occasion
for it, for me.  it was remarkable, too, i had but three subjects, and
they were of three different religions—my man friday was a protestant,
his father was a pagan and a cannibal, and the spaniard was a papist.
however, i allowed liberty of conscience throughout my dominions.  but
this is by the way.

as soon as i had secured my two weak, rescued prisoners, and given them
shelter, and a place to rest them upon, i began to think of making some
provision for them; and the first thing i did, i ordered friday to take a
yearling goat, betwixt a kid and a goat, out of my particular flock, to
be killed; when i cut off the hinder-quarter, and chopping it into small
pieces, i set friday to work t
 
 ___________________________
 
o boiling and stewing, and made them a very
good dish, i assure you, of flesh and broth; and as i cooked it without
doors, for i made no fire within my inner wall, so i carried it all into
the new tent, and having set a table there for them, i sat down, and ate
my own dinner also with them, and, as well as i could, cheered them and
encouraged them.  friday was my interpreter, especially to his father,
and, indeed, to the spaniard too; for the spaniard spoke the language of
the savages pretty well.

after we had dined, or rather supped, i ordered friday to take one of the
canoes, and go and fetch our muskets and other firearms, which, for want
of time, we had left upon the place of battle; and the next day i ordered
him to go and bury the dead bodies of the savages, which lay open to the
sun, and would presently be offensive.  i also ordered him to bury the
horrid remains of their barbarous feast, which i could not think of doing
myself; nay,
 
 ___________________________
 
 have ventured upon a hundred of them, fairly in the
open field, at any time.




chapter xvii—visit of mutineers


in a little time, however, no more canoes appearing, the fear of their
coming wore off; and i began to take my former thoughts of a voyage to
the main into consideration; being likewise assured by friday’s father
that i might depend upon good usage from their nation, on his account, if
i would go.  but my thoughts were a little suspended when i had a serious
discourse with the spaniard, and when i understood that there were
sixteen more of his countrymen and portuguese, who having been cast away
and made their escape to that side, lived there at peace, indeed, with
the savages, but were very sore put to it for necessaries, and, indeed,
for life.  i asked him all the particulars of their voyage, and found
they were a spanish ship, bound from the rio de la plata to the havanna,
being directed to leave their loading there, which was chiefly hides and
silver, and to bring back wh
 
 ___________________________
 
ch of faith among his countrymen.
he told me they were all of them very civil, honest men, and they were
under the greatest distress imaginable, having neither weapons nor
clothes, nor any food, but at the mercy and discretion of the savages;
out of all hopes of ever returning to their own country; and that he was
sure, if i would undertake their relief, they would live and die by me.

upon these assurances, i resolved to venture to relieve them, if
possible, and to send the old savage and this spaniard over to them to
treat.  but when we had got all things in readiness to go, the spaniard
himself started an objection, which had so much prudence in it on one
hand, and so much sincerity on the other hand, that i could not but be
very well satisfied in it; and, by his advice, put off the deliverance of
his comrades for at least half a year.  the case was thus: he had been
with us now about a month, during which time i had let him see in what
manner i had provided, with the assistance of providen
 
 ___________________________
 
ng now society enough, and our numbers being sufficient to put us out
of fear of the savages, if they had come, unless their number had been
very great, we went freely all over the island, whenever we found
occasion; and as we had our escape or deliverance upon our thoughts, it
was impossible, at least for me, to have the means of it out of mine.
for this purpose i marked out several trees, which i thought fit for our
work, and i set friday and his father to cut them down; and then i caused
the spaniard, to whom i imparted my thoughts on that affair, to oversee
and direct their work.  i showed them with what indefatigable pains i had
hewed a large tree into single planks, and i caused them to do the like,
till they made about a dozen large planks, of good oak, near two feet
broad, thirty-five feet long, and from two inches to four inches thick:
what prodigious labour it took up any one may imagine.

at the same time i contrived to increase my little flock of tame goats as
much as i could; and 
 
 ___________________________
 
for this purpose i made friday and the spaniard go
out one day, and myself with friday the next day (for we took our turns),
and by this means we got about twenty young kids to breed up with the
rest; for whenever we shot the dam, we saved the kids, and added them to
our flock.  but above all, the season for curing the grapes coming on, i
caused such a prodigious quantity to be hung up in the sun, that, i
believe, had we been at alicant, where the raisins of the sun are cured,
we could have filled sixty or eighty barrels; and these, with our
 
 ___________________________
 
ead,
formed a great part of our food—very good living too, i assure you, for
they are exceedingly nourishing.

it was now harvest, and our crop in good order: it was not the most
plentiful increase i had seen in the island, but, however, it was enough
to answer our end; for from twenty-two bushels of barley we brought in
and thrashed out above two hundred and twenty bushels; and the like in
proportion of the rice; which was store enough for our food to the next
harvest, though all the sixteen spaniards had been on shore with me; or,
if we had been ready for a voyage, it would very plentifully have
victualled our ship to have carried us to any part of the world; that is
to say, any part of america.  when we had thus housed and secured our
magazine of corn, we fell to work to make more wicker-ware, viz. great
baskets, in which we kept it; and the spaniard was very handy and
dexterous at this part, and often blamed me that i did not make some
things for defence of this kind of work; but i saw n
 
 ___________________________
 
o need of it.

and now, having a full supply of food for all the guests i expected, i
gave the spaniard leave to go over to the main, to see what he could do
with those he had left behind him there.  i gave him a strict charge not
to bring any man who would not first swear in the presence of himself and
the old savage that he would in no way injure, fight with, or attack the
person he should find in the island, who was so kind as to send for them
in order to their deliverance; but that they would stand by him and
defend him against all such attempts, and wherever they went would be
entirely under
 
 ___________________________
 
 and subjected to his command; and that this should be put
in writing, and signed in their hands.  how they were to have done this,
when i knew they had neither pen nor ink, was a question which we never
asked.  under these instructions, the spaniard and the old savage, the
father of friday, went away in one of the canoes which they might be said
to have come in, or rather were brought in, when they came as prisoners
to be devoured by the savages.  i gave each of them a musket, with a
firelock on it, and about eight charges of powder and ball, charging them
to be very good husbands of both, and not to use either of them but upon
urgent occasions.

this was a cheerful work, being the first measures used by me in view of
my deliverance for no
 
 ___________________________
 
w twenty-seven years and some days.  i gave them
provisions of bread and of dried grapes, sufficient for themselves for
many days, and sufficient for all the spaniards—for about eight days’
time; and wishing them a good voyage, i saw them go, agreeing with them
about a signal they should hang out at their return, by which i should
know them again when they came back, at a distance, before they came on
shore.  they went away with a fair gale on the day that the moon was at
full, by my account in the month of october; but as for an exact
reckoning of days, after i had once lost it i could never recover it
again; nor had i kept even the number of years so p
 
 ___________________________
 
may be sure
they will not eat them.”

all this while i had no thought of what the matter really was, but stood
trembling with the horror of the sight, expecting every moment when the
three prisoners should be killed; nay, once i saw one of the villains
lift up his arm with a great cutlass, as the seamen call it, or sword, to
strike one of the poor men; and i expected to see him fall every moment;
at which all the blood in my body seemed to run chill in my veins.  i
wished heartily now for the spaniard, and the savage that had gone with
him, or that i had any way to have come undiscovered within shot of them,
that i might have secured the three men, for i saw no firearms they had
among them; but it fell out to my mind another way.  after i had observed
the outrageous usage of the three men by the insolent seamen, i observed
the fellows run scattering about the island, as if they wanted to see the
country.  i observed that the three other men had liberty to go also
where they pleased; but they
 
 ___________________________
 
when we had carried all these things on shore (the oars, mast, sail, and
rudder of the boat were carried away before), we knocked a great hole in
her bottom, that if they had come strong enough to master us, yet they
could not carry off the boat.  indeed, it was not much in my thoughts
that we could be able to recover the ship; but my view was, that if they
went away without the boat, i did not much question to make her again fit
to carry as to the leeward islands, and call upon our friends the
spaniards in my way, for i had them still in my thoughts.




chapter xviii—the ship recovered


while we were thus preparing our designs, and had first, by main
strength, heaved the boat upon the beach, so high that the tide would not
float her off at high-water mark, and besides, had broke a hole in her
bottom too big to be quickly stopped, and were set down musing what we
should do, we heard the ship fire a gun, and make a waft with her ensign
as a signal for the boat to come on board—but no boat
 
 ___________________________
 
 and told them they had
nothing less to expect.

when they had all declared their willingness to stay, i then told them i
would let them into the story of my living there, and put them into the
way of making it easy to them.  accordingly, i gave them the whole
history of the place, and of my coming to it; showed them my
fortifications, the way i made my bread, planted my corn, cured my
grapes; and, in a word, all that was necessary to make them easy.  i told
them the story also of the seventeen spaniards that were to be expected,
for whom i left a letter, and made them promise to treat them in common
with themselves.  here it may be noted that the captain, who had ink on
board, was greatly surprised that i never hit upon a way of making ink of
charcoal and water, or of something else, as i had done things much more
difficult.

i left them my firearms—viz. five muskets, three fowling-pieces, and
three swords.  i had above a barrel and a half of powder left; for after
the first year or two i u
 
 ___________________________
 
icated good fortune i was
past running any more hazards—and so, indeed, i had been, if other
circumstances had concurred; but i was inured to a wandering life, had no
family, nor many relations; nor, however rich, had i contracted fresh
acquaintance; and though i had sold my estate in the brazils, yet i could
not keep that country out of my head, and had a great mind to be upon the
wing again; especially i could not resist the strong inclination i had to
see my island, and to know if the poor spaniards were in being there.  my
true friend, the widow, earnestly dissuaded me from it, and so far
prevailed with me, that for almost seven years she prevented my running
abroad, during which time i took my two nephews, the children of one of
my brothers, into my care; the eldest, having something of his own, i
bred up as a gentleman, and gave him a settlement of some addition to his
estate after my decease.  the other i placed with the captain of a ship;
and after five years, finding him a sensible,
 
 ___________________________
 
me, i in part settled myself here; for, first of all, i
married, and that not either to my disadvantage or dissatisfaction, and
had three children, two sons and one daughter; but my wife dying, and my
nephew coming home with good success from a voyage to spain, my
inclination to go abroad, and his importunity, prevailed, and engaged me
to go in his ship as a private trader to the east indies; this was in the
year 1694.

in this voyage i visited my new colony in the island, saw my successors
the spaniards, had the old story of their lives and of the villains i
left there; how at first they insulted the poor spaniards, how they
afterwards agreed, disagreed, united, separated, and how at last the
spaniards were obliged to use violence with them; how they were subjected
to the spaniards, how honestly the spaniards used them—a history, if it
were entered into, as full of variety and wonderful accidents as my own
part—particularly, also, as to their battles with the caribbeans, who
landed severa