ut for one hundred
pounds sterling, which, you say, is half your stock, and let the hazard
be run for the first; so that, if it come safe, you may order the rest
the same way, and, if it miscarry, you may have the other half to have
recourse to for your supply.”

this was so wholesome advice, and looked so friendly, that i could not
but be convinced it was the best course i could take; so i accordingly
prepared letters to the gentlewoman with whom i had left my money, and a
procuration to the portuguese captain, as he desired.

i wrote the english captain’s widow a full account of all my
adventures—my slavery, escape, and how i had met with the portuguese
captain at sea, the humanity of his behaviour, and what condition i was
now in, with all other necessary directions for my supply; and when this
honest captain came to lisbon, he found means, by some of the english
merchants there, to send over, not the order only, but a full account of
my story to a merchant in london, who represented it effectu
 
 ___________________________
 
ance for putting me in possession, but would find a very
considerable sum of money in their hands for my account, being the
produce of the farm while their fathers held the trust, and before it was
given up, as above; which, as he remembered, was for about twelve years.

i showed myself a little concerned and uneasy at this account, and
inquired of the old captain how it came to pass that the trustees should
thus dispose of my effects, when he knew that i had made my will, and had
made him, the portuguese captain, my universal heir, &c.

he told me that was true; but that as there was no proof of my being
dead, he could not act as executor until some certain account should come
of my death; and, besides, he was not willing to intermeddle with a thing
so remote: that it was true he had registered my will, and put in his
claim; and could he have given any account of my being dead or alive, he
would have acted by procuration, and taken possession of the ingenio (so
they call the sugar-house), and have give