ude of 15 degrees north even to the line itself.

i was now set up for a guinea trader; and my friend, to my great
misfortune, dying soon after his arrival, i resolved to go the same
voyage again, and i embarked in the same vessel with one who was his mate
in the former voyage, and had now got the command of the ship.  this was
the unhappiest voyage that ever man made; for though i did not carry
quite £100 of my new-gained wealth, so that i had £200 left, which i had
lodged with my friend’s widow, who was very just to me, yet i fell into
terrible misfortunes.  the first was this: our ship making her course
towards the canary islands, or rather between those islands and the
african shore, was surprised in the grey of the morning by a turkish
rover of sallee, who gave chase to us with all the sail she could make.
we crowded also as much canvas as our yards would spread, or our masts
carry, to get clear; but finding the pirate gained upon us, and would
certainly come up with us in a few ho
 
 ___________________________
 
ck, and let the hazard
be run for the first; so that, if it come safe, you may order the rest
the same way, and, if it miscarry, you may have the other half to have
recourse to for your supply.”

this was so wholesome advice, and looked so friendly, that i could not
but be convinced it was the best course i could take; so i accordingly
prepared letters to the gentlewoman with whom i had left my money, and a
procuration to the portuguese captain, as he desired.

i wrote the english captain’s widow a full account of all my
adventures—my slavery, escape, and how i had met with the portuguese
captain at sea, the humanity of his behaviour, and what condition i was
now in, with all other necessary directions for my supply; and when this
honest captain came to lisbon, he found means, by some of the english
merchants there, to send over, not the order only, but a full account of
my story to a merchant in london, who represented it effectually to her;
whereupon she not only delivered the money
 
 ___________________________
 
ond captivity the same
day of the month that i first made my escape in the long-boat from among
the moors of sallee.  in this vessel, after a long voyage, i arrived in
england the 11th of june, in the year 1687, having been thirty-five years
absent.

when i came to england i was as perfect a stranger to all the world as if
i had never been known there.  my benefactor and faithful steward, whom i
had left my money in trust with, was alive, but had had great misfortunes
in the world; was become a widow the second time, and very low in the
world.  i made her very easy as to what she owed me, assuring her i would
give her no trouble; but, on the contrary, in gratitude for her former
care and faithfulness to me, i relieved her as my little stock would
afford; which at that time would, indeed, allow me to do but little for
her; but i assured her i would never forget her former kindness to me;
nor did i forget her when i had sufficient to help her, as shall be
observed in its proper place.  i went
 
 ___________________________
 
ithout lock or key, till it grew mouldy and tarnished
before anybody would meddle with it; on the contrary, i knew not where to
put it, or whom to trust with it.  my old patron, the captain, indeed,
was honest, and that was the only refuge i had.  in the next place, my
interest in the brazils seemed to summon me thither; but now i could not
tell how to think of going thither till i had settled my affairs, and
left my effects in some safe hands behind me.  at first i thought of my
old friend the widow, who i knew was honest, and would be just to me; but
then she was in years, and but poor, and, for aught i knew, might be in
debt: so that, in a word, i had no way but to go back to england myself
and take my effects with me.

it was some months, however, before i resolved upon this; and, therefore,
as i had rewarded the old captain fully, and to his satisfaction, who had
been my former benefactor, so i began to think of the poor widow, whose
husband had been my first benefactor, and she, while
 
 ___________________________
 
tructor.  so, the first thing i did, i got a
merchant in lisbon to write to his correspondent in london, not only to
pay a bill, but to go find her out, and carry her, in money, a hundred
pounds from me, and to talk with her, and comfort her in her poverty, by
telling her she should, if i lived, have a further supply: at the same
time i sent my two sisters in the country a hundred pounds each, they
being, though not in want, yet not in very good circumstances; one having
been married and left a widow; and the other having a husband not so kind
to her as he should be.  but among all my relations or acquaintances i
could not yet pitch upon one to whom i durst commit the gross of my
stock, that i might go away to the brazils, and leave things safe behind
me; and this greatly perplexed me.

i had once a mind to have gone to the brazils and have settled myself
there, for i was, as it were, naturalised to the place; but i had some
little scruple in my mind about religion, which insensibly drew me
 
 ___________________________
 
ers have given an account of with
much more advantage than i can.  i travelled from toulouse to paris, and
without any considerable stay came to calais, and landed safe at dover
the 14th of january, after having had a severe cold season to travel in.

i was now come to the centre of my travels, and had in a little time all
my new-discovered estate safe about me, the bills of exchange which i
brought with me having been currently paid.

my principal guide and privy-counsellor was my good ancient widow, who,
in gratitude for the money i had sent her, thought no pains too much nor
care too great to employ for me; and i trusted her so entirely that i was
perfectly easy as to the security of my effects; and, indeed, i was very
happy from the beginning, and now to the end, in the unspotted integrity
of this good gentlewoman.

and now, having resolved to dispose of my plantation in the brazils, i
wrote to my old friend at lisbon, who, having offered it to the two
merchants, the survivors of my tru
 
 ___________________________
 
rds—and so, indeed, i had been, if other
circumstances had concurred; but i was inured to a wandering life, had no
family, nor many relations; nor, however rich, had i contracted fresh
acquaintance; and though i had sold my estate in the brazils, yet i could
not keep that country out of my head, and had a great mind to be upon the
wing again; especially i could not resist the strong inclination i had to
see my island, and to know if the poor spaniards were in being there.  my
true friend, the widow, earnestly dissuaded me from it, and so far
prevailed with me, that for almost seven years she prevented my running
abroad, during which time i took my two nephews, the children of one of
my brothers, into my care; the eldest, having something of his own, i
bred up as a gentleman, and gave him a settlement of some addition to his
estate after my decease.  the other i placed with the captain of a ship;
and after five years, finding him a sensible, bold, enterprising young
fellow, i put him into 