stures to show it.  at last he lays his head flat upon the ground,
close to my foot, and sets my other foot upon his head, as he had done
before; and after this made all the signs to me of subjection, servitude,
and submission imaginable, to let me know how he would serve me so long
as he lived.  i understood him in many things, and let him know i was
very well pleased with him.  in a little time i began to speak to him;
and teach him to speak to me: and first, i let him know his name should
be friday, which was the day i saved his life: i called him so for the
memory of the time.  i likewise taught him to say master; and then let
him know that was to be my name: i likewise taught him to say yes and no
and to know the meaning of them.  i gave him some milk in an earthen pot,
and let him see me drink it before him, and sop my bread in it; and gave
him a cake of bread to do the like, which he quickly complied with, and
made signs that it was very good for him.  i kept there with him all that
n
 
 ___________________________
 
im to come away, which he did immediately, with
great submission.  i then led him up to the top of the hill, to see if
his enemies were gone; and pulling out my glass i looked, and saw plainly
the place where they had been, but no appearance of them or their canoes;
so that it was plain they were gone, and had left their two comrades
behind them, without any search after them.

but i was not content with this discovery; but having now more courage,
and consequently more curiosity, i took my man friday with me, giving him
the sword in his hand, with the bow and arrows at his back, which i found
he could use very dexterously, making him carry one gun for me, and i two
for myself; and away we marched to the place where these creatures had
been; for i had a mind now to get some further intelligence of them.
when i came to the place my very blood ran chill in my veins, and my
heart sunk within me, at the horror of the spectacle; indeed, it was a
dreadful sight, at least it was so to me, though fr
 
 ___________________________
 
iday made nothing of
it.  the place was covered with human bones, the ground dyed with their
blood, and great pieces of flesh left here and there, half-eaten,
mangled, and scorched; and, in short, all the tokens of the triumphant
feast they had been making there, after a victory over their enemies.  i
saw three skulls, five hands, and the bones of three or four legs and
feet, and abundance of other parts of the bodies; and friday, by his
signs, made me understand that they brought over four prisoners to feast
upon; that three of them were eaten up, and that he, pointing to himself,
was the fourth; that there had been a great battle between them and their
next king, of whose subjects, it seems, he had been one, and that they
had taken a great number of prisoners; all which were carried to several
places by those who had taken them in the fight, in order to feast upon
them, as was done here by these wretches upon those th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey brought hither.

i caused friday to gather all the skulls, bones, flesh, and whatever
remained, and lay them together in a heap, and make a great fire upon it,
and burn them all to ashes.  i found friday had still a hankering stomach
after some of the flesh, and was still a cannibal in his nature; but i
showed so much abhorrence at the very thoughts of it, and at the least
appearance of it, that he durst not discover it: for i had, by some
means, let him know that i would kill him if he offered it.

when he had done this, we came back to our castle; and there i fell to
work for my man friday; and first of all, i gave him a pair of linen
drawers, which i had out of the poor gunner’s chest i me
 
 ___________________________
 
ge him: and that i might do well for him and yet be
perfectly easy myself, i made a little tent for him in the vacant place
between my two fortifications, in the inside of the last, and in the
outside of the first.  as there was a door or entrance there into my
cave, i made a formal framed door-case, and a door to it, of boards, and
set it up in the passage, a little within the entrance; and, causing the
door to open in the inside, i barred it up in the night, taking in my
ladders, too; so that friday could no way come at me in the inside of my
innermost wall, without making so much noise in getting over that it must
needs awaken me; for my first wall had now a complete roof over it of
long poles, covering all my tent, and leaning up to the side of the hill;
which was again laid across with smaller sticks, instead of laths, and
then thatched over a great thickness with the rice-straw, which was
strong, like reeds; and at the hole or place which was left to go in or
out by the ladder i had pl
 
 ___________________________
 
aced a kind of trap-door, which, if it had been
attempted on the outside, would not have opened at all, but would have
fallen down and made a great noise—as to weapons, i took them all into my
side every night.  but i needed none of all this precaution; for never
man had a more faithful, loving, sincere servant than friday was to me:
without passions, sullenness, or designs, perfectly obliged and engaged;
his very affections were tied to me, like those of a child to a father;
and i daresay he would have sacrificed his life to save mine upon any
occasion whatsoever—the many testimonies he gave me of this put it out of
doubt, and soon convinced me that i needed to use no precautions for my
safety on his account.

this frequently gave me occasion to observe, and that with wonder, that
however it had pleased god in
 
 ___________________________
 
nd helpful; but especially to make him speak, and
understand me when i spoke; and he was the aptest scholar that ever was;
and particularly was so merry, so constantly diligent, and so pleased
when he could but understand me, or make me understand him, that it was
very pleasant for me to talk to him.  now my life began to be so easy
that i began to say to myself that could i but have been safe from more
savages, i cared not if i was never to remove from the place where i
lived.




chapter xv—friday’s education


after i had been two or three days returned to my castle, i thought that,
in order to bring friday off from his horrid way of feeding, and from the
relish of a cannibal’s stomach, i ought to let him taste other flesh; so
i took him out with me one morning to the woods.  i went, indeed,
intending to kill a kid out of my own flock; and bring it home and dress
it; but as i was going i saw a she-goat lying down in the shade, and two
young kids sitting by her.  i catched hold of fr
 
 ___________________________
 
reat many things i
did not understand; but i could easily see the meaning was to pray me not
to kill him.

i soon found a way to convince him that i would do him no harm; and
taking him up by the hand, laughed at him, and pointing to the kid which
i had killed, beckoned to him to run and fetch it, which he did: and
while he was wondering, and looking to see how the creature was killed, i
loaded my gun again.  by-and-by i saw a great fowl, like a hawk, sitting
upon a tree within shot; so, to let friday understand a little what i
would do, i called him to me again, pointed at the fowl, which was indeed
a parrot, though i thought it had been a hawk; i say, pointing to the
parrot, and to my gun, and to the ground under the parrot, to let him see
i would make it fall, i made him understand that i would shoot and kill
that bird; accordingly, i fired, and bade him look, and immediately he
saw the parrot fall.  he stood like one frightened again, notwithstanding
all i had said to him; and i found he
 
 ___________________________
 
not
do; he would never care for salt with meat or in his broth; at least, not
for a great while, and then but a very little.

having thus fed him with boiled meat and broth, i was resolved to feast
him the next day by roasting a piece of the kid: this i did by hanging it
before the fire on a string, as i had seen many people do in england,
setting two poles up, one on each side of the fire, and one across the
top, and tying the string to the cross stick, letting the meat turn
continually.  this friday admired very much; but when he came to taste
the flesh, he took so many ways to tell me how well he liked it, that i
could not but understand him: and at last he told me, as well as he
could, he would never eat man’s flesh any more, which i was very glad to
hear.

the next day i set him to work beating some corn out, and sifting it in
the manner i used to do, as i observed before; and he soon understood how
to do it as well as i, especially after he had seen what the meaning of
it was, and th
 
 ___________________________
 
at it was to make bread of; for after that i let him see me
make my bread, and bake it too; and in a little time friday was able to
do all the work for me as well as i could do it myself.

i began now to consider, that having two mouths to feed instead of one, i
must provide more ground for my harvest, and plant a larger quantity of
corn than i used to do; so i marked out a larger piece of land, and began
the fence in the same manner as before, in which friday worked not only
very willingly and very hard, but did it very cheerfully: and i told him
what it was for; that it was for corn to make more bread, because he was
now with me, and that i might have enough for him and myself too.  he
appeared very sensible of that part, and let me know that he thought i
had much more labour upon me on his account than i had for myself; and
that he would work the harder for me if i would tell him what to do.

this was the pleasantest year of all the life i led in 
 
 ___________________________
 
this place.
friday began to talk pretty well, and understand the names of almost
everything i had occasion to call for, and of every place i had to send
him to, and talked a great deal to me; so that, in short, i began now to
have some use for my tongue again, which, indeed, i had very little
occasion for before.  besides the pleasure of talking to him, i had a
singular satisfaction in the fellow himself: his simple, unfeigned
honesty appeared to me more and more every day, and i began really to
love the creature
 
 ___________________________
 
efore.

i had a mind once to try if he had any inclination for his own country
again; and having taught him english so well that he could answer me
almost any question, i asked him whether the nation that he belonged to
never conquered in battle?  at which he smiled, and said—“yes, yes, we
always fight the better;” that is, he meant always get the better in
fight; and so we began the following discourse:—

_master_.—you always fight the better; how came you to be taken prisoner,
then, friday?

_friday_.—my nation beat much for all that.

_master_.—how beat?  if your nation beat them, how came you to be taken?

_friday_.—they more many than my nation, in the place where me was; they
take one, two, three, and me: my nation over-beat them in the yonder
place, where me no was; there my nation take one, two, great thousand.

_master_.—but why did not your side recover you from the hands of your
enemies, then?

_friday_.—they run, one, two, three, and me, and make go in the can
 
 ___________________________
 
oe; my
nation have no canoe that time.

_master_.—well, friday, and what does your nation do with the men they
take?  do they carry them away and eat them, as these did?

_friday_.—yes, my nation eat mans too; eat all up.

_master_.—where do they carry them?

_friday_.—go to other place, where they think.

_master_.—do they come hither?

_friday_.—yes, yes, they come hither; come other else place.

_master_.—have you been here with them?

_friday_.—yes, i have been here (points to the nw. side of the island,
which, it seems, was their side).

by this i understood that my man friday had formerly been among the
savages who used to come on shore on the farther part of the island, on
the same man-eating occasions he was now brought for; and some time
after, when i took the courage to carry him to that side, being the same
i formerly mentioned, he presently knew the place, and told me he was
there once, when they ate up twenty men, two wom
 
 ___________________________
 
 there was a current and wind, always one way in the morning, the
other in the afternoon.  this i understood to be no more than the sets of
the tide, as going out or coming in; but i afterwards understood it was
occasioned by the great draft and reflux of the mighty river orinoco, in
the mouth or gulf of which river, as i found afterwards, our island lay;
and that this land, which i perceived to be w. and nw., was the great
island trinidad, on the north point of the mouth of the river.  i asked
friday a thousand questions about the country, the inhabitants, the sea,
the coast, and what nations were near; he told me all he knew with the
greatest openness imaginable.  i asked him the names of the several
nations of his sort of people, but could get no other name than caribs;
from whence i easily understood that these were the caribbees, which our
maps place on the part of america which reaches from the mouth of the
river orinoco to guiana, and onwards to st. martha.  he told me that up a
great
 
 ___________________________
 
e spaniards, whose cruelties in america had been spread over the
whole country, and were remembered by all the nations from father to son.

i inquired if he could tell me how i might go from this island, and get
among those white men.  he told me, “yes, yes, you may go in two canoe.”
i could not understand what he meant, or make him describe to me what he
meant by two canoe, till at last, with great difficulty, i found he meant
it must be in a large boat, as big as two canoes.  this part of friday’s
discourse i began to relish very well; and from this time i entertained
some hopes that, one time or other, i might find an opportunity to make
my escape from this place, and that this poor savage might be a means to
help me.

during the long time that friday had now been with me, and that he began
to speak to me, and understand me, i was not wanting to lay a foundation
of religious knowledge in his mind; particularly i asked him one time,
who made him.  the creature did not understand me a
 
 ___________________________
 
went to say o (so he called saying
prayers), and then came back and told them what benamuckee said.  by this
i observed, that there is priestcraft even among the most blinded,
ignorant pagans in the world; and the policy of making a secret of
religion, in order to preserve the veneration of the people to the
clergy, not only to be found in the roman, but, perhaps, among all
religions in the world, even among the most brutish and barbarous
savages.

i endeavoured to clear up this fraud to my man friday; and told him that
the pretence of their old men going up to the mountains to say o to their
god benamuckee was a cheat; and their bringing word from thence what he
said was much more so; that if they met with any answer, or spake with
any one there, it must be with an evil spirit; and then i entered into a
long discourse with him about the devil, the origin of him, his rebellion
against god, his enmity to man, the reason of it, his setting himself up
in the dark parts of the world to be worshi
 
 ___________________________
 
m
of the power of god, his omnipotence, his aversion to sin, his being a
consuming fire to the workers of iniquity; how, as he had made us all, he
could destroy us and all the world in a moment; and he listened with
great seriousness to me all the while.  after this i had been telling him
how the devil was god’s enemy in the hearts of men, and used all his
malice and skill to defeat the good designs of providence, and to ruin
the kingdom of christ in the world, and the like.  “well,” says friday,
“but you say god is so strong, so great; is he not much strong, much
might as the devil?”  “yes, yes,” says i, “friday; god is stronger than
the devil—god is above the devil, and therefore we pray to god to tread
him down under our feet, and enable us to resist his temptations and
quench his fiery darts.”  “but,” says he again, “if god much stronger,
much might as the wicked devil, why god no kill the devil, so make him no
more do wicked?”  i was strangely surprised at th
 
 ___________________________
 
 a casuist or a solver of difficulties; and at first i could
not tell what to say; so i pretended not to hear him, and asked him what
he said; but he was too earnest for an answer to forget his question, so
that he repeated it in the very same broken words as above.  by this time
i had recovered myself a little, and i said, “god will at last punish him
severely; he is reserved for the judgment, and is to be cast into the
bottomless pit, to dwell with everlasting fire.”  this did not satisfy
friday; but he returns upon me, repeating my words, “‘_reserve at last_!’
me no understand—but why not kill the devil now; not kill great ago?”
“you may as well ask me,” said i, “why god does not kill you or me, when
we do wicked things here that offend him—we are preserved to repent and
be pardoned.”  he mused some time on this.  “well, well,” says he, mighty
affectionately, “that well—so you, i, devil, all wicked, all preserve,
repent, god pardon all.”  here i was run d
 
 ___________________________
 
true knowledge of religion and of the christian
doctrine, that he might know christ jesus, in whom is life eternal; i
say, when i reflected upon all these things, a secret joy ran through
every part of my soul, and i frequently rejoiced that ever i was brought
to this place, which i had so often thought the most dreadful of all
afflictions that could possibly have befallen me.

i continued in this thankful frame all the remainder of my time; and the
conversation which employed the hours between friday and me was such as
made the three years which we lived there together perfectly and
completely happy, if any such thing as complete happiness can be formed
in a sublunary state.  this savage was now a good christian, a much
better than i; though i have reason to hope, and bless god for it, that
we were equally penitent, and comforted, restored penitents.  we had here
the word of god to read, and no farther off from his spirit to instruct
than if we had been in england.  i always applied myself,
 
 ___________________________
 
f god; and we had, blessed
be god, comfortable views of the spirit of god teaching and instructing
by his word, leading us into all truth, and making us both willing and
obedient to the instruction of his word.  and i cannot see the least use
that the greatest knowledge of the disputed points of religion, which
have made such confusion in the world, would have been to us, if we could
have obtained it.  but i must go on with the historical part of things,
and take every part in its order.

after friday and i became more intimately acquainted, and that he could
understand almost all i said to him, and speak pretty fluently, though in
broken english, to me, i acquainted him with my own history, or at least
so much of it as related to my coming to this place: how i had lived
there, and how long; i let him into the mystery, for such it was to him,
of gunpowder and bullet, and taught him how to shoot.  i gave him a
knife, which he was wonderfully delighted with; and i made him a belt,
with a frog 
 
 ___________________________
 
came from; how we lived, how we worshipped god, how we behaved to one
another, and how we traded in ships to all parts of the world.  i gave
him an account of the wreck which i had been on board of, and showed him,
as near as i could, the place where she lay; but she was all beaten in
pieces before, and gone.  i showed him the ruins of our boat, which we
lost when we escaped, and which i could not stir with my whole strength
then; but was now fallen almost all to pieces.  upon seeing this boat,
friday stood, musing a great while, and said nothing.  i asked him what
it was he studied upon.  at last says he, “me see such boat like come to
place at my nation.”  i did not understand him a good while; but at last,
when i had examined further into it, i understood by him that a boat,
such as that had been, came on shore upon the country where he lived:
that is, as he explained it, was driven thither by stress of weather.  i
presently imagined that some european ship must have been cast away up
 
 ___________________________
 
on
their coast, and the boat might get loose and drive ashore; but was so
dull that i never once thought of men making their escape from a wreck
thither, much less whence they might come: so i only inquired after a
description of the boat.

friday described the boat to me well enough; but brought me better to
understand him when he added with some warmth, “we save the white mans
from drown.”  then i presently asked if there were any white mans, as he
called them, in the boat.  “yes,” he said; “the boat full of white mans.”
i asked him how many.  he told upon his fingers seventeen.  i asked him
then what became of them.  he told me, “they live, they dwell at my
nation.”

this put new thoughts into my head; for i presently 
 
 ___________________________
 
 did not kill them and eat them.  he said,
“no, they make brother with them;” that is, as i understood him, a truce;
and then he added, “they no eat mans but when make the war fight;” that
is to say, they never eat any men but such as come to fight with them and
are taken in battle.

it was after this some considerable time, that being upon the top of the
hill at the east side of the island, from whence, as i have said, i had,
in a clear day, discovered the main or continent of america, friday, the
weather being very serene, looks very earnestly towards the mainland,
and, in a kind of surprise, falls a jumping and dancing, and calls out to
me, for i was at some distance from him.  i asked him what was the
matter.  “oh, joy!” says he; “oh, glad! there see my country, there my
nation!”  i observed an extraordinary sense of pleasure appeared in his
face, and his eyes sparkled, and his countenance discovered a strange
eagerness, as if he had a mind to be in his own country again.
 
 ___________________________
 
  this
observation of mine put a great many thoughts into me, which made me at
first not so easy about my new man friday as i was before; and i made no
doubt but that, if friday could get back to his own nation again, he
would not only forget all his religion but all his obligation to me, and
would be forward enough to give his countrymen an account of me, and come
back, perhaps with a hundred or two of them, and make a feast upon me, at
which he might be as merry as he used to be with those of his enemies
when they were taken in war.  but i wronged the poor honest creature very
much, for which i was very sorry afterwards.  however, as my jealousy
increased, and held s
 
 ___________________________
 
ld discover any of the new thoughts which i suspected
were in him; but i found everything he said was so honest and so
innocent, that i could find nothing to nourish my suspicion; and in spite
of all my uneasiness, he made me at last entirely his own again; nor did
he in the least perceive that i was uneasy, and therefore i could not
suspect him of deceit.

one day, walking up the same hill, but the weather being hazy at sea, so
that we could not see the continent, i called to him, and said, “friday,
do not you wish yourself in your own country, your own nation?”  “yes,”
he said, “i be much o glad to be at my own nation.”  “what would you do
there?” said i.  “would you turn wild again, eat men’s flesh again, and
be a savage as you were before?”  he looked full of concern, and shaking
his head, said, “no, no, friday tell them to live good; tell them to pray
god; tell them to eat corn-bread, cattle flesh, milk; no eat man again.”
“why, then,” said i to him, “the
 
 ___________________________
 
en white men,
or bearded men, as he called them who came on shore there in distress.

from this time, i confess, i had a mind to venture over, and see if i
could possibly join with those bearded men, who i made no doubt were
spaniards and portuguese; not doubting but, if i could, we might find
some method to escape from thence, being upon the continent, and a good
company together, better than i could from an island forty miles off the
shore, alone and without help.  so, after some days, i took friday to
work again by way of discourse, and told him i would give him a boat to
go back to his own nation; and, accordingly, i carried him to my frigate,
which lay on the other side of the island, and having cleared it of water
(for i always kept it sunk in water), i brought it out, showed it him,
and we both went into it.  i found he was a most dexterous fellow at
managing it, and would make it go almost as swift again as i could.  so
when he was in, i said to him, “well, now, friday, shall we go
 
 ___________________________
 
 to your
nation?”  he looked very dull at my saying so; which it seems was because
he thought the boat was too small to go so far.  i then told him i had a
bigger; so the next day i went to the place where the first boat lay
which i had made, but which i could not get into the water.  he said that
was big enough; but then, as i had taken no care of it, and it had lain
two or three and twenty years there, the sun had so split and dried it,
that it was rotten.  friday told me such a boat would do very well, and
would carry “much enough vittle, drink, bread;” this was his way of
talking.




chapter xvi—rescue of prisoners from cannibals


upon the whole, i was by this time so fixed upon my design of going over
with him to the continent that i told him we would go and make one as big
as that, and he should go home in it.  he answered not one word, but
looked very grave and sad.  i asked him what was the matter with him.  he
asked me again, “why you an
 
 ___________________________
 
gry mad with friday?—what me done?”  i asked
him what he meant.  i told him i was not angry with him at all.  “no
angry!” says he, repeating the words several times; “why send friday home
away to my nation?”  “why,” says i, “friday, did not you say you wished
you were there?”  “yes, yes,” says he, “wish we both there; no wish
friday there, no master there.”  in a word, he would not think of going
there without me.  “i go there, friday?” says i; “what shall i do there?”
he turned very quick upon me at this.  “you do great deal much good,”
says he; “you teach wild mans be good, sober, tame mans; you tell them
know god, pray god, and live new life.”  “alas, friday!” says i, “thou
knowest not what thou sayest; i am but an ignorant man myself.”  “yes,
yes,” says he, “you teachee me good, you teachee them good.”  “no, no,
friday,” says i, “you shall go without me; leave me here to live by
myself
 
 ___________________________
 
, as i did before.”  he looked confused again at that word; and
running to one of the hatchets which he used to wear, he takes it up
hastily, and gives it to me.  “what must i do with this?” says i to him.
“you take kill friday,” says he.  “what must kill you for?” said i again.
he returns very quick—“what you send friday away for?  take kill friday,
no send friday away.”  this he spoke so earnestly that i saw tears stand
in his eyes.  in a word, i so plainly discovered the utmost affection in
him to me, and a firm resolution in him, that i told him then and often
after, that i would never send him away from me if he was willing to stay
with me.

upon the whole, as i found by all his discourse a settled affection to
me, and that nothing could part him from me, so i found all the
foundation of his desire to go to his own country was laid in his ardent
af
 
 ___________________________
 
fection to the people, and his hopes of my doing them good; a thing
which, as i had no notion of myself, so i had not the least thought or
intention, or desire of undertaking it.  but still i found a strong
inclination to attempting my escape, founded on the supposition gathered
from the discourse, that there were seventeen bearded men there; and
therefore, without any more delay, i went to work with friday to find out
a great tree proper to fell, and make a large periagua, or canoe, to
undertake the voyage.  there were trees enough in the island to have
built a little fleet, not of periaguas or canoes, but even of good, large
vessels; but the main thing i looked at was, to get one so near the water
that we might launch it when it was made, to avoid the mistake i
committed at first.  at last friday pitched upon a tree; for i found he
knew much better than i what kind of wood was fittest for it; no
 
 ___________________________
 
r can i
tell to this day what wood to call the tree we cut down, except that it
was very like the tree we call fustic, or between that and the nicaragua
wood, for it was much of the same colour and smell.  friday wished to
burn the hollow or cavity of this tree out, to make it for a boat, but i
showed him how to cut it with tools; which, after i had showed him how to
use, he did very handily; and in about a month’s hard labour we finished
it and made it very handsome; especially when, with our axes, which i
showed him how to handle, we cut and hewed the outside into the true
shape of a boat.  after this, however, it cost us near a fortnight’s time
to get her along, as it were inch by inch, upon grea
 
 ___________________________
 
t rollers into the
water; but when she was in, she would have carried twenty men with great
ease.

when she was in the water, though she was so big, it amazed me to see
with what dexterity and how swift my man friday could manage her, turn
her, and paddle her along.  so i asked him if he would, and if we might
venture over in her.  “yes,” he said, “we venture over in her very well,
though great blow wind.”  however i had a further design that he knew
nothing of, and that was, to make a mast and a sail, and to fit her with
an anchor and cable.  as to a mast, that was easy enough to get; so i
pitched upon a straight young cedar-tree, which i found near the place,
and which there were great plenty of i
 
 ___________________________
 
n the island, and i set friday to
work to cut it down, and gave him directions how to shape and order it.
but as to the sail, that was my particular care.  i knew i had old sails,
or rather pieces of old sails, enough; but as i had had them now
six-and-twenty years by me, and had not been very careful to preserve
them, not imagining that i should ever have this kind of use for them, i
did not doubt but they were all rotten; and, indeed, most of them were
so.  however, i found two pieces which appeared pretty good, and with
t
 
 ___________________________
 
ail, or foresail, to it, to assist if we should turn to
windward; and, what was more than all, i fixed a rudder to the stern of
her to steer with.  i was but a bungling shipwright, yet as i knew the
usefulness and even necessity of such a thing, i applied myself with so
much pains to do it, that at last i brought it to pass; though,
considering the many dull contrivances i had for it that failed, i think
it cost me almost as much labour as making the boat.

after all this was done, i had my man friday to teach as to what belonged
to the navigation of my boat; though he knew very well how to paddle a
canoe, he knew nothing of what belonged to a sail and a rudder; and was
the most amazed when he saw me work the boat to and again in the sea by
the rudder, and how the sail jibed, and filled this way or that way as
the course we sailed changed; i say when he saw this he stood like one
astonished and amazed.  however, with a little use, i made all these
things familiar to him, and he became an exp
 
 ___________________________
 
another year in this
place.  i went on, however, with my husbandry; digging, planting, and
fencing as usual.  i gathered and cured my grapes, and did every
necessary thing as before.

the rainy season was in the meantime upon me, when i kept more within
doors than at other times.  we had stowed our new vessel as secure as we
could, bringing her up into the creek, where, as i said in the beginning,
i landed my rafts from the ship; and hauling her up to the shore at
high-water mark, i made my man friday dig a little dock, just big enough
to hold her, and just deep enough to give her water enough to float in;
and then, when the tide was out, we made a strong dam across the end of
it, to keep the water out; and so she lay, dry as to the tide from the
sea: and to keep the rain off we laid a great many boughs of trees, so
thick that she was as well thatched as a house; and thus we waited for
the months of november and december, in which i designed to make my
adventure.

when the settled season beg
 
 ___________________________
 
an to come in, as the thought of my design
returned with the fair weather, i was preparing daily for the voyage.
and the first thing i did was to lay by a certain quantity of provisions,
being the stores for our voyage; and intended in a week or a fortnight’s
time to open the dock, and launch out our boat.  i was busy one morning
upon something of this kind, when i called to friday, and bid him to go
to the sea-shore and see if he could find a turtle or a tortoise, a thing
which we generally got once a week, for the sake of the eggs as well as
the flesh.  friday had not been long gone when he came running back, and
flew over my outer wall or fence, like one that felt not the ground or
the steps he set his foot on; and before i had time to speak to him he
cries out to me, “o master! o master! o sorrow! o bad!”—“what’s the
matter, friday?” says i.  “o yonder t
 
 ___________________________
 
here,” says he, “one, two, three
canoes; one, two, three!”  by this way of speaking i concluded there were
six; but on inquiry i found there were but three.  “well, friday,” says
i, “do not be frightened.”  so i heartened him up as well as i could.
however, i saw the poor fellow was most terribly scared, for nothing ran
in his head but that they were come to look for him, and would cut him in
pieces and eat him; and the poor fellow trembled so that i scarcely knew
what to do with him.  i comforted him as well as i could, and told him i
was in as much danger as he, and that they would eat me as well as him.
“but,” says i, “friday, we must resolve to fi
 
 ___________________________
 
ght them.  can you fight,
friday?”  “me shoot,” says he, “but there come many great number.”  “no
matter for that,” said i again; “our guns will fright them that we do not
kill.”  so i asked him whether, if i resolved to defend him, he would
defend me, and stand by me, and do just as i bid him.  he said, “me die
when you bid die, master.”  so i went and fetched a good dram of rum and
gave him; for i had been so good a husband of my rum that i had a great
deal left.  when we had drunk it, i made him take t
 
 ___________________________
 
he two fowling-pieces,
which we always carried, and loaded them with large swan-shot, as big as
small pistol-bullets.  then i took four muskets, and loaded them with two
slugs and five small bullets each; and my two pistols i loaded with a
brace of bullets each.  i hung my great sword, as usual, naked by my
side, and gave friday his hatchet.  when i had thus prepared myself, i
took my perspective glass, and went up to the side of the hill, to see
what i could discover; and i found quickly by my glass that there were
one-and-twenty savages, three prisoners, and three canoes; and that their
whole business seemed to be the triumphant banquet upon these three human
bodies: a barbarous feast, indeed! but nothing more than, as i had
observed, was usual with them.  i observed also that they had landed, not
where they had done
 
 ___________________________
 
 when friday made his escape, but nearer to my creek,
where the shore was low, and where a thick wood came almost close down to
the sea.  this, with the abhorrence of the inhuman errand these wretches
came about, filled me with such indignation that i came down again to
friday, and told him i was resolved to go down to them and kill them all;
and asked him if he would stand by me.  he had now got over his fright,
and his spirits being a little raised with the dram i had given him, he
was very cheerful, and told me, as before, he would die when i bid die.

in this fit of fury i divided the arms which i had charged, as before,
between us; i gave friday one pistol to stick in his girdle, and three
guns upon his shoulder, and i took one pistol and the other three guns
my
 
 ___________________________
 
self; and in this posture we marched out.  i took a small bottle of rum
in my pocket, and gave friday a large bag with more powder and bullets;
and as to orders, i charged him to keep close behind me, and not to stir,
or shoot, or do anything till i bid him, and in the meantime not to speak
a word.  in this posture i fetched a compass to my right hand of near a
mile, as well to get over the creek as to get into the wood, so that i
could come within shot of them before i should be discovered, which i had
seen by my glass it was easy to do.

while i was making this march, my former thoughts retur
 
 ___________________________
 
 own disaster, being in them a token, indeed, of god’s
having left them, with the other nations of that part of the world, to
such stupidity, and to such inhuman courses, but did not call me to take
upon me to be a judge of their actions, much less an executioner of his
justice—that whenever he thought fit he would take the cause into his own
hands, and by national vengeance punish them as a people for national
crimes, but that, in the meantime, it was none of my business—that it was
true friday might justify it, because he was a declared enemy and in a
state of war with those very particular people, and it was lawful for him
to attack them—but i could not say the same with regard to myself.  these
things were so warmly pressed upon my thoughts all the way as i went,
that i resolved i would only go and place myself near them that i might
observe their barbarous feast, and that i would act then as god should
direct; but that unless something offered that was more a call to me than
yet
 
 ___________________________
 
 i knew of, i would not meddle with them.

with this resolution i entered the wood, and, with all possible wariness
and silence, friday following close at my heels, i marched till i came to
the skirts of the wood on the side which was next to them, only that one
corner of the wood lay between me and them.  here i called softly to
friday, and showing him a great tree which was just at the corner of the
wood, i bade him go to the tree, and bring me word if he could see there
plainly what they were doing.  he did so, and came immediately back to
me, and told me they might be plainly viewed there—that they were all
about their fire, eating the flesh of one of their prisoners, and that
another lay bound upon the sand a little from them, whom he said they
would kill next; and this fired the very soul within me.  he told me it
was 
 
 ___________________________
 
 i got
behind some bushes, which held all the way till i came to the other tree,
and then came to a little rising ground, which gave me a full view of
them at the distance of about eighty yards.

i had now not a moment to lose, for nineteen of the dreadful wretches sat
upon the ground, all close huddled together, and had just sent the other
two to butcher the poor christian, and bring him perhaps limb by limb to
their fire, and they were stooping down to untie the bands at his feet.
i turned to friday.  “now, friday,” said i, “do as i bid thee.”  friday
said he would.  “then, friday,” says i, “do exactly as you see me do;
fail in nothing.”  so i set down one of the muskets and the fowling-piece
upon the ground, and friday did the like by his, and with the other
musket i took my aim at the savages, bidding him to do the like; then
asking him if he was ready, he said, “yes.”  “then fire at them,” said i;
and at the same moment i fired also.

friday took his aim so much 
 
 ___________________________
 
better than i, that on the side that he shot
he killed two of them, and wounded three more; and on my side i killed
one, and wounded two.  they were, you may be sure, in a dreadful
consternation: and all of them that were not hurt jumped upon their feet,
but did not immediately know which way to run, or which way to look, for
they knew not from whence their destruction came.  friday kept his eyes
close upon me, that, as i had bid him, he might observe what i did; so,
as soon as the first shot was made, i threw down the piece, and took up
the fowling-piece, and friday did the like; he saw me cock and present;
he did the same again.  “are you ready, friday?” said i.  “yes,” says he.
“let fly, then,” says i, “in the name of god!” and with that i fired
again among the amazed wretches, and so did friday; and as our pieces
were now loaded with what i call swan-sh
 
 ___________________________
 
ot, or small pistol-bullets, we
found only two drop; but so many were wounded that they ran about yelling
and screaming like mad creatures, all bloody, and most of them miserably
wounded; whereof three more fell quickly after, though not quite dead.

“now, friday,” says i, laying down the discharged pieces, and taking up
the musket which was yet loaded, “follow me,” which he did with a great
deal of courage; upon which i rushed out of the wood and showed myself,
and friday close at my foot.  as soon as i perceived they saw me, i
shouted as loud as i could, and bade friday do so too, and running as
fast as i could, which, by the way, was not very fast, being loaded with
arms as i was, i made directly towards the poor victim, who was, as i
said, lying upon the beach or shore, between the place where they sat and
the sea.  the two butchers who were just going to work with him had left
him at the surprise of our first fire, and fled in a terrible fright to
the seasid
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and had jumped into a canoe, and three more of the rest made
the same way.  i turned to friday, and bade him step forwards and fire at
them; he understood me immediately, and running about forty yards, to be
nearer them, he shot at them; and i thought he had killed them all, for i
saw them all fall of a heap into the boat, though i saw two of them up
again quickly; however, he killed two of them, and wounded the third, so
that he lay down in the bottom of the boat as if he had been dead.

while my man friday fired at them, i pulled out my knife and cut the
flags that bound the poor victi
 
 ___________________________
 
hankfully; and no sooner had he the arms in his hands, but, as
if they had put new vigour into him, he flew upon his murderers like a
fury, and had cut two of them in pieces in an instant; for the truth is,
as the whole was a surprise to them, so the poor creatures were so much
frightened with the noise of our pieces that they fell down for mere
amazement and fear, and had no more power to attempt their own escape
than their flesh had to resist our shot; and that was the case of those
five that friday shot at in the boat; for as three of them fell with the
hurt they received, so the other two fell with the fright.

i kept my piece in my hand still without firing, being willing to keep my
charge ready, because i had given the spaniard my pistol and sword: so i
called to friday, and bade him run up to the tree from whence we first
fired, and fetch the arms which lay there that had been discharged, which
he did with great swiftness; and then giving him my musket, i sat down
myself to load all t
 
 ___________________________
 
 was as bold and
brave as could be imagined, though weak, had fought the indian a good
while, and had cut two great wounds on his head; but the savage being a
stout, lusty fellow, closing in with him, had thrown him down, being
faint, and was wringing my sword out of his hand; when the spaniard,
though undermost, wisely quitting the sword, drew the pistol from his
girdle, shot the savage through the body, and killed him upon the spot,
before i, who was running to help him, could come near him.

friday, being now left to his liberty, pursued the flying wretches, with
no weapon in his hand but his hatchet: and with that he despatched those
three who as i said before, were wounded at first, and fallen, and all
the rest he could come up with: and the spaniard coming to me for a gun,
i gave him one of the fowling-pieces, with which he pursued two of the
savages, and wounded them both; but as he was not able to run, they both
got from him into the wood, where friday pursued them, and killed one of
 
 ___________________________
 

them, but the other was too nimble for him; and though he was wounded,
yet had plunged himself into the sea, and swam with all his might off to
those two who were left in the canoe; which three in the canoe, with one
wounded, that we knew not whether he died or no, were all that escaped
our hands of one-and-twenty.  the account of the whole is as follows:
three killed at our first shot from the tree; two killed at the next
shot; two killed by friday in the boat; two killed by friday of those at
first wounded; one killed by friday in the wood; three killed by the
spaniard; four killed, being found dropped here and there, of the wounds,
or killed by friday in his chase of them; four escaped in the boat,
whereof one wounded, if not dead—twenty-one in all.

those that were in the canoe worked hard to get out of gun-shot, and
though friday made two or three shots at them, i did not find that he hit
any of them.  friday would fain have had me take one of their canoes, and
purs
 
 ___________________________
 
ue them; and indeed i was very anxious about their escape, lest,
carrying the news home to their people, they should come back perhaps
with two or three hundred of the canoes and devour us by mere multitude;
so i consented to pursue them by sea, and running to one of their canoes,
i jumped in and bade friday follow me: but when i was in the canoe i was
surprised to find another poor creature lie there, bound hand and foot,
as the spaniard was, for the slaughter, and almost dead with fear, not
knowing what was the matter; for he had not been able to look up over the
side of the boat, he was tied so hard neck and heels, and had been tied
so long that he had really but little life in him.

i immediately cut the twisted flags or rushes which they had bound him
with, and would have helped him up; but he
 
 ___________________________
 
 could not stand or speak, but
groaned most piteously, believing, it seems, still, that he was only
unbound in order to be killed.  when friday came to him i bade him speak
to him, and tell him of his deliverance; and pulling out my bottle, made
him give the poor wretch a dram, which, with the news of his being
delivered, revived him, and he sat up in the boat.  but when friday came
to hear him speak, and look in his face, it would have moved any one to
tears to have seen how friday kissed him, embraced him, hugged him,
cried, laughed, hallooed, jumped about, danced, sang; then cried again,
wrung his hands, beat his own face and head; and then sang and jumped
about again like a distracted creature.  it was a good while before i
could make him speak to me or tell me what was the matter; but when he
came a little to himself he told me that it was his father.

it is not easy for me to express how it moved me to see what ecstasy and
filial affection had worked in this poor sav
 
 ___________________________
 
them with, which did them a great
deal of good.

this affair put an end to our pursuit of the canoe with the other
savages, who were now almost out of sight; and it was happy for us that
we did not, for it blew so hard within two hours after, and before they
could be got a quarter of their way, and continued blowing so hard all
night, and that from the north-west, which was against them, that i could
not suppose their boat could live, or that they ever reached their own
coast.

but to return to friday; he was so busy about his father that i could not
find in my heart to take him off for some time; but after i thought he
could leave him a little, i called him to me, and he came jumping and
laughing, and pleased to the highest extreme: then i asked him if he had
given his father any bread.  he shook his head, and said, “none; ugly dog
eat all up self.”  i then gave him a cake of bread out of a little pouch
i carried on purpose; i also gave him a dram for himself; but he would
not taste it,
 
 ___________________________
 
d got two more cakes or loaves of bread: the bread he gave me,
but the water he carried to his father; however, as i was very thirsty
too, i took a little of it.  the water revived his father more than all
the rum or spirits i had given him, for he was fainting with thirst.

when his father had drunk, i called to him to know if there was any water
left.  he said, “yes”; and i bade him give it to the poor spaniard, who
was in as much want of it as his father; and i sent one of the cakes that
friday brought to the spaniard too, who was indeed very weak, and was
reposing himself upon a green place under the shade of a tree; and whose
limbs were also very stiff, and very much swelled with the rude bandage
he had been tied with.  when i saw that upon friday’s coming to him with
the water he sat up and drank, and took the bread and began to eat, i
went to him and gave him a handful of raisins.  he looked up in my face
with all the tokens of gratitude and thankfulness that could appear in
any
 
 ___________________________
 
 countenance; but was so weak, notwithstanding he had so exerted
himself in the fight, that he could not stand up upon his feet—he tried
to do it two or three times, but was really not able, his ankles were so
swelled and so painful to him; so i bade him sit still, and caused friday
to rub his ankles, and bathe them with rum, as he had done his father’s.

i observed the poor affectionate creature, every two minutes, or perhaps
less, all the while he was here, turn his head about to see if his father
was in the same place and posture as he left him sitting; and at last he
found he was not to be seen; at which he started up, and, without
speaking a word, flew with that swiftness to him that one could scarce
perceive his feet to touch the ground as he went; but when he came
 
 ___________________________
 
, he
only found he had laid himself down to ease his limbs, so friday came
back to me presently; and then i spoke to the spaniard to let friday help
him up if he could, and lead him to the boat, and then he should carry
him to our dwelling, where i would take care of him.  but friday, a
lusty, strong fellow, took the spaniard upon his back, and carried him
away to the boat, and set him down softly upon the side or gunnel of the
canoe, with his feet in the inside of it; and then lifting him quite in,
he set him close to his father; and presently stepping out again,
launched the boat off, and paddled it along the shore faster than i could
walk, though the wind blew pretty hard too; so he brought them both safe
into our creek, and leaving them in the boat, ran away to fetch th
 
 ___________________________
 
e other
canoe.  as he passed me i spoke to him, and asked him whither he went.
he told me, “go fetch more boat;” so away he went like the wind, for sure
never man or horse ran like him; and he had the other canoe in the creek
almost as soon as i got to it by land; so he wafted me over, and then
went to help our new guests out of the boat, which he did; but they were
neither of them able to walk; so that poor friday knew not what to do.

to remedy this, i went to work in my thought, and calling to friday to
bid them sit down on the bank while he came to me, i soon made a kind of
hand-barrow to lay them on, and friday and i carried them both up
together upon it between us.

but when we got them to the outside of our wall, or fortification, we
were at a worse loss than before, for it was impossible to get them over,
and i was resolved not to break it down; so i set to work again, and
friday and i, in about t
 
 ___________________________
 
 in subjects;
and it was a merry reflection, which i frequently made, how like a king i
looked.  first of all, the whole country was my own property, so that i
had an undoubted right of dominion.  secondly, my people were perfectly
subjected—i was absolutely lord and lawgiver—they all owed their lives to
me, and were ready to lay down their lives, if there had been occasion
for it, for me.  it was remarkable, too, i had but three subjects, and
they were of three different religions—my man friday was a protestant,
his father was a pagan and a cannibal, and the spaniard was a papist.
however, i allowed liberty of conscience throughout my dominions.  but
this is by the way.

as soon as i had secured my two weak, rescued prisoners, and given them
shelter, and a place to rest them upon, i began to think of making some
provision for them; and the first thing i did, i ordered friday to take a
yearling goat, betwixt a kid and a goat, out of my particular flock, to
be killed; when i cut off the
 
 ___________________________
 
 hinder-quarter, and chopping it into small
pieces, i set friday to work to boiling and stewing, and made them a very
good dish, i assure you, of flesh and broth; and as i cooked it without
doors, for i made no fire within my inner wall, so i carried it all into
the new tent, and having set a table there for them, i sat down, and ate
my own dinner also with them, and, as well as i could, cheered them and
encouraged them.  friday was my interpreter, especially to his father,
and, indeed, to the spaniard too; for the spaniard spoke the language of
the savages pretty well.

after we had dined, or rather supped, i ordered friday to take one of the
canoes, and go and fetch our muskets and other firearms, which, for want
of time, we had left upon the place of battle; and the next day i ordered
him to go and bury the dead bodies of the savages, which lay open to the
sun, and would presently be offensive.  i also ordered him t
 
 ___________________________
 
o bury the
horrid remains of their barbarous feast, which i could not think of doing
myself; nay, i could not bear to see them if i went that way; all which
he punctually performed, and effaced the very appearance of the savages
being there; so that when i went again, i could scarce know where it was,
otherwise than by the corner of the wood pointing to the place.

i then began to enter into a little conversation with my two new
subjects; and, first, i set friday to inquire of his father what he
thought of the escape of the savages in that canoe, and whether we might
expect a return of them, with a power too great for us to resist.  his
first opinion was, that the savages in the boat never could live out the
storm which blew that night they went off, but must of necessity be
drowned, or driven south to those other shores, where they were as sure
to be devoured as they were to be drowned if they were cast away; but, as
to what they would do if they came 
 
 ___________________________
 
safe on shore, he said he knew not;
but it was his opinion that they were so dreadfully frightened with the
manner of their being attacked, the noise, and the fire, that he believed
they would tell the people they were all killed by thunder and lightning,
not by the hand of man; and that the two which appeared—viz. friday and
i—were two heavenly spirits, or furies, come down to destroy them, and
not men with weapons.  this, he said, he knew; because he heard them all
cry out so, in their language, one to another; for it was impossible for
them to conceive that a man could dart fire, and speak thunder, and kill
at a distance, without lifting up the hand, as was done now: and this old
savage was in the right; for, as i understood since, by other hands, the
savages never attempted to go over to the island afterwa
 
 ___________________________
 
 this, however, i knew
not; and therefore was under continual apprehensions for a good while,
and kept always upon my guard, with all my army: for, as there were now
four of us, i would have ventured upon a hundred of them, fairly in the
open field, at any time.




chapter xvii—visit of mutineers


in a little time, however, no more canoes appearing, the fear of their
coming wore off; and i began to take my former thoughts of a voyage to
the main into consideration; being likewise assured by friday’s father
that i might depend upon good usage from their nation, on his account, if
i would go.  but my thoughts were a little suspended when i had a serious
discourse with the spaniard, and when i understood that there were
sixteen more of his countrymen and portuguese, who having been cast away
and made their escape to that side, lived there at peace, indeed, with
the savages, but were very sore put to it for necessaries, and, indeed,
for life.  i asked him all the particulars of their voyag
 
 ___________________________
 
supposed it is
six months in the ground in that country.

having now society enough, and our numbers being sufficient to put us out
of fear of the savages, if they had come, unless their number had been
very great, we went freely all over the island, whenever we found
occasion; and as we had our escape or deliverance upon our thoughts, it
was impossible, at least for me, to have the means of it out of mine.
for this purpose i marked out several trees, which i thought fit for our
work, and i set friday and his father to cut them down; and then i caused
the spaniard, to whom i imparted my thoughts on that affair, to oversee
and direct their work.  i showed them with what indefatigable pains i had
hewed a large tree into single planks, and i caused them to do the like,
till they made about a dozen large planks, of good oak, near two feet
broad, thirty-five feet long, and from two inches to four inches thick:
what prodigious labour it took up any one may imagine.

at the same time i contrived to
 
 ___________________________
 
 increase my little flock of tame goats as
much as i could; and for this purpose i made friday and the spaniard go
out one day, and myself with friday the next day (for we took our turns),
and by this means we got about twenty young kids to breed up with the
rest; for whenever we shot the dam, we saved the kids, and added them to
our flock.  but above all, the season for curing the grapes coming on, i
caused such a prodigious quantity to be hung up in the sun, that, i
believe, had we been at alicant, where the raisins of the sun are cured,
we could have filled sixty or eighty barrels; and these, with our bread,
formed a great part of our food
 
 ___________________________
 
should find in the island, who was so kind as to send for them
in order to their deliverance; but that they would stand by him and
defend him against all such attempts, and wherever they went would be
entirely under and subjected to his command; and that this should be put
in writing, and signed in their hands.  how they were to have done this,
when i knew they had neither pen nor ink, was a question which we never
asked.  under these instructions, the spaniard and the old savage, the
father of friday, went away in one of the canoes which they might be said
to have come in, or rather were brought in, when they came as prisoners
to be devoured by the savages.  i gave each of them a musket, with a
firelock on it, and about eight charges of powder and ball, charging them
to be very good husbands of both, and not to use either of them but upon
urgent occasions.

this was a cheerful work, being the first measures used by me in view of
my deliverance for now twenty-seven years and some days.  i ga
 
 ___________________________
 
for an exact
reckoning of days, after i had once lost it i could never recover it
again; nor had i kept even the number of years so punctually as to be
sure i was right; though, as it proved when i afterwards examined my
account, i found i had kept a true reckoning of years.

it was no less than eight days i had waited for them, when a strange and
unforeseen accident intervened, of which the like has not, perhaps, been
heard of in history.  i was fast asleep in my hutch one morning, when my
man friday came running in to me, and called aloud, “master, master, they
are come, they are come!”  i jumped up, and regardless of danger i went,
as soon as i could get my clothes on, through my little grove, which, by
the way, was by this time grown to be a very thick wood; i say,
regardless of danger i went without my arms, which was not my custom to
do; but i was surprised when, turning my eyes to the sea, i presently saw
a boat at about a league and a half distance, standing in for the shore,
wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h a shoulder-of-mutton sail, as they call it, and the wind blowing
pretty fair to bring them in: also i observed, presently, that they did
not come from that side which the shore lay on, but from the southernmost
end of the island.  upon this i called friday in, and bade him lie close,
for these were not the people we looked for, and that we might not know
yet whether they were friends or enemies.  in the next place i went in to
fetch my perspective glass to see what i could make of them; and having
taken the ladder out, i climbed up to the top of the hill, as i used to
do when i was apprehensive of anything, and to take my view the plainer
without being discovered.  i had scarce set my foot upon the hill when my
eye plainly discovered a ship lying
 
 ___________________________
 
as i thought, bound; and when the
first four or five of them were jumped on shore, they took those three
out of the boat as prisoners: one of the three i could perceive using the
most passionate gestures of entreaty, affliction, and despair, even to a
kind of extravagance; the other two, i could perceive, lifted up their
hands sometimes, and appeared concerned indeed, but not to such a degree
as the first.  i was perfectly confounded at the sight, and knew not what
the meaning of it should be.  friday called out to me in english, as well
as he could, “o master! you see english mans eat prisoner as well as
savage mans.”  “why, friday,” says i, “do you think they are going to eat
them, then?”  “yes,” says friday, “they will eat them.”  “no no,” says i,
“friday; i am afraid they will murder them, indeed; but you may be sure
they will not eat them.”

all this while i had no thought of what the matter really was, but stood
trembling with the horror of the sight, expect
 
 ___________________________
 
e
any farther than to my place of observation near the top of the hill: and
very glad i was to think how well it was fortified.  i knew it was no
less than ten hours before the boat could float again, and by that time
it would be dark, and i might be at more liberty to see their motions,
and to hear their discourse, if they had any.  in the meantime i fitted
myself up for a battle as before, though with more caution, knowing i had
to do with another kind of enemy than i had at first.  i ordered friday
also, whom i had made an excellent marksman with his gun, to load himself
with arms.  i took myself two fowling-pieces, and i gave him three
muskets.  my figure, indeed, was very fierce; i had my formidable
goat-skin coat on, with the great cap i have mentioned, a naked sword by
my side, two pistols in my belt, and a gun upon each shoulder.

it was my design, as i said above, not to have made any attempt till it
was dark; but about two o’clock, being the heat of the day, i found that
they wer
 
 ___________________________
 
e all gone straggling into the woods, and, as i thought, laid
down to sleep.  the three poor distressed men, too anxious for their
condition to get any sleep, had, however, sat down under the shelter of a
great tree, at about a quarter of a mile from me, and, as i thought, out
of sight of any of the rest.  upon this i resolved to discover myself to
them, and learn something of their condition; immediately i marched as
above, my man friday at a good distance behind me, as formidable for his
arms as i, but not making quite so staring a spectre-like figure as i
did.  i came as near them undiscovered as i could, and then, before any
of them saw me, i called aloud to them in spanish, “what are ye,
gentlemen?”  they started up at the noise, but were ten times more
confounded when they saw me, and the uncouth figure that i made.  they
made no answer at all, but i thought i perceived them just going to fly
from me, when i spoke to t
 
 ___________________________
 
d give him an assurance of their abhorrence of the treachery
they had been guilty of, and would swear to be faithful to him in
recovering the ship, and afterwards in carrying her back to jamaica, from
whence they came.  they gave him all the protestations of their sincerity
that could be desired; and he was willing to believe them, and spare
their lives, which i was not against, only that i obliged him to keep
them bound hand and foot while they were on the island.

while this was doing, i sent friday with the captain’s mate to the boat
with orders to secure her, and bring away the oars and sails, which they
did; and by-and-by three straggling men, that were (happily for them)
parted from the rest, came back upon hearing the guns fired; and seeing
the captain, who was before their prisoner, now their conqueror, they
submitted to be bound also; and so our victory was complete.

it now remained that the captain and i should inquire into one another’s
circumstances.  i began first, and told
 
 ___________________________
 
em into your hands; for depend upon it, every man that comes ashore is
our own, and shall die or live as they behave to us.”  as i spoke this
with a raised voice and cheerful countenance, i found it greatly
encouraged him; so we set vigorously to our business.

we had, upon the first appearance of the boat’s coming from the ship,
considered of separating our prisoners; and we had, indeed, secured them
effectually.  two of them, of whom the captain was less assured than
ordinary, i sent with friday, and one of the three delivered men, to my
cave, where they were remote enough, and out of danger of being heard or
discovered, or of finding their way out of the woods if they could have
delivered themselves.  here they left them bound, but gave them
provisions; and promised them, if they continued there quietly, to give
them their liberty in a day or two; but that if they attempted their
escape they should be put to death without mercy.  they promised
faithfully to bear their confinement with
 
 ___________________________
 
 patience, and were very
thankful that they had such good usage as to have provisions and light
left them; for friday gave them candles (such as we made ourselves) for
their comfort; and they did not know but that he stood sentinel over them
at the entrance.

the other prisoners had better usage; two of them were kept pinioned,
indeed, because the captain was not able to trust them; but the other two
were taken into my service, upon the captain’s recommendation, and upon
their solemnly engaging to live and die with us; so with them and the
three honest men we were seven men, well armed; and i made no doubt w
 
 ___________________________
 
 resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

as soon as i perceived them go towards the shore, i imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as i told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but i presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  i
ordered friday and the captain’s mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, i bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw the
 
 ___________________________
 
m as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as i directed
them.

they were just going into the boat when friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, i expected.  when they had set
themselves over, i observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along wit
 
 ___________________________
 
h them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
this was what i wished for; and immediately leaving friday and the
captain’s mate to their business, i took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
aware—one of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
the fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
they needed very few arguments to persuade a single ma
 
 ___________________________
 
n to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  in the meantime, friday and
the captain’s mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

we had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to mak
 
 ___________________________
 
e sure work with them.  it was several hours after
friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  at length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  we
could 
 
 ___________________________
 
again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  my men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but i was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as i could;
and especially i was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  i resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, i drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

they had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much
 
 ___________________________
 
 in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  the boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  at the noise of the
fire i immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  we came upon them, indeed, in the da
 
 ___________________________
 
they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  upon the captain
coming to me, i told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
but, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, i
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  this was committed to friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  they conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  the others i ordered to my bower, as i called it, of which i
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

to these in the morning i sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and 
 
 ___________________________
 
, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, i had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that i had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captain’s motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

i asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man friday, i did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  as to the five in the cave, i resolved to keep them fast, but
friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
i made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where friday
was to take them.

when i showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them i was the person the go
 
 ___________________________
 
s malefactors, to be
delivered over to justice at the first english colony he could come to;
and i found that the captain himself was very anxious about it.  upon
this, i told him that, if he desired it, i would undertake to bring the
two men he spoke of to make it their own request that he should leave
them upon the island.  “i should be very glad of that,” says the captain,
“with all my heart.”  “well,” says i, “i will send for them up and talk
with them for you.”  so i caused friday and the two hostages, for they
were now discharged, their comrades having performed their promise; i
say, i caused them to go to the cave, and bring up the five men, pinioned
as they were, to the bower, and keep them there till i came.  after some
time, i came thither dressed in my new habit; and now i was called
governor again.  being all met, and the captain with me, i caused the men
to be brought before me, and i told them i had got a full account of
their villainous behaviour to the captain
 
 ___________________________
 
nd a present of almost £200 sterling.

but after making several reflections upon the circumstances of my life,
and how little way this would go towards settling me in the world, i
resolved to go to lisbon, and see if i might not come at some information
of the state of my plantation in the brazils, and of what was become of
my partner, who, i had reason to suppose, had some years past given me
over for dead.  with this view i took shipping for lisbon, where i
arrived in april following, my man friday accompanying me very honestly
in all these ramblings, and proving a most faithful servant upon all
occasions.  when i came to lisbon, i found out, by inquiry, and to my
particular satisfaction, my old friend, the captain of the ship who first
took me up at sea off the shore of africa.  he was now grown old, and had
left off going to sea, having put his son, who was far from a young man,
into his ship, and who still used the brazil trade.  the old man did not
know me, and indeed i hardly knew hi
 
 ___________________________
 
ore so,
my old captain brought an english gentleman, the son of a merchant in
lisbon, who was willing to travel with me; after which we picked up two
more english merchants also, and two young portuguese gentlemen, the last
going to paris only; so that in all there were six of us and five
servants; the two merchants and the two portuguese, contenting themselves
with one servant between two, to save the charge; and as for me, i got an
english sailor to travel with me as a servant, besides my man friday, who
was too much a stranger to be capable of supplying the place of a servant
on the road.

in this manner i set out from lisbon; and our company being very well
mounted and armed, we made a little troop, whereof they did me the honour
to call me captain, as well because i was the oldest man, as because i
had two servants, and, indeed, was the origin of the whole journey.

as i have troubled you with none of my sea journals, so i shall trouble
you now with none of my land journals; but some ad
 
 ___________________________
 
self, we found it so indeed; and to me, that
had been always used to a hot climate, and to countries where i could
scarce bear any clothes on, the cold was insufferable; nor, indeed, was
it more painful than surprising to come but ten days before out of old
castile, where the weather was not only warm but very hot, and
immediately to feel a wind from the pyrenean mountains so very keen, so
severely cold, as to be intolerable and to endanger benumbing and
perishing of our fingers and toes.

poor friday was really frightened when he saw the mountains all covered
with snow, and felt cold weather, which he had never seen or felt before
in his life.  to mend the matter, when we came to pampeluna it continued
snowing with so much violence and so long, that the people said winter
was come before its time; and the roads, which were difficult before,
were now quite impassable; for, in a word, the snow lay in some places
too thick for us to travel, and being not hard frozen, as is the case in
the nort
 
 ___________________________
 
uide being something
before us, and not just in sight, out rushed three monstrous wolves, and
after them a bear, from a hollow way adjoining to a thick wood; two of
the wolves made at the guide, and had he been far before us, he would
have been devoured before we could have helped him; one of them fastened
upon his horse, and the other attacked the man with such violence, that
he had not time, or presence of mind enough, to draw his pistol, but
hallooed and cried out to us most lustily.  my man friday being next me,
i bade him ride up and see what was the matter.  as soon as friday came
in sight of the man, he hallooed out as loud as the other, “o master! o
master!” but like a bold fellow, rode directly up to the poor man, and
with his pistol shot the wolf in the head that attacked him.

it was happy for the poor man that it was my man friday; for, having been
used to such creatures in his country, he had no fear upon him, but went
close up to him and shot him; whereas, any other of us w
 
 ___________________________
 
ould have fired
at a farther distance, and have perhaps either missed the wolf or
endangered shooting the man.

but it was enough to have terrified a bolder man than i; and, indeed, it
alarmed all our company, when, with the noise of friday’s pistol, we
heard on both sides the most dismal howling of wolves; and the noise,
redoubled by the echo of the mountains, appeared to us as if there had
been a prodigious number of them; and perhaps there was not such a few as
that we had no cause of apprehension: however, as friday had killed this
wolf, the other that had fastened upon the horse left him immediately,
and fled, without doing him any damage, having happily fastened upon his
head, where the bosses of the bridle had stuck in hi
 
 ___________________________
 
s teeth.  but the man
was most hurt; for the raging creature had bit him twice, once in the
arm, and the other time a little above his knee; and though he had made
some defence, he was just tumbling down by the disorder of his horse,
when friday came up and shot the wolf.

it is easy to suppose that at the noise of friday’s pistol we all mended
our pace, and rode up as fast as the way, which was very difficult, would
give us leave, to see what was the matter.  as soon as we came clear of
the trees, which blinded us before, we saw clearly what had been the
case, and how friday had disengaged the poor guide, though we did not
presently discern what kind of creature it was he had killed.




chapter xx—fight between friday and a bear


but never was a fight managed so hardily, and in such a surprising manner
as
 
 ___________________________
 
 that which followed between friday and the bear, which gave us all,
though at first we were surprised and afraid for him, the greatest
diversion imaginable.  as the bear is a heavy, clumsy creature, and does
not gallop as the wolf does, who is swift and light, so he has two
particular qualities, which generally are the rule of his actions; first,
as to men, who are not his proper prey (he does not usually attempt them,
except they first attack him, unless he be excessively hungry, which it
is probable might now be the case, the 
 
 ___________________________
 
p, and stand still, and look
steadfastly at him, he takes it for an affront; but if you throw or toss
anything at him, though it were but a bit of stick as big as your finger,
he thinks himself abused, and sets all other business aside to pursue his
revenge, and will have satisfaction in point of honour—that is his first
quality: the next is, if he be once affronted, he will never leave you,
night or day, till he has his revenge, but follows at a good round rate
till he overtakes you.

my man friday had delivered our guide, and when we came up to him he was
helping him off his horse, for the man was both hurt and frightened, when
on a sudden we espied the bear come out of the wood; and a monstrous one
it was, the biggest by far that ever i saw.  we were all a little
surprised when we saw him; but when friday saw him, it was easy to see
joy and courage in the fellow’s countenance.  “o! o! o!” says friday,
three times, pointing to him; “o master, you give me te leave, me shakee
te ha
 
 ___________________________
 
nd with him; me makee you good laugh.”

i was surprised to see the fellow so well pleased.  “you fool,” says i,
“he will eat you up.”—“eatee me up! eatee me up!” says friday, twice over
again; “me eatee him up; me makee you good laugh; you all stay here, me
show you good laugh.”  so down he sits, and gets off his boots in a
moment, and puts on a pair of pumps (as we call the flat shoes they wear,
and which he had in his pocket), gives my other servant his horse, and
with his gun away he flew, swift like the wind.

the bear was walking softly on, and offered to meddle with nobody, till
friday coming pretty near, calls to him, as if the bear could understand
him.
 
 ___________________________
 
  “hark ye, hark ye,” says friday, “me speakee with you.”  we
followed at a distance, for now being down on the gascony side of the
mountains, we were entered a vast forest, where the country was plain and
pretty open, though it had many trees in it scattered here and there.
friday, who had, as we say, the heels of the bear, came up with him
quickly, and took up a great stone, and threw it at him, and hit him just
on the head, but did him no more harm than if he had thrown it against a
wall; but it answered friday’s end, for the rogue was so void of fear
that he did it purely to make the bear follow him, and show us some laugh
as he called it.  as soon as the bear felt the blow, and saw him, he
turns about and comes after him, taking very long strides, and shuffling
on 
 
 ___________________________
 
at a strange rate, so as would have put a horse to a middling gallop;
away reins friday, and takes his course as if he ran towards us for help;
so we all resolved to fire at once upon the bear, and deliver my man;
though i was angry at him for bringing the bear back upon us, when he was
going about his own business another way; and especially i was angry that
he had turned the bear upon us, and then ran away; and i called out, “you
dog! is this your making us laugh?  come away, and take your horse, that
we may shoot the creature.”  he heard me, and cried out, “no shoot, no
s
 
 ___________________________
 
n the ground, at about five or six yards from the bottom of the
tree.  the bear soon came to the tree, and we followed at a distance: the
first thing he did he stopped at the gun, smelt at it, but let it lie,
and up he scrambles into the tree, climbing like a cat, though so
monstrous heavy.  i was amazed at the folly, as i thought it, of my man,
and could not for my life see anything to laugh at, till seeing the bear
get up the tree, we all rode near to him.

when we came to the tree, there was friday got out to the small end of a
large branch, and the bear got about half-way to him.  as soon as the
bear got out to that part where the limb of the tree was weaker, “ha!”
says he to us, “now you see me teachee the bear dance:” so he began
jumping and shaking the bough, at which the bear began to totter, but
stood still, and began to look behind him, to see how he should get back;
then, indeed, we did laugh heartily.  but friday had not done with him by
a great deal; when seeing him stan
 
 ___________________________
 
d still, he called out to him again, as
if he had supposed the bear could speak english, “what, you come no
farther? pray you come farther;” so he left jumping and shaking the tree;
and the bear, just as if he understood what he said, did come a little
farther; then he began jumping again, and the bear stopped again.  we
thought now was a good time to knock him in the head, and called to
friday to stand still and we should shoot the bear: but he cried out
earnestly, “oh, pray!  oh, pray! no shoot, me shoot by and then:” he
would have said by-and-by.  however, to shorten the story, friday danced
so much, and the bear stood so ticklish, that we had laughing enough, but
still could not imagine what the fellow would do: for first we thought he
depended upon shaking the bear off; and we found the bear was too cunning
for that too; for he would not go out far enough to be thrown down, b
 
 ___________________________
 
ut
clung fast with his great broad claws and feet, so that we could not
imagine what would be the end of it, and what the jest would be at last.
but friday put us out of doubt quickly: for seeing the bear cling fast to
the bough, and that he would not be persuaded to come any farther, “well,
well,” says friday, “you no come farther, me go; you no come to me, me
come to you;” and upon this he went out to the smaller end, where it
would bend with his weight, and gently let himself down by it, sliding
down the bough till he came near enough to jump down on his feet, and
away he ran to his gun, took it up, and stood still.  “well,” said i to
him, “friday, what will you do now?  why don’t you shoot him?”  “no
shoot,” says friday, “no yet; me shoot now, me no kill; me stay, give you
one
 
 ___________________________
 
 more laugh:” and, indeed, so he did; for when the bear saw his enemy
gone, he came back from the bough, where he stood, but did it very
cautiously, looking behind him every step, and coming backward till he
got into the body of the tree, then, with the same hinder end foremost,
he came down the tree, grasping it with his claws, and moving one foot at
a time, very leisurely.  at this juncture, and just before he could set
his hind foot on the ground, friday stepped up close to him, clapped the
muzzle of his piece into his ear, and shot him dead.  then the rogue
turned about to see if we did not laugh; and when he saw we were pleased
by our looks, he began to laugh very loud.  “so we kill bear in my
country,” says friday.  “so you kill them?” says i; “why, you have no
guns.”—“no,” says he, “no gun, but shoot great much long arrow.”  this
was a good diversion to us; but we were still in a wild place, and our
guide very much hur
 
 ___________________________
 
t, and what to do we hardly knew; the howling of
wolves ran much in my head; and, indeed, except the noise i once heard on
the shore of africa, of which i have said something already, i never
heard anything that filled me with so much horror.

these things, and the approach of night, called us off, or else, as
friday would have had us, we should certainly have taken the skin of this
monstrous creature off, which was worth saving; but we had near three
leagues to go, and our guide hastened us; so we left him, and went
forward on our journey.

the ground was still covered with snow, though not so deep and dangerous
as on the mountains; and the ravenous creatures, as we heard afterwards,
were come down into the forest and plain country, pressed by hunger, to
seek for food, and had done a great deal of mischief
 
 ___________________________
 
we came through that wood, which
was near half a league, and entered the plain.  as soon as we came into
the plain, we had occasion enough to look about us.  the first object we
met with was a dead horse; that is to say, a poor horse which the wolves
had killed, and at least a dozen of them at work, we could not say eating
him, but picking his bones rather; for they had eaten up all the flesh
before.  we did not think fit to disturb them at their feast, neither did
they take much notice of us.  friday would have let fly at them, but i
would not suffer him by any means; for i found we were like to have more
business upon our hands than we were aware of.  we had not gone half over
the plain when we began to hear the wolves howl in the wood on our left
in a frightful manner, and presently after we saw about a hundred coming
on directly towards us, all in a body, and most of them in a line, as
regularly as an army drawn up by experienced officers.  i scarce knew in
what manner to receive them, b
 
 ___________________________
 
ring,
for they came on like devils, those behind pushing on those before.

when we had fired a second volley of our fusees, we thought they stopped
a little, and i hoped they would have gone off, but it was but a moment,
for others came forward again; so we fired two volleys of our pistols;
and i believe in these four firings we had killed seventeen or eighteen
of them, and lamed twice as many, yet they came on again.  i was loth to
spend our shot too hastily; so i called my servant, not my man friday,
for he was better employed, for, with the greatest dexterity imaginable,
he had charged my fusee and his own while we were engaged—but, as i said,
i called my other man, and giving him a horn of powder, i had him lay a
train all along the piece of timber, and let it be a large train.  he did
so, and had but just time to get away, when the wolves came up to it, and
some got upon it, when i, snapping an unchanged pistol close to the
powder, set it on fire; those that were upon the timber were 