the tragedy of king lear

by william shakespeare




dramatis personae

      lear, king of britain.
      king of france.
      duke of burgundy.
      duke of cornwall.
      duke of albany.
      earl of kent.
      earl of gloucester.
      edgar, son of gloucester.
      edmund, bastard son to gloucester.
      curan, a courtier.
      old man, tenant to gloucester.
      doctor.
      lear's fool.
      oswald, steward to goneril.
      a captain under edmund's command.
      gentlemen.
      a herald.
      servants to cornwall.

      goneril, daughter to lear.
      regan, daughter to lear.
      cordelia, daughter to lear.

      knights attending on lear, officers, messenge
 
 ___________________________
 
t 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



scene: - britain.


act i. scene i.
[king lear's palace.]

enter kent, gloucester, and edmund. [kent and glouceste converse.
edmund stands back.]

  kent. i thought the king had more affected the duke of albany
than
     cornwall.
  glou. it did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of
the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most,
for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  kent. is not this your son, my lord?
  glou. his breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. 
 
 ___________________________
 
i have so
often
     blush'd to acknowledge him that now i am braz'd to't.
  kent. i cannot conceive you.
  glou. sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew
     round-womb'd, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere
she
     had a husband for her bed. do you smell a fault?
  kent. i cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
     proper.
  glou. but i have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder
than
     this, who yet is no dearer in my account. though this knave
came
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet
was
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
     whoreson must be acknowledged.- do you know this noble
gentleman,
     edmund?
  edm. [comes forward] no, my lord.
  glou. my lord of k
 
 ___________________________
 
ent. remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  edm. my services to your lordship.
  kent. i must love you, and sue to know you better.
  edm. sir, i shall study deserving.
  glou. he hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 sound a sennet.
     the king is coming.

      enter one bearing a coronet; then lear; then the dukes of
      albany and cornwall; next, goneril, regan, cordelia, with
                              followers.

  lear. attend the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.
  glou. i shall, my l
 
 ___________________________
 

     the mysteries of hecate and the night;
     by all the operation of the orbs
     from whom we do exist and cease to be;
     here i disclaim all my paternal care,
     propinquity and property of blood,
     and as a stranger to my heart and me
     hold thee from this for ever. the barbarous scythian,
     or he that makes his generation messes
     to gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
     be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and reliev'd,
     as thou my sometime daughter.
  kent. good my liege-
  lear. peace, kent!
     come not between the dragon and his wrath.
     i lov'd her most, and thought to set my rest
     on her kind nursery.- hence and avoid my sight!-
     so be my grave my peace as here i give
     her father's heart from her! call france! who stirs?
     call burgundy! cornwall and albany,
     with my two daughters' dowers digest this third;
     let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
     i do invest you jointly in my power,
     p
 
 ___________________________
 
reeminence, and all the large effects
     that troop with majesty. ourself, by monthly course,
     with reservation of an hundred knights,
     by you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
     make with you by due turns. only we still retain
     the name, and all th' additions to a king. the sway,
     revenue, execution of the rest,
     beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,
     this coronet part betwixt you.
  kent. royal lear,
     whom i have ever honour'd as my king,
     lov'd as my father, as my master follow'd,
     as my great patron thought on in my prayers-
  lear. the bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.
  kent. let it fall rather, though the fork invade
     the region of my heart! be kent unmannerly
     when lear is mad. what wouldst thou do, old man?
     think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
     when power to flattery bows? to plainness honour's bound
     when
 
 ___________________________
 
 majesty falls to folly. reverse thy doom;
     and in thy best consideration check
     this hideous rashness. answer my life my judgment,
     thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
     nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
     reverbs no hollowness.
  lear. kent, on thy life, no more!
  kent. my life i never held but as a pawn
     to wage against thine enemies; nor fear to lose it,
     thy safety being the motive.
  lear. out of my sight!
  kent. see better, lear, and let me still remain
     the true blank of thine eye.
  lear. now by apollo-
  kent. now by apollo, king,
     thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
  lear. o vassal! miscreant!
                                   [lays his hand on his sword.]
  alb., corn. dear sir, forbear!
  kent. do!
     kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
     upon the foul disease. revoke thy gift,
     or, whilst i can vent clamour from my throat,
     i'll tell thee thou dost evil.
  lea
 
 ___________________________
 
 strain'd pride
     to come between our sentence and our power,-
     which nor our nature nor our place can bear,-
     our potency made good, take thy reward.
     five days we do allot thee for provision
     to shield thee from diseases of the world,
     and on the sixth to turn thy hated back
     upon our kingdom. if, on the tenth day following,
     thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
     the moment is thy death. away! by jupiter,
     this shall not be revok'd.
  kent. fare thee well, king. since thus thou wilt appear,
     freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
     [to cordelia] the gods to their dear shelter take thee,
maid,
     that justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
     [to regan and goneril] and your large speeches may your
deeds
        approve,
     that good effects may spring from words of love.
     thus kent, o princes, bids you all adieu;
     he'll shape his old course in a country new.
exit.

  flourish. enter glo
 
 ___________________________
 
nt he hath now cast
her
     off appears too grossly.
  reg. 'tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but
slenderly
     known himself.
  gon. the best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then
     must we look to receive from his age, not alone the
     imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal
     the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring
with
     them.
  reg. such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as
this
     of kent's banishment.
  gon. there is further compliment of leave-taking between france
and
     him. pray you let's hit together. if our father carry
authority
     with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of
his
     will but offend us.
  reg. we shall further think on't.
  gon. we must do something, and i' th' heat.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
the earl of gloucester's castle.

enter [edmund the] bastard solus, [with 
 
 ___________________________
 
e, tired bed,
     go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
     got 'tween asleep and wake? well then,
     legitimate edgar, i must have your land.
     our father's love is to the bastard edmund
     as to th' legitimate. fine word- 'legitimate'!
     well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
     and my invention thrive, edmund the base
     shall top th' legitimate. i grow; i prosper.
     now, gods, stand up for bastards!

                          enter gloucester.

  glou. kent banish'd thus? and france in choler parted?
     and the king gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     confin'd to exhibition? all this done
     upon the gad? edmund, how now? what news?
  edm. so please your lordship, none.
                                           [puts up the letter.]
  glou. why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
  edm. i know no news, my lord.
  glou. what paper were you reading?
  edm. nothing, my lord.
  glou. no? what needed then that terrible dis
 
 ___________________________
 
ord; in palaces, treason; and the bond
crack'd
     'twixt son and father. this villain of mine comes under the
     prediction; there's son against father: the king falls from
bias
     of nature; there's father against child. we have seen the
best
     of our time. machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
     ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. find
out
     this villain, edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully. and the noble and true-hearted kent banish'd! his
     offence, honesty! 'tis strange.                       exit.
  edm. this is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we
are
     sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we
make
     guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as
if
     we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
     knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical pre-dominance;
     drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforc'd obedience of
     
 
 ___________________________
 
flatteries, when they are seen abus'd.
     remember what i have said.
  osw. very well, madam.
  gon. and let his knights have colder looks among you.
     what grows of it, no matter. advise your fellows so.
     i would breed from hence occasions, and i shall,
     that i may speak. i'll write straight to my sister
     to hold my very course. prepare for dinner.
                                                         exeunt.




scene iv.
the duke of albany's palace.

enter kent, [disguised].

  kent. if but as well i other accents borrow,
     that can my speech defuse, my good intent
     may carry through itself to that full issue
     for which i raz'd my likeness. now, banish'd kent,
     if thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
     so may it come, thy master, whom thou lov'st,
     shall find thee full of labours.

         horns within. enter lear, [knights,] and attendants.

  lear. let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready. [ex
 
 ___________________________
 
it
     an attendant.] how now? what art thou?
  kent. a man, sir.
  lear. what dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?
  kent. i do profess to be no less than i seem, to serve him
truly
     that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to
     converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear
     judgment, to fight when i cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
  lear. what art thou?
  kent. a very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.
  lear. if thou be'st as poor for a subject as he's for a king,
thou
     art poor enough. what wouldst thou?
  kent. service.
  lear. who wouldst thou serve?
  kent. you.
  lear. dost thou know me, fellow?
  kent. no, sir; but you have that in your countenance which i
would
     fain call master.
  lear. what's that?
  kent. authority.
  lear. what services canst thou do?
  kent. i can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a c
 
 ___________________________
 
urious tale
in
     telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. that which
     ordinary men are fit for, i am qualified in, and the best of
me
     is diligence.
  lear. how old art thou?
  kent. not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so
old to
     dote on her for anything. i have years on my back
forty-eight.
  lear. follow me; thou shalt serve me. if i like thee no worse
after
     dinner, i will not part from thee yet. dinner, ho, dinner!
     where's my knave? my fool? go you and call my fool hither.

                                            [exit an attendant.]

                     enter [oswald the] steward.

     you, you, sirrah, where's my daught
 
 ___________________________
 
                              [exit an attendant.]

                     enter [oswald the] steward.

     o, you, sir, you! come you hither, sir. who am i, sir?
  osw. my lady's father.
  lear. 'my lady's father'? my lord's knave! you whoreson dog!
you
     slave! you cur!
  osw. i am none of these, my lord; i beseech your pardon.
  lear. do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?
                                                  [strikes him.]
  osw. i'll not be strucken, my lord.
  kent. nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
                                            [trips up his heels.
  lear. i thank thee, fellow. thou serv'st me, and i'll love
thee.
  kent. come, sir, arise, away! i'll teach you differences. away,
     away! if you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry;
but
     away! go to! have you wisdom? so.
                                               [pushes him out.]
  lear. now, my friendly knave, i thank thee. there's earnest of
thy
 
 ___________________________
 

     service.                                     [gives money.]

                             enter fool.

  fool. let me hire him too. here's my coxcomb.
                                          [offers kent his cap.]
  lear. how now, my pretty knave? how dost thou?
  fool. sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
  kent. why, fool?
  fool. why? for taking one's part that's out of favour. nay, an
thou
     canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold
shortly.
     there, take my coxcomb! why, this fellow hath banish'd two
on's
     daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. if
     thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb.- how now,
     nuncle? would i had two coxcombs and two daughters!
  lear. why, my boy?
  fool. if i gave them all my living, i'ld keep my coxcombs

 
 ___________________________
 
 lear. a pestilent gall to me!
  fool. sirrah, i'll teach thee a speech.
  lear. do.
  fool. mark it, nuncle.
          have more than thou showest,
          speak less than thou knowest,
          lend less than thou owest,
          ride more than thou goest,
          learn more than thou trowest,
          set less than thou throwest;
          leave thy drink and thy whore,
          and keep in-a-door,
          and thou shalt have more
          than two tens to a score.
  kent. this is nothing, fool.
  fool. then 'tis like the breath of an unfeed lawyer- you gave
me
     nothing for't. can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
  lear. why, no, boy. nothing can be made out of nothing.
  fool. [to kent] prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land
     comes to. he will not believe a fool.
  lear. a bitter fool!
  fool. dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
     fool and a sweet fool?
  lear. no, lad; teach me.
  fool.   that lord that coun
 
 ___________________________
 
sell'd thee
            to give away thy land,
          come place him here by me-
            do thou for him stand.
          the sweet and bitter fool
            will presently appear;
          the one in motley here,
            the other found out there.
  lear. dost thou call me fool, boy?
  fool. all thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast
     born with.
  kent. this is not altogether fool, my lord.
  fool. no, faith; lords and great men will not let me. if i had
a
     monopoly out, they would have part on't. and ladies too,
they
     will not let me have all the fool to myself; they'll be
     snatching. give me an egg, nuncle, and i'll give thee two
     crowns.
  lear. what two crowns shall they be?
  fool. why, after i have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up
the
     meat, the two crowns of the egg. when thou clovest thy crown
i'
 
 
 ___________________________
 
weep this cause again, i'll pluck ye out,
     and cast you, with the waters that you lose,
     to temper clay. yea, is it come to this?
     let it be so. yet have i left a daughter,
     who i am sure is kind and comfortable.
     when she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
     she'll flay thy wolvish visage. thou shalt find
     that i'll resume the shape which thou dost think
     i have cast off for ever; thou shalt, i warrant thee.
                            exeunt [lear, kent, and attendants].
  gon. do you mark that, my lord?
  alb. i cannot be so partial, goneril,
     to the great love i bear you -
  gon. pray you, content.- what, oswald, ho!
     [to the fool] you, sir, more knave than fool, after your
master!
  fool. nuncle lear, nuncle lear, tarry! take the fool with thee.


          a fox when one has caught her,
          and such a daughter,
          should sure to the slaughter,
          if my cap would buy a halter.
          so the fool 
 
 ___________________________
 
n your return. [exit oswald.] no, no, my lord!
     this milky gentleness and course of yours,
     though i condemn it not, yet, under pardon,
     you are much more at task for want of wisdom
     than prais'd for harmful mildness.
  alb. how far your eyes may pierce i cannot tell.
     striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
  gon. nay then-
  alb. well, well; th' event.                            exeunt.




scene v.
court before the duke of albany's palace.

enter lear, kent, and fool.

  lear. go you before to gloucester with these letters. acquaint
my
     daughter no further with anything you know than comes from
her
     demand out of the letter. if your diligence be not speedy, i
     shall be there afore you.
  kent. i will not sleep, my lord, till i have delivered your
letter.
exit.
  fool. if a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger
of
     kibes?
  lear. ay, boy.
  fool. then i prithee be merry. thy wit shall ne'er go
slip-shod.
 
 ___________________________
 
 writ, so hath our sister,
     of differences, which i best thought it fit
     to answer from our home. the several messengers
     from hence attend dispatch. our good old friend,
     lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
     your needful counsel to our business,
     which craves the instant use.
  glou. i serve you, madam.
     your graces are right welcome.
                                               exeunt. flourish.




scene ii.
before gloucester's castle.

enter kent and [oswald the] steward, severally.

  osw. good dawning to thee, friend. art of this house?
  kent. ay.
  osw. where may we set our horses?
  kent. i' th' mire.
  osw. prithee, if thou lov'st me, tell me.
  kent. i love thee not.
  osw. why then, i care not for thee.
  kent. if i had thee in lipsbury pinfold, i would make thee care
for
     me.
  osw. why dost thou use me thus? i know thee not.
  kent. fellow, i know thee.
  osw. what dost thou know me for?
  kent. a knave; a r
 
 ___________________________
 
eson,
     glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue;
     one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in
way of
     good service, and art nothing but the composition of a
knave,
     beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel
bitch;
     one whom i will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny
the
     least syllable of thy addition.
  osw. why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one
     that's neither known of thee nor knows thee!
  kent. what a brazen-fac'd varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest
me!
     is it two days ago since i beat thee and tripp'd up thy
heels
     before the king? [draws his sword.] draw, you rogue! for,
though
     it be night, yet the moon shines. i'll make a sop o' th'
     moonshine o' you. draw, you whoreson cullionly barbermonger!
     draw!
  osw. away! i have nothing to do with thee.
  kent. draw, you rascal! you come with letters against the king,
and
     take vanity the puppet's par
 
 ___________________________
 
t against the royalty of her
father.
     draw, you rogue, or i'll so carbonado your shanks! draw, you
     rascal! come your ways!
  osw. help, ho! murther! help!
  kent. strike, you slave! stand, rogue! stand, you neat slave!
     strike!                                        [beats him.]
  osw. help, ho! murther! murther!

      enter edmund, with his rapier drawn, gloucester, cornwall,
                           regan, servants.

  edm. how now? what's the matter?                 parts [them].
  kent. with you, goodman boy, an you please! come, i'll flesh
ye!
     come on, young master!
  glou. weapons? arms? what's the matter here?
  corn. keep
 
 ___________________________
 
 peace, upon your lives!
     he dies that strikes again. what is the matter?
  reg. the messengers from our sister and the king
  corn. what is your difference? speak.
  osw. i am scarce in breath, my lord.
  kent. no marvel, you have so bestirr'd your valour. you
cowardly
     rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.
  corn. thou art a strange fellow. a tailor make a man?
  kent. ay, a tailor, sir. a stonecutter or a painter could not
have
     made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the
trade.
  corn. speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
  osw. this ancient ruffian, sir, whose life i have spar'd
     at suit of his grey beard-
  kent. thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! my lord, if
     you'll give me leave, i will tread this unbolted villain
into
     mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. 'spare my
grey
     beard,' you wagtail?
 
 ___________________________
 

  corn. peace, sirrah!
     you beastly knave, know you no reverence?
  kent. yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
  corn. why art thou angry?
  kent. that such a slave as this should wear a sword,
     who wears no honesty. such smiling rogues as these,
     like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
     which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
     that in the natures of their lords rebel,
     bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
     renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
     with every gale and vary of their masters,
     knowing naught (like dogs) but following.
     a plague upon your epileptic
 
 ___________________________
 
 visage!
     smile you my speeches, as i were a fool?
     goose, an i had you upon sarum plain,
     i'ld drive ye cackling home to camelot.
  corn. what, art thou mad, old fellow?
  glou. how fell you out? say that.
  kent. no contraries hold more antipathy
     than i and such a knave.
  corn. why dost thou call him knave? what is his fault?
  kent. his countenance likes me not.
  corn. no more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.
  kent. sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain.
     i have seen better faces in my time
     than stands on any shoulder that i see
     before me at this instant.
  corn. this is some fellow
     who, having been prais'd for bluntness, doth affect
     a saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
     quite from his nature. he cannot flatter, he!
     an honest mind and plain- he must speak truth!
     an they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
     these kind of knaves i know which in this 
 
 ___________________________
 
plainness
     harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
     than twenty silly-ducking observants
     that stretch their duties nicely.
  kent. sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
     under th' allowance of your great aspect,
     whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
     on flickering phoebus' front-
  corn. what mean'st by this?
  kent. to go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. i
     know, sir, i am no flatterer. he that beguil'd you in a
plain
     accent was a plain knave, which, for my part, i will not be,
     though i should win your displeasure to entreat me to't.
  corn. what was th' offence you gave him?
  osw. i never gave him any.
     it pleas'd the king his master very late
     to strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
     when he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,
     tripp'd m
 
 ___________________________
 
e behind; being down, insulted, rail'd
     and put upon him such a deal of man
     that worthied him, got praises of the king
     for him attempting who was self-subdu'd;
     and, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
     drew on me here again.
  kent. none of these rogues and cowards
     but ajax is their fool.
  corn. fetch forth the stocks!
     you stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
     we'll teach you-
  kent. sir, i am too old to learn.
     call not your stocks for me. i serve the king;
     on whose employment i was sent to you.
     you shall do small respect, show too bold malice
     against the grace and person of my master,
     stocking his messenger.
  corn. fetch forth the stocks! as i have life and honour,
     there shall he sit till noon.
  reg. till noon? till night, my lord, and all night too!
  kent. why, madam, if i were your father's dog,
     you should not use me so.

 
 ___________________________
 
 check him for't. your purpos'd low correction
     is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches
     for pilf'rings and most common trespasses
     are punish'd with. the king must take it ill
     that he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
     should have him thus restrain'd.
  corn. i'll answer that.
  reg. my sister may receive it much more worse,
     to have her gentleman abus'd, assaulted,
     for following her affairs. put in his legs.-
                                    [kent is put in the stocks.]
     come, my good lord, away.
                           exeunt [all but gloucester and kent].
  glou. i am sorry for thee, friend. 'tis the duke's pleasure,
     whose disposition, all the world well knows,
     will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd. i'll entreat for thee.
  kent. pray do not, sir. i have watch'd and travell'd hard.
     some time i shall sleep out, the rest i'll whistle.
     a good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
     give you good morrow!
  g
 
 ___________________________
 
lou. the duke 's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.
exit.
  kent. good king, that must approve the common saw,
     thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
     to the warm sun!
     approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
     that by thy comfortable beams i may
     peruse this letter. nothing almost sees miracles
     but misery. i know 'tis from cordelia,
     who hath most fortunately been inform'd
     of my obscured course- and [reads] 'shall find time
     from this enormous state, seeking to give
     losses their remedies'- all weary a
 
 ___________________________
 
precedent
     of bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
     strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
     pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
     and with this horrible object, from low farms,
     poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
     sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
     enforce their charity. 'poor turlygod! poor tom!'
     that's something yet! edgar i nothing am.             exit.




scene iv.
before gloucester's castle; kent in the stocks.

enter lear, fool, and gentleman.

  lear. 'tis strange that they should so depart from home,
     and not send back my messenger.
  gent. as i learn'd,
     the night before there was no purpose in them
     of this remove.
  kent. hail to thee, noble master!
  lear. ha!
     mak'st thou this shame thy pastime?
  kent. no, my lord.
  fool. ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters. horses are tied by
the
     head, dogs and bears by th' neck, monkeys by th' loins, and
 
 ___________________________
 

men
     by th' legs. when a man's over-lusty at legs, then he wears
     wooden nether-stocks.
  lear. what's he that hath so much thy place mistook
     to set thee here?
  kent. it is both he and she-
     your son and daughter.
  lear. no.
  kent. yes.
  lear. no, i say.
  kent. i say yea.
  lear. no, no, they would not!
  kent. yes, they have.
  lear. by jupiter, i swear no!
  kent. by juno, i swear ay!
  lear. they durst not do't;
     they would not, could not do't. 'tis worse than murther
     to do upon respect such violent outrage.
     resolve me with all modest haste which way
     thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
     coming from us.
  kent. my lord, when at their home
     i did commend your highness' letters to them,
     ere i was risen from the place that show'd
     my duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     stew'd in his hast
 
 ___________________________
 
ers that wear rags
            do make their children blind;
          but fathers that bear bags
            shall see their children kind.
          fortune, that arrant whore,
          ne'er turns the key to th' poor.

     but for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
     daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
  lear. o, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
     hysterica passio! down, thou climbing sorrow!
     thy element's below! where is this daughter?
  kent. with the earl, sir, here within.
  lear. follow me not;
     stay here.                                            exit.
  gent. made you no more offence but what you speak of?
  kent. none.
     how chance the king comes with so small a number?
  fool. an thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question,
     thou'dst well deserv'd it.
  kent. why, fool?
  fool. we'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there's
no
     labouring i' th' winter. all that follow their noses
 
 ___________________________
 
ter.
     when a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine
again. i
     would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
          that sir which serves and seeks for gain,
            and follows but for form,
          will pack when it begins to rain
            and leave thee in the storm.
          but i will tarry; the fool will stay,
            and let the wise man fly.
          the knave turns fool that runs away;
            the fool no knave, perdy.
  kent. where learn'd you this, fool?
  fool. not i' th' stocks, fool.

                      enter lear and gloucester

  lear. deny to speak with me? they are sick? they are weary?
     they have travell'd all the night? mere fetches-
     the images of revolt and flying off!
     fetch me a better answer.
  glou. my dear lord,
     you know the fiery quality of the duke,
     how unremovable and fix'd he is
     in his own course.
  lear. vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
     fier
 
 ___________________________
 
        exit.
  lear. o me, my heart, my rising heart! but down!
  fool. cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when
she
     put 'em i' th' paste alive. she knapp'd 'em o' th' coxcombs
with
     a stick and cried 'down, wantons, down!' 'twas her brother
that,
     in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

             enter cornwall, regan, gloucester, servants.

  lear. good morrow to you both.
  corn. hail to your grace!
                                       kent here set at liberty.
  reg. i am glad to see your highness.
  lear. regan, i think you are; i know what reason
     i have to think so. if thou shouldst not be glad,
     i would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
     sepulchring an adultress. [to kent] o, are you free?
     some other time for that.- beloved regan,
     thy sister's naught. o regan, she hath tied
     sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here!
                                   [lays his hand on his heart.]
   
 
 ___________________________
 
men's weapons, water drops,
     stain my man's cheeks! no, you unnatural hags!
     i will have such revenges on you both
     that all the world shall- i will do such things-
     what they are yet, i know not; but they shall be
     the terrors of the earth! you think i'll weep.
     no, i'll not weep.
     i have full cause of weeping, but this heart
     shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
     or ere i'll weep. o fool, i shall go mad!
              exeunt lear, gloucester, kent, and fool. storm and
                                                        tempest.
  corn. let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.
  reg. this house is little; the old man and 's people
     cannot be well bestow'd.
  gon. 'tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest
     and must needs taste his folly.
  reg. for his particular, i'll receive him gladly,
     but not one follower.
  gon. so am i purpos'd.
     where is my lord of gloucester?
  corn. followed the old man forth.

  
 
 ___________________________
 
akespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iii. scene i.
a heath.

storm still. enter kent and a gentleman at several doors.

  kent. who's there, besides foul weather?
  gent. one minded like the weather, most unquietly.
  kent. i know you. where's the king?
  gent. contending with the fretful elements;
     bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
     or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
     that things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
     which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
     catch in their fury and make nothing of;
     strives in h
 
 ___________________________
 
is little world of man to outscorn
     the to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
     this night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
     the lion and the belly-pinched wolf
     keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
     and bids what will take all.
  kent. but who is with him?
  gent. none but the fool, who labours to outjest
     his heart-struck injuries.
  kent. sir, i do know you,
     and dare upon the warrant of my note
     commend a dear thing to you. there is division
     (although as yet the face of it be cover'd
     with mutual cunning) 'twixt albany and cornwall;
     who have (as who have not, that their great stars
     thron'd and set high?) servants, who seem no less,
     which are to france the spies and speculations
     intelligent of our state. what hath been seen,
     either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
     or 
 
 ___________________________
 
have secret feet
     in some of our best ports and are at point
     to show their open banner. now to you:
     if on my credit you dare build so far
     to make your speed to dover, you shall find
     some that will thank you, making just report
     of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
     the king hath cause to plain.
     i am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
     and from some knowledge and assurance offer
     this office to you.
  gent. i will talk further with you.
  kent. no, do not.
     for confirmation that i am much more
     than my out-wall, open this purse and take
     what it contains. if you shall see cordelia
     (as fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
     and she will tell you who your fellow is
     that yet you do not know. fie on this storm!
     i will go seek the king.
  gent. give me your hand. have you no more to say?
  kent. few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
     that, when we have found the king (in which yo
 
 ___________________________
 

  fool. he that has a house to put 's head in has a good
head-piece.
          the codpiece that will house
            before the head has any,
          the head and he shall louse:
            so beggars marry many.
          the man that makes his toe
            what he his heart should make
          shall of a corn cry woe,
            and turn his sleep to wake.
     for there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a
     glass.

                             enter kent.

  lear. no, i will be the pattern of all patience;
     i will say nothing.
  kent. who's there?
  fool. marry, here's grace and a codpiece; that's a wise man and
a
     fool.
  kent. alas, sir, are you here? things that love night
     love not such nights as these. the wrathful skies
     gallow the very wanderers of the dark
     and make them keep their caves. since i was man,
     such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
     such groans of roaring wind and rain, 
 
 ___________________________
 
ind out their enemies now. tremble, thou wretch,
     that hast within thee undivulged crimes
     unwhipp'd of justice. hide thee, thou bloody hand;
     thou perjur'd, and thou simular man of virtue
     that art incestuous. caitiff, in pieces shake
     that under covert and convenient seeming
     hast practis'd on man's life. close pent-up guilts,
     rive your concealing continents, and cry
     these dreadful summoners grace. i am a man
     more sinn'd against than sinning.
  kent. alack, bareheaded?
     gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
     some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
     repose you there, whilst i to this hard house
     (more harder than the stones whereof 'tis rais'd,
     which even but now, demanding after you,
     denied me to come in) return, and force
     their scanted courtesy.
  lear. my wits begin to turn.
     come on, my boy. how dost, my boy? art cold?
     i am cold myself. where is this straw, my fellow?
 
 ___________________________
 
ties is strange,
     that can make vile things precious. come, your hovel.
     poor fool and knave, i have one part in my heart
     that's sorry yet for thee.
  fool. [sings]

          he that has and a little tiny wit-
            with hey, ho, the wind and the rain-
          must make content with his fortunes fit,
             for the rain it raineth every day.

  lear. true, my good boy. come, bring us to this hovel.
                                         exeunt [lear and kent].
  fool. this is a brave night to cool a courtesan. i'll speak a
     prophecy ere i go:
          when priests are more in word than matter;
          when brewers mar their malt with water;
          when nobles are their tailors' tutors,
          no heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;
          when every case in law is right,
          no squire in debt nor no poor knight;
          when slanders do not live in tongues,
          nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
          
 
 ___________________________
 
he king my old
master
     must be relieved. there is some strange thing toward,
edmund.
     pray you be careful.                                  exit.
  edm. this courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke
     instantly know, and of that letter too.
     this seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
     that which my father loses- no less than all.
     the younger rises when the old doth fall.             exit.




scene iv.
the heath. before a hovel.

storm still. enter lear, kent, and fool.

  kent. here is the place, my lord. good my lord, enter.
     the tyranny of the open night 's too rough
     for nature to endure.
  lear. let me alone.
  kent. good my lord, enter here.
  lear. wilt break my heart?
  kent. i had rather break mine own. good my lord, enter.
  lear. thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
     invades us to the skin. so 'tis to thee;
     but where the greater malady is fix'd,
     the lesser is scarce felt. thou'dst shun a be
 
 ___________________________
 
the tempest in my mind
     doth from my senses take all feeling else
     save what beats there. filial ingratitude!
     is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
     for lifting food to't? but i will punish home!
     no, i will weep no more. in such a night
     'to shut me out! pour on; i will endure.
     in such a night as this! o regan, goneril!
     your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all!
     o, that way madness lies; let me shun that!
     no more of that.
  kent. good my lord, enter here.
  lear. prithee go in thyself; seek thine own ease.
     this tempest will not give me leave to ponder
     on things would hurt me more. but i'll go in.
     [to the fool] in, boy; go first.- you houseless poverty-
     nay, get thee in. i'll pray, and then i'll sleep.
                                                    exit [fool].
     poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are,
     that bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
     how shall your houseless
 
 ___________________________
 
s and unfed sides,
     your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you
     from seasons such as these? o, i have ta'en
     too little care of this! take physic, pomp;
     expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
     that thou mayst shake the superflux to them
     and show the heavens more just.
  edg. [within] fathom and half, fathom and half! poor tom!

                     enter fool [from the hovel].

  fool. come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit. help me, help
me!
  kent. give me thy hand. who's there?
  fool. a spirit, a spirit! he says his name's poor tom.
  kent. what art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw?
     come forth.

                 enter edgar [disguised as a madman].

  edg. away! the foul fiend follows me! through the sharp
hawthorn
     blows the cold wind. humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm
thee.
  lear. hast thou given all to thy two daughters, and art thou
come
     to this?
  edg. who gives anything to poor tom? whom the
 
 ___________________________
 
o poor tom some
charity,
     whom the foul fiend vexes. there could i have him now- and
there-
     and there again- and there!
                                                    storm still.
  lear. what, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
     couldst thou save nothing? didst thou give 'em all?
  fool. nay, he reserv'd a blanket, else we had been all sham'd.
  lear. now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
     hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
  kent. he hath no daughters, sir.
  lear. death, traitor! nothing could have subdu'd nature
     to such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
     is it the fashion that discarded fathers
     should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
     judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot
     those pelican daughters.
  edg. pillicock sat on pillicock's hill. 'allow, 'allow, loo,
loo!
  fool. this cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
  edg. take heed o' th' foul fiend; obey thy pa
 
 ___________________________
 
ster with a torch.

  edg. this is the foul fiend flibbertigibbet. he begins at
curfew,
     and walks till the first cock. he gives the web and the pin,
     squints the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white
wheat,
     and hurts the poor creature of earth.

           saint withold footed thrice the 'old;
           he met the nightmare, and her nine fold;
              bid her alight
              and her troth plight,
           and aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!

  kent. how fares your grace?
  lear. what's he?
  kent. who's there? what is't you seek?
  glou. what are you there? your names?
  edg. poor tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the
todpole,
     the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart,
when
     the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets, swallows
the
     old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the
     standing pool; who is whipp'd from tithing to tithing, and
     stock-punish'd and impriso
 
 ___________________________
 
lesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
     that it doth hate what gets it.
  edg. poor tom 's acold.
  glou. go in with me. my duty cannot suffer
     t' obey in all your daughters' hard commands.
     though their injunction be to bar my doors
     and let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
     yet have i ventur'd to come seek you out
     and bring you where both fire and food is ready.
  lear. first let me talk with this philosopher.
     what is the cause of thunder?
  kent. good my lord, take his offer; go into th' house.
  lear. i'll talk a word with this same learned theban.
     what is your study?
  edg. how to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
  lear. let me ask you one word in private.
  kent. importune him once more to go, my lord.
     his wits begin t' unsettle.
  glou. canst thou blame him?
                                                    storm still.
     his daughters seek his death. ah, that good kent!
     he said it would be thus- 
 
 ___________________________
 
 mad: i'll tell thee, friend,
     i am almost mad myself. i had a son,
     now outlaw'd from my blood. he sought my life
     but lately, very late. i lov'd him, friend-
     no father his son dearer. true to tell thee,
     the grief hath craz'd my wits. what a night 's this!
     i do beseech your grace-
  lear. o, cry you mercy, sir.
     noble philosopher, your company.
  edg. tom's acold.
  glou. in, fellow, there, into th' hovel; keep thee warm.
  lear. come, let's in all.
  kent. this way, my lord.
  lear. with him!
     i will keep still with my philosopher.
  kent. good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
  glou. take him you on.
  kent. sirrah, come on; go along with us.
  lear. come, good athenian.
  glou. no words, no words! hush.
  edg. child rowland to the dark tower came;
     his word was still

          fie, foh, and fum!
          i smell the blood of a british man.
                                                         exeunt.

s
 
 ___________________________
 
er is, that he may be ready for our
     apprehension.
  edm. [aside] if i find him comforting the king, it will stuff
his
     suspicion more fully.- i will persever in my course of
loyalty,
     though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
  corn. i will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer
     father in my love.
                                                         exeunt.




scene vi.
a farmhouse near gloucester's castle.

enter gloucester, lear, kent, fool, and edgar.

  glou. here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. i
will
     piece out the comfort with what addition i can. i will not
be
     long from you.
  kent. all the power of his wits have given way to his
impatience.
     the gods reward your kindness!
                                              exit [gloucester].
  edg. frateretto calls me, and tells me nero is an angler in the
     lake of darkness. pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
  fool. pr
 
 ___________________________
 
hou, sapient sir, sit here. now, you
she-foxes!
  edg. look, where he stands and glares! want'st thou eyes at
trial,
     madam?

             come o'er the bourn, bessy, to me.

  fool.      her boat hath a leak,
             and she must not speak
           why she dares not come over to thee.

  edg. the foul fiend haunts poor tom in the voice of a
nightingale.
     hoppedance cries in tom's belly for two white herring. croak
     not, black angel; i have no food for thee.
  kent. how do you, sir? stand you not so amaz'd.
     will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
  lear. i'll see their trial first. bring in their evidence.
     [to edgar] thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.
     [to the fool] and thou, his yokefellow of equity,
     bench by his side. [to kent] you are o' th' commission,
     sit you too.
  edg. let us deal justly.

          sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
            thy sheep be in the corn;
          and for one 
 
 ___________________________
 
'tis goneril. i here take my oath
before
     this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor king her
father.
  fool. come hither, mistress. is your name goneril?
  lear. she cannot deny it.
  fool. cry you mercy, i took you for a joint-stool.
  lear. and here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
     what store her heart is made on. stop her there!
     arms, arms! sword! fire! corruption in the place!
     false justicer, why hast thou let her scape?
  edg. bless thy five wits!
  kent. o pity! sir, where is the patience now
     that you so oft have boasted to retain?
  edg. [aside] my tears begin to take his part so much
     they'll mar my counterfeiting.
  lear. the little dogs and all,
     tray, blanch, and sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
  edg. tom will throw his head at them. avaunt, you curs!
           be thy mouth or black or white,
           tooth that poisons if it bite;
           mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
           hound or spaniel, brach 
 
 ___________________________
 
y head,
           dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
     do de, de, de. sessa! come, march to wakes and fairs and
market
     towns. poor tom, thy horn is dry.
  lear. then let them anatomize regan. see what breeds about her
     heart. is there any cause in nature that makes these hard
     hearts? [to edgar] you, sir- i entertain you for one of my
     hundred; only i do not like the fashion of your garments.
you'll
     say they are persian attire; but let them be chang'd.
  kent. now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
  lear. make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
     so, so, so. we'll go to supper i' th' morning. so, so, so.
  fool. and i'll go to bed at noon.

                          enter gloucester.

  glou. come hither, friend. where is the king my master?
  kent. here, sir; but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
  glou. good friend, i prithee take him in thy arms.
     i have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
     there is a litte
 
 ___________________________
 
r ready; lay him in't
     and drive towards dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
     both welcome and protection. take up thy master.
     if thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
     with thine, and all that offer to defend him,
     stand in assured loss. take up, take up!
     and follow me, that will to some provision
     give thee quick conduct.
  kent. oppressed nature sleeps.
     this rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
     which, if convenience will not allow,
     stand in hard cure. [to the fool] come, help to bear thy
master.
     thou must not stay behind.
  glou. come, come, away!
                                         exeunt [all but edgar].
  edg. when we our betters see bearing our woes,
     we scarcely think our miseries our foes.
     who alone suffers suffers most i' th' mind,
     leaving free things a
 
 ___________________________
 
im back again.
  alb. knows he the wickedness?
  gent. ay, my good lord. 'twas he inform'd against him,
     and quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
     might have the freer course.
  alb. gloucester, i live
     to thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king,
     and to revenge thine eyes. come hither, friend.
     tell me what more thou know'st.
                                                         exeunt.




scene iii.
the french camp near dover.

enter kent and a gentleman.

  kent. why the king of france is so suddenly gone back know you
the
     reason?
  gent. something he left imperfect in the state, which since his
     coming forth is thought of, which imports to the kingdom so
much
     fear and danger that his personal return was most required
and
     necessary.
  kent. who hath he left behind him general?
  gent. the marshal of france, monsieur la far.
  kent. did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of
     g
 
 ___________________________
 
rief?
  gent. ay, sir. she took them, read them in my presence,
     and now and then an ample tear trill'd down
     her delicate cheek. it seem'd she was a queen
     over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
     sought to be king o'er her.
  kent. o, then it mov'd her?
  gent. not to a rage. patience and sorrow strove
     who should express her goodliest. you have seen
     sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
     were like, a better way. those happy smilets
     that play'd on her ripe lip seem'd not to know
     what guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
     as pearls from diamonds dropp'd. in brief,
     sorrow would be a rarity most belov'd,
     if all could so become it.
  kent. made she no verbal qu
 
 ___________________________
 
estion?
  gent. faith, once or twice she heav'd the name of father
     pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart;
     cried 'sisters, sisters! shame of ladies! sisters!
     kent! father! sisters! what, i' th' storm? i' th' night?
     let pity not be believ'd!' there she shook
     the holy water from her heavenly eyes,
     and clamour moisten'd. then away she started
     to deal with grief alone.
  kent. it is the stars,
     the stars above us, govern our conditions;
     else one self mate and mate could not beget
     such different issues. you spoke not with her since?
  gent. no.
  kent. was this before the king return'd?
  gent. no, since.
  kent. well, sir, the poor distressed lear's i' th' town;
     who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
     what we are come about, and by no means
     will yield to see his daughter.
  gent. why, good sir?
  kent. a sovereign shame s
 
 ___________________________
 
o elbows him; his own unkindness,
     that stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
     to foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
     to his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
     his mind so venomously that burning shame
     detains him from cordelia.
  gent. alack, poor gentleman!
  kent. of albany's and cornwall's powers you heard not?
  gent. 'tis so; they are afoot.
  kent. well, sir, i'll bring you to our master lear
     and leave you to attend him. some dear cause
     will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
     when i am known aright, you shall not grieve
     lending me this acquaintance. i pray you go
     along with me.                                      exeunt.




scene iv.
the french camp.

enter, with drum and colours, cordelia, doctor, and soldiers.

  cor. alack, 'tis he! why, he was met even now
     as mad as the vex'd sea, singin
 
 ___________________________
 
 that i stand up, and have ingenious feeling
     of my huge sorrows! better i were distract.
     so should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,
     and woes by wrong imaginations lose
     the knowledge of themselves.
                                                a drum afar off.
  edg. give me your hand.
     far off methinks i hear the beaten drum.
     come, father, i'll bestow you with a friend.        exeunt.




scene vii.
a tent in the french camp.

enter cordelia, kent, doctor, and gentleman.

  cor. o thou good kent, how shall i live and work
     to match thy goodness? my life will be too short
     and every measure fail me.
  kent. to be acknowledg'd, madam, is o'erpaid.
     all my reports go with the modest truth;
     nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
  cor. be better suited.
     these weeds are memories of those worser hours.
     i prithee put them off.
  kent. pardon, dear madam.
     yet to be known shortens my made intent.
     my boon i
 
 ___________________________
 
vants.

  gent. ay, madam. in the heaviness of sleep
     we put fresh garments on him.
  doct. be by, good madam, when we do awake him.
     i doubt not of his temperance.
  cor. very well.
                                                          music.
  doct. please you draw near. louder the music there!
  cor. o my dear father, restoration hang
     thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
     repair those violent harms that my two sisters
     have in thy reverence made!
  kent. kind and dear princess!
  cor. had you not been their father, these white flakes
     had challeng'd pity of them. was this a face
     to be oppos'd against the warring winds?
     to stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
     in the most terrible and nimble stroke
     of quick cross lightning? to watch- poor perdu!-
     with this thin helm? mine enemy's dog,
     though he had bit me, should have stood that night
     against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
     
 
 ___________________________
 
embers not these garments; nor i know not
     where i did lodge last night. do not laugh at me;
     for (as i am a man) i think this lady
     to be my child cordelia.
  cor. and so i am! i am!
  lear. be your tears wet? yes, faith. i pray weep not.
     if you have poison for me, i will drink it.
     i know you do not love me; for your sisters
     have, as i do remember, done me wrong.
     you have some cause, they have not.
  cor. no cause, no cause.
  lear. am i in france?
  kent. in your own kingdom, sir.
  lear. do not abuse me.
  doct. be comforted, good madam. the great rage
     you see is kill'd in him; and yet it is danger
     to make him even o'er the time he has lost.
     desire him to go in. trouble him no more
     till further settling.
  cor. will't please your highness walk?
  lear. you must bear with me.
     pray you now, forget and forgive. i am old and foolish.
                              exeunt. manent kent and gentleman.
  gent. holds 
 
 ___________________________
 
it true, sir, that the duke of cornwall was so
slain?
  kent. most certain, sir.
  gent. who is conductor of his people?
  kent. as 'tis said, the bastard son of gloucester.
  gent. they say edgar, his banish'd son, is with the earl of
kent
     in germany.
  kent. report is changeable. 'tis time to look about; the powers
of
     the kingdom approach apace.
  gent. the arbitrement is like to be bloody.
     fare you well, sir.                                 [exit.]
  kent. my point and period will be throughly wrought,
     or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.        exit.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
 
 ___________________________
 
 worst estate,
     shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding
     who 'twas that so endur'd, with his strong arms
     he fastened on my neck, and bellowed out
     as he'd burst heaven; threw him on my father;
     told the most piteous tale of lear and him
     that ever ear receiv'd; which in recounting
     his grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
     began to crack. twice then the trumpets sounded,
     and there i left him tranc'd.
  alb. but who was this?
  edg. kent, sir, the banish'd kent; who in disguise
     followed his enemy king and did him service
     improper for a slave.

                enter a gentleman with a bloody knife.

  gent. help, help! o, help!
  edg. what kind of help?
  alb. speak, man.
  edg. what means that bloody knife?
  gent. 'tis hot, it smokes.
     it came even from the heart of- o! she's dead!
  alb. who dead? speak, man.
  gent. your lady, sir, your lady! and her sister
     by her is poisoned; she hath confes
 
 ___________________________
 
s'd it.
  edm. i was contracted to them both. all three
     now marry in an instant.

                             enter kent.

  edg. here comes kent.
  alb. produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
                                               [exit gentleman.]
     this judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble
     touches us not with pity. o, is this he?
     the time will not allow the compliment
     that very manners urges.
  kent. i am come
     to bid my king and master aye good night.
     is he not here?
  alb. great thing of us forgot!
     speak, edmund, where's the king? and where's cordelia?
                 the bodies of goneril and regan are brought in.
     seest thou this object, kent?
  kent. alack, why thus?
  edm. yet edmund was belov'd.
     the one the other poisoned for my sake,
     and after slew herself.
  alb. even so. cover their faces.
  edm. i pant for life. some good i mean to do,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
mund is borne off.]

    enter lear, with cordelia [dead] in his arms, [edgar,
captain,
                        and others following].

  lear. howl, howl, howl, howl! o, you are men of stone.
     had i your tongues and eyes, i'ld use them so
     that heaven's vault should crack. she's gone for ever!
     i know when one is dead, and when one lives.
     she's dead as earth. lend me a looking glass.
     if that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
     why, then she lives.
  kent. is this the promis'd end?
  edg. or image of that horror?
  alb. fall and cease!
  lear. this feather stirs; she lives! if it be so,
     it is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
     that ever i have felt.
  kent. o my good master!
  lear. prithee away!
  edg. 'tis noble kent, your friend.
  lear. a plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
     i might have sav'd her; now she's gone for ever!
     cordelia, cordelia! stay a little. ha!
     what is't thou say'st, her voice wa
 
 ___________________________
 
s ever soft,
     gentle, and low- an excellent thing in woman.
     i kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
  capt. 'tis true, my lords, he did.
  lear. did i not, fellow?
     i have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
     i would have made them skip. i am old now,
     and these same crosses spoil me. who are you?
     mine eyes are not o' th' best. i'll tell you straight.
  kent. if fortune brag of two she lov'd and hated,
     one of them we behold.
  lear. this' a dull sight. are you not kent?
  kent. the same-
     your servant kent. where is your servant caius?
  lear. he's a good fellow, i can tell you that.
     he'll strike, and quickly too. he's dead and rotten.
  kent. no, my good lord; i am the very man-
  lear. i'll see that straight.
  kent. that from your first of difference and decay
     have followed your sad steps.
  lear. you're welcome hit
 
 ___________________________
 
her.
  kent. nor no man else! all's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
     your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
     and desperately are dead.
  lear. ay, so i think.
  alb. he knows not what he says; and vain is it
     that we present us to him.
  edg. very bootless.

                           enter a captain.

  capt. edmund is dead, my lord.
  alb. that's but a trifle here.
     you lords and noble friends, know our intent.
     what comfort to this great decay may come
     shall b
 
 ___________________________
 
e applied. for us, we will resign,
     during the life of this old majesty,
     to him our absolute power; [to edgar and kent] you to your
        rights;
     with boot, and such addition as your honours
     have more than merited.- all friends shall taste
     the wages of their virtue, and all foes
     the cup of their deservings.- o, see, see!
  lear. and my poor fool is hang'd! no, no, no life!
     why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
     and thou no breath at all? thou'lt come no more,
     never, never, never, never, never!
     pray you undo this button. thank you, sir.
     do you see t
 
 ___________________________
 
his? look on her! look! her lips!
     look there, look there!                            he dies.
  edg. he faints! my lord, my lord!
  kent. break, heart; i prithee break!
  edg. look up, my lord.
  kent. vex not his ghost. o, let him pass! he hates him
     that would upon the rack of this tough world
     stretch him out longer.
  edg. he is gone indeed.
  kent. the wonder is, he hath endur'd so long.
     he but usurp'd his life.
  alb. bear them from hence. our present business
     is general woe. [to kent and edgar] friends of my soul, you
        twain
     rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain.
  kent. i have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
     my master calls me; i must not say no.
  alb. the weight of this sad time we must obey,
     speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
     the oldest have borne most; we that are 