the tragedy of king lear

by william shakespeare




dramatis personae

      lear, king of britain.
      king of france.
      duke of burgundy.
      duke of cornwall.
      duke of albany.
      earl of kent.
      earl of gloucester.
      edgar, son of gloucester.
      edmund, bastard son to gloucester.
      curan, a courtier.
      old man, tenant to gloucester.
      doctor.
      lear's fool.
      oswald, steward to goneril.
      a captain under edmund's command.
      gentlemen.
      a herald.
      servants to cornwall.

      goneril, daughter to lear.
      regan, daughter to lear.
      cordelia, daughter to lear.

      k
 
 ___________________________
 
copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



scene: - britain.


act i. scene i.
[king lear's palace.]

enter kent, gloucester, and edmund. [kent and glouceste converse.
edmund stands back.]

  kent. i thought the king had more affected the duke of albany
than
     cornwall.
  glou. it did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of
the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most,
for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  kent. is not this your son, my lord?
  glou. his breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. i have so
often
     blush'd to acknowledge him that now i am braz'd to't.
  kent. i cannot conceive you.
  glou. sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupo
 
 ___________________________
 
     edmund?
  edm. [comes forward] no, my lord.
  glou. my lord of kent. remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  edm. my services to your lordship.
  kent. i must love you, and sue to know you better.
  edm. sir, i shall study deserving.
  glou. he hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 sound a sennet.
     the king is coming.

      enter one bearing a coronet; then lear; then the dukes of
      albany and cornwall; next, goneril, regan, cordelia, with
                              followers.

  lear. attend the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.
  glou. i shall, my liege.
                                 exeunt [gloucester and edmund].
  lear. meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
     give me the map there. know we have divided
     in three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
     to shake all cares and business from our age,
     conferring them on younger strengths while we
 
 ___________________________
 

     unburthen'd crawl toward death. our son of cornwall,
     and you, our no less loving son of albany,
     we have this hour a constant will to publish
     our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
     may be prevented now. the princes, france and burgundy,
     great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
     long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
     and here are to be answer'd. tell me, my daughters
     (since now we will divest us both of rule,
     interest of territory, cares of state),
     which of you 
 
 ___________________________
 
 lov'd, or father found;
     a love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.
     beyond all manner of so much i love you.
  cor. [aside] what shall cordelia speak? love, and be silent.
  lear. of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
     with shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,
     with plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
     we make thee lady. to thine and albany's issue
     be this perpetual.- what says our second daughter,
     our dearest regan, wife to cornwall? speak.
  reg. sir, i am made
     of the selfsame metal that my sister is,
     and prize me at her worth. in my true heart
     i find she names my very deed of love;
     only she comes too short, that i profess
     myself an enemy to all other joys
     which the most precious square of sense possesses,
     and find i am alone felicitate
     in your dear highness' love.
  cor. [aside] then poor cordelia!
     and yet not so; since i am sure my love's
     more richer than my 
 
 ___________________________
 
or he that makes his generation messes
     to gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
     be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and reliev'd,
     as thou my sometime daughter.
  kent. good my liege-
  lear. peace, kent!
     come not between the dragon and his wrath.
     i lov'd her most, and thought to set my rest
     on her kind nursery.- hence and avoid my sight!-
     so be my grave my peace as here i give
     her father's heart from her! call france! who stirs?
     call burgundy! cornwall and albany,
     with my two daughters' dowers digest this third;
     let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
     i do invest you jointly in my power,
     preeminence, and all the large effects
     that troop with majesty. ourself, by monthly course,
     with reservation of an hundred knights,
     by you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
     make with you by due turns. only we still retain
     the name, and all th' additions to a king. the sway,
     revenue, execution
 
 ___________________________
 
of ours, and our fair france.
     not all the dukes in wat'rish burgundy
     can buy this unpriz'd precious maid of me.
     bid them farewell, cordelia, though unkind.
     thou losest here, a better where to find.
  lear. thou hast her, france; let her be thine; for we
     have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
     that face of hers again. therefore be gone
     without our grace, our love, our benison.
     come, noble burgundy.
             flourish. exeunt lear, burgundy, [cornwall, albany,
                                    gloucester, and attendants].
  france. bid farewell to your sisters.
  cor. the jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
     cordelia leaves you. i know you what you are;
     and, like a sister, am most loath to call
     your faults as they are nam'd. use well our father.
     to your professed bosoms i commit him;
     but yet, alas, stood i within his grace,
     i would prefer him to a better place!
     so farewell to you both.
  gon.
 
 ___________________________
 

distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
a court within the castle of the earl of gloucester.

enter [edmund the] bastard and curan, meeting.

  edm. save thee, curan.
  cur. and you, sir. i have been with your father, and given him
     notice that the duke of cornwall and regan his duchess will
be
     here with him this night.
  edm. how comes that?
  cur. nay, i know not. you have heard of the news abroad- i mean
the
     whisper'd ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?
  edm. not i. pray you, what are they?
  cur. have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two
dukes
     of cornwall and albany?
  edm. not a word.
  cur. you may do, then, in time. fare you well, sir.      exit.
  edm. the duke be here to-night? the better! b
 
 ___________________________
 
est!
     this weaves itself perforce into my business.
     my father hath set guard to take my brother;
     and i have one thing, of a queasy question,
     which i must act. briefness and fortune, work!
     brother, a word! descend! brother, i say!

                             enter edgar.

     my father watches. o sir, fly this place!
     intelligence is given where you are hid.
     you have now the good advantage of the night.
     have you not spoken 'gainst the duke of cornwall?
     he's coming hither; now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
     and regan with him. have you nothing said
     upon his party 'gainst the duke of albany?
     advise yourself.
  edg. i am sure on't, not a word.
  edm. i hear my father coming. pardon me!
     in cunning i must draw my sword upon you.
     draw, seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.-
     yield! come before my father. light, ho, here!
     fly, brother.- torches, torches!- so farewell.
                           
 
 ___________________________
 
ned villain!
     would he deny his letter? i never got him.
                                                  tucket within.
     hark, the duke's trumpets! i know not why he comes.
     all ports i'll bar; the villain shall not scape;
     the duke must grant me that. besides, his picture
     i will send far and near, that all the kingdom
     may have due note of him, and of my land,
     loyal and natural boy, i'll work the means
     to make thee capable.

                enter cornwall, regan, and attendants.

  corn. how now, my noble friend? since i came hither
     (which i can call but now) i have heard strange news.
  reg. if it be true, all vengeance comes too short
     which can pursue th' offender. how dost, my lord?
  glou. o madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
  reg. what, did my father's godson seek your life?
     he whom my father nam'd? your edgar?
  glou. o lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
  reg. was he not companion with the riotous kn
 
 ___________________________
 

  kent. draw, you rascal! you come with letters against the king,
and
     take vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her
father.
     draw, you rogue, or i'll so carbonado your shanks! draw, you
     rascal! come your ways!
  osw. help, ho! murther! help!
  kent. strike, you slave! stand, rogue! stand, you neat slave!
     strike!                                        [beats him.]
  osw. help, ho! murther! murther!

      enter edmund, with his rapier drawn, gloucester, cornwall,
                           regan, servants.

  edm. how now? what's the matter?                 parts [them].
  kent. with you, goodman boy, an you please! come, i'll flesh
ye!
     come on, young master!
  glou. weapons? arms? what's the matter here?
  corn. keep peace, upon your lives!
     he dies that strikes again. what is the matter?
  reg. the messengers from our sister and the king
  corn. what is your difference? speak.
  osw. i am scarce in breath, my lord.
  kent. no ma
 
 ___________________________
 
           enter lear and gloucester

  lear. deny to speak with me? they are sick? they are weary?
     they have travell'd all the night? mere fetches-
     the images of revolt and flying off!
     fetch me a better answer.
  glou. my dear lord,
     you know the fiery quality of the duke,
     how unremovable and fix'd he is
     in his own course.
  lear. vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
     fiery? what quality? why, gloucester, gloucester,
     i'ld speak with the duke of cornwall and his wife.
  glou. well, my good lord, i have inform'd them so.
  lear. inform'd them? dost thou understand me, man?
  glou. ay, my good lord.
  lear. the king would speak with cornwall; the dear father
     would with his daughter speak, commands her service.
     are they inform'd of this? my breath and blood!
     fiery? the fiery duke? tell the hot duke that-
     no, but not yet! may be he is not well.
     infirmity doth still neglect all office
     whereto our health is bou
 
 ___________________________
 
ear me,
     or at their chamber door i'll beat the drum
     till it cry sleep to death.
  glou. i would have all well betwixt you.                 exit.
  lear. o me, my heart, my rising heart! but down!
  fool. cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when
she
     put 'em i' th' paste alive. she knapp'd 'em o' th' coxcombs
with
     a stick and cried 'down, wantons, down!' 'twas her brother
that,
     in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

             enter cornwall, regan, gloucester, servants.

  lear. good morrow to you both.
  corn. hail to your grace!
                                       kent here set at liberty.
  reg. i am glad to see your highness.
  lear. regan, i think you are; i know what reason
     i have to think so. if thou shouldst not be glad,
     i would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
     sepulchring an adultress. [to kent] o, are you free?
     some other time for that.- beloved regan,
     thy sister's naught. o regan
 
 ___________________________
 
ht, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
     the lion and the belly-pinched wolf
     keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
     and bids what will take all.
  kent. but who is with him?
  gent. none but the fool, who labours to outjest
     his heart-struck injuries.
  kent. sir, i do know you,
     and dare upon the warrant of my note
     commend a dear thing to you. there is division
     (although as yet the face of it be cover'd
     with mutual cunning) 'twixt albany and cornwall;
     who have (as who have not, that their great stars
     thron'd and set high?) servants, who seem no less,
     which are to france the spies and speculations
     intelligent of our state. what hath been seen,
     either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
     or the hard rein which both of them have borne
     against the old kind king, or something deeper,
     whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings-
     but, true it is, from france there comes a power
     into thi
 
 ___________________________
 

     i will keep still with my philosopher.
  kent. good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
  glou. take him you on.
  kent. sirrah, come on; go along with us.
  lear. come, good athenian.
  glou. no words, no words! hush.
  edg. child rowland to the dark tower came;
     his word was still

          fie, foh, and fum!
          i smell the blood of a british man.
                                                         exeunt.

scene v.
gloucester's castle.

enter cornwall and edmund.

  corn. i will have my revenge ere i depart his house.
  edm. how, my lord, i may be censured, that nature thus gives
way to
     loyalty, something fears me to think of.
  corn. i now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil
     disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit,
set
     awork by a reproveable badness in himself.
  edm. how malicious is my fortune that i must repent to be just!
     this is the letter he spoke of, which approves him 
 
 ___________________________
 
bearing fellowship.
     how light and portable my pain seems now,
     when that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
     he childed as i fathered! tom, away!
     mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
     when false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
     in thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
     what will hap more to-night, safe scape the king!
     lurk, lurk.                                         [exit.]




scene vii.
gloucester's castle.

enter cornwall, regan, goneril, [edmund the] bastard, and
servants.

  corn. [to goneril] post speedily to my lord your husband, show
him
     this letter. the army of france is landed.- seek out the
traitor
     gloucester.
                                  [exeunt some of the servants.]
  reg. hang him instantly.
  gon. pluck out his eyes.
  corn. leave him to my displeasure. edmund, keep you our sister
     company. the revenges we are bound to take upon your
traitorous
     father are not fi
 
 ___________________________
 
 then edgar was abus'd.
     kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
  reg. go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
     his way to dover.
                                     exit [one] with gloucester.
     how is't, my lord? how look you?
  corn. i have receiv'd a hurt. follow me, lady.
     turn out that eyeless villain. throw this slave
     upon the dunghill. regan, i bleed apace.
     untimely comes this hurt. give me your arm.
                                  exit [cornwall, led by regan].
  2. serv. i'll never care what wickedness i do,
     if this man come to good.
  3. serv. if she live long,
     and in the end meet the old course of death,
     women will all turn monsters.
  2. serv. let's follow the old earl, and get the bedlam
     to lead him where he would. his roguish madness
     allows itself to anything.
  3. serv. go thou. i'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
     to apply to his bleeding face. now heaven help him!
                   
 
 ___________________________
 
eems not in the fiend
     so horrid as in woman.
  gon. o vain fool!
  alb. thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame!
     bemonster not thy feature! were't my fitness
     to let these hands obey my blood,
     they are apt enough to dislocate and tear
     thy flesh and bones. howe'er thou art a fiend,
     a woman's shape doth shield thee.
  gon. marry, your manhood mew!

                          enter a gentleman.

  alb. what news?
  gent. o, my good lord, the duke of cornwall 's dead,
     slain by his servant, going to put out
     the other eye of gloucester.
  alb. gloucester's eyes?
  gent. a servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
     oppos'd against the act, bending his sword
     to his great master; who, thereat enrag'd,
     flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead;
     but not without that harmful stroke which since
     hath pluck'd him after.
  alb. this shows you are above,
     you justicers, that these our nether crimes
     so
 
 ___________________________
 
in his better tune, remembers
     what we are come about, and by no means
     will yield to see his daughter.
  gent. why, good sir?
  kent. a sovereign shame so elbows him; his own unkindness,
     that stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
     to foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
     to his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
     his mind so venomously that burning shame
     detains him from cordelia.
  gent. alack, poor gentleman!
  kent. of albany's and cornwall's powers you heard not?
  gent. 'tis so; they are afoot.
  kent. well, sir, i'll bring you to our master lear
     and leave you to attend him. some dear cause
     will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
     when i am known aright, you shall not grieve
     lending me this acquaintance. i pray you go
     along with me.                                      exeunt.




scene iv.
the french camp.

enter, with drum and colours, cordelia, doctor, and soldiers.

  cor. alack, 'tis 
 
 ___________________________
 
lear. do not abuse me.
  doct. be comforted, good madam. the great rage
     you see is kill'd in him; and yet it is danger
     to make him even o'er the time he has lost.
     desire him to go in. trouble him no more
     till further settling.
  cor. will't please your highness walk?
  lear. you must bear with me.
     pray you now, forget and forgive. i am old and foolish.
                              exeunt. manent kent and gentleman.
  gent. holds it true, sir, that the duke of cornwall was so
slain?
  kent. most certain, sir.
  gent. who is conductor of his people?
  kent. as 'tis said, the bastard son of gloucester.
  gent. they say edgar, his banish'd son, is with the earl of
kent
     in germany.
  kent. report is changeable. 'tis time to look about; the powers
of
     the kingdom approach apace.
  gent. the arbitrement is like to be bloody.
     fare you well, sir.                                 [exit.]
  kent. my point and period will be throughly wrought,