the tragedy of king lear

by william shakespeare




dramatis personae

      lear, king of britain.
      king of france.
      duke of burgundy.
      duke of cornwall.
      duke of albany.
      earl of kent.
      earl of gloucester.
      edgar, son of gloucester.
      edmund, bastard son to gloucester.
      curan, a courtier.
      old man, tenant to gloucester.
      doctor.
      lear's fool.
      oswald, steward to goneril.
      a captain under edmund's command.
      gentlemen.
      a herald.
      servants to cornwall.

      goneril, daughter to lear.
      regan, daughter to lear.
      cordelia, daughter to lear.

      knights attending on lear, officers, messengers, soldiers,
        attendants.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic 
 
 ___________________________
 
and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



scene: - britain.


act i. scene i.
[king lear's palace.]

enter kent, gloucester, and edmund. [kent and glouceste converse.
edmund stands back.]

  kent. i thought the king had more affected the duke of albany
than
     cornwall.
  glou. it did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of
the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most,
for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  kent. is not this your son, my lord?
  glou. his breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. i have so
often
     blush'd to acknowledge him that now i am
 
 ___________________________
 
she
     had a husband for her bed. do you smell a fault?
  kent. i cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
     proper.
  glou. but i have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder
than
     this, who yet is no dearer in my account. though this knave
came
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet
was
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
     whoreson must be acknowledged.- do you know this noble
gentleman,
     edmund?
  edm. [comes forward] no, my lord.
  glou. my lord of kent. remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  edm. my services to your lordship.
  kent. i must love you, and sue to know you better.
  edm. sir, i shall study deserving.
  glou. he hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 sound a sennet.
     the king is coming.

      enter one bearing a coronet; then lear; then the dukes of
      albany and cornwall; n
 
 ___________________________
 
ext, goneril, regan, cordelia, with
                              followers.

  lear. attend the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.
  glou. i shall, my liege.
                                 exeunt [gloucester and edmund].
  lear. meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
     give me the map there. know we have divided
     in three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
     to shake all cares and business from our age,
     conferring them on younger strengths while we
     unburthen'd crawl toward death. our son of cornwall,
     and you, our no less loving son of albany,
     we have this hour a constant will to publish
     our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
     may be prevent
 
 ___________________________
 
e from him as
this
     of kent's banishment.
  gon. there is further compliment of leave-taking between france
and
     him. pray you let's hit together. if our father carry
authority
     with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of
his
     will but offend us.
  reg. we shall further think on't.
  gon. we must do something, and i' th' heat.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
the earl of gloucester's castle.

enter [edmund the] bastard solus, [with a letter].

  edm. thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy law
     my services are bound. wherefore should i
     stand in the plague of custom, and permit
     the curiosity of nations to deprive me,
     for that i am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
     lag of a brother? why bastard? wherefore base?
     when my dimensions are as well compact,
     my mind as generous, and my shape as true,
     as honest madam's issue? why brand they us
     with base? 
 
 ___________________________
 
with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
     who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
     more composition and fierce quality
     than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
     go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
     got 'tween asleep and wake? well then,
     legitimate edgar, i must have your land.
     our father's love is to the bastard edmund
     as to th' legitimate. fine word- 'legitimate'!
     well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
     and my invention thrive, edmund the base
     shall top th' legitimate. i grow; i prosper.
     now, gods, stand up for bastards!

                          enter gloucester.

  glou. kent banish'd thus? and france in choler parted?
     and the king gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     confin'd to exhibition? all this done
     upon the gad? edmund, how now? what news?
  edm. so please your lordship, none.
                                           [puts up the letter.]
  glou. why so earnestly seek you to p
 
 ___________________________
 
e hath writ this to feel my affection to your
     honour, and to no other pretence of danger.
  glou. think you so?
  edm. if your honour judge it meet, i will place you where you
shall
     hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have
your
     satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this
very
     evening.
  glou. he cannot be such a monster.
  edm. nor is not, sure.
  glou. to his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.
     heaven and earth! edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, i
pray
     you; frame the business after your own wisdom. i would
unstate
     myself to be in a due resolution.
  edm. i will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as i
     shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
  glou. these late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good
to
     us. though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus,
yet
     nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects. love
cools,
     friendship fal
 
 ___________________________
 
ls off, brothers divide. in cities, mutinies;
in
     countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond
crack'd
     'twixt son and father. this villain of mine comes under the
     prediction; there's son against father: the king falls from
bias
     of nature; there's father against child. we have seen the
best
     of our time. machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
     ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. find
out
     this villain, edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully. and the noble and true-hearted kent banish'd! his
     offence, honesty! 'tis strange.                       exit.
  edm. this is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we
are
     sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we
make
     guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as
if
     we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
     knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical 
 
 ___________________________
 
d my
     nativity was under ursa major, so that it follows i am rough
and
     lecherous. fut! i should have been that i am, had the
     maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my
bastardizing.
     edgar-

                             enter edgar.

     and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy.
my
     cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like tom o'
bedlam.
     o, these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa, sol, la,
mi.
  edg. how now, brother edmund? what serious contemplation are
you
     in?
  edm. i am thinking, brother, of a prediction i read this other
day,
     what should follow these eclipses.
  edg. do you busy yourself with that?
  edm. i promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily:
as
     of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death,
     dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state,
     menaces and maledictions against king and nobles; needless
     diffidences, banishment of
 
 ___________________________
 
3 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act ii. scene i.
a court within the castle of the earl of gloucester.

enter [edmund the] bastard and curan, meeting.

  edm. save thee, curan.
  cur. and you, sir. i have been with your father, and given him
     notice that the duke of cornwall and regan his duchess will
be
     here with him this night.
  edm. how comes that?
  cur. nay, i know not. you have heard of the news abroad- i mean
the
     whisper'd ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?
  edm. not i. pray you, what are they?
  cur. have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two
duke
 
 ___________________________
 
to defend yourself; now quit you well.-
     yield! come before my father. light, ho, here!
     fly, brother.- torches, torches!- so farewell.
                                                     exit edgar.
     some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
     of my more fierce endeavour. [stabs his arm.] i have seen
        drunkards
     do more than this in sport.- father, father!-
     stop, stop! no help?

             enter gloucester, and servants with torches.

  glou. now, edmund, where's the villain?
  edm. here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
     mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
     to stand 's auspicious mistress.
  glou. but where is he?
  edm. look, sir, i bleed.
  glou. where is the villain, edmund?
  edm. fled this way, sir. when by no means he could-
  glou. pursue him, ho! go after.        [exeunt some servants].
     by no means what?
  edm. persuade me to the murther of your lordship;
     but that i told him the revenging
 
 ___________________________
 
hat tend upon my father?
  glou. i know not, madam. 'tis too bad, too bad!
  edm. yes, madam, he was of that consort.
  reg. no marvel then though he were ill affected.
     'tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     to have th' expense and waste of his revenues.
     i have this present evening from my sister
     been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
     that, if they come to sojourn at my house,
     i'll not be there.
  corn. nor i, assure thee, regan.
     edmund, i hear that you have shown your father
     a childlike office.
  edm. 'twas my duty, sir.
  glou. he did bewray his practice, and receiv'd
     this hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
  corn. is he pursued?
  glou. ay, my good lord.
  corn. if he be taken, he shall never more
     be fear'd of doing harm. make your own purpose,
     how in my strength you please. for you, edmund,
     whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
     so much commend itself, you shall be ours.
 
 ___________________________
 
 osw. away! i have nothing to do with thee.
  kent. draw, you rascal! you come with letters against the king,
and
     take vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her
father.
     draw, you rogue, or i'll so carbonado your shanks! draw, you
     rascal! come your ways!
  osw. help, ho! murther! help!
  kent. strike, you slave! stand, rogue! stand, you neat slave!
     strike!                                        [beats him.]
  osw. help, ho! murther! murther!

      enter edmund, with his rapier drawn, gloucester, cornwall,
                           regan, servants.

  edm. how now? what's the matter?                 parts [them].
  kent. with you, goodman boy, an you please! come, i'll flesh
ye!
     come on, young master!
  glou. weapons? arms? what's the matter here?
  corn. keep peace, upon your lives!
     he dies that strikes again. what is the matter?
  reg. the messengers from our sister and the king
  corn. what is your difference? speak.
  osw. i
 
 ___________________________
 
landers do not live in tongues,
          nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
          when usurers tell their gold i' th' field,
          and bawds and whores do churches build:
          then shall the realm of albion
          come to great confusion.
          then comes the time, who lives to see't,
          that going shall be us'd with feet.
     this prophecy merlin shall make, for i live before his time.
exit.




scene iii.
gloucester's castle.

enter gloucester and edmund.

  glou. alack, alack, edmund, i like not this unnatural dealing!
when
     i desir'd their leave that i might pity him, they took from
me
     the use of mine own house, charg'd me on pain of perpetual
     displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor
any
     way sustain him.
  edm. most savage and unnatural!
  glou. go to; say you nothing. there is division betwixt the
dukes,
     and a worse matter than that. i have received a letter this
     night- 'tis dangero
 
 ___________________________
 
 lock'd the letter
in
     my closet. these injuries the king now bears will be
revenged
     home; there's part of a power already footed; we must
incline to
     the king. i will seek him and privily relieve him. go you
and
     maintain talk with the duke, that my charity be not of him
     perceived. if he ask for me, i am ill and gone to bed.
though i
     die for't, as no less is threat'ned me, the king my old
master
     must be relieved. there is some strange thing toward,
edmund.
     pray you be careful.                                  exit.
  edm. this courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke
     instantly know, and of that letter too.
     this seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
     that which my father loses- no less than all.
     the younger rises when the old doth fall.             exit.




scene iv.
the heath. before a hovel.

storm still. enter lear, kent, and fool.

  kent. here is the place, my lord. good my lord, enter.
     the tyra
 
 ___________________________
 
 keep still with my philosopher.
  kent. good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
  glou. take him you on.
  kent. sirrah, come on; go along with us.
  lear. come, good athenian.
  glou. no words, no words! hush.
  edg. child rowland to the dark tower came;
     his word was still

          fie, foh, and fum!
          i smell the blood of a british man.
                                                         exeunt.

scene v.
gloucester's castle.

enter cornwall and edmund.

  corn. i will have my revenge ere i depart his house.
  edm. how, my lord, i may be censured, that nature thus gives
way to
     loyalty, something fears me to think of.
  corn. i now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil
     disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit,
set
     awork by a reproveable badness in himself.
  edm. how malicious is my fortune that i must repent to be just!
     this is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an
     in
 
 ___________________________
 
ow light and portable my pain seems now,
     when that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
     he childed as i fathered! tom, away!
     mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
     when false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
     in thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
     what will hap more to-night, safe scape the king!
     lurk, lurk.                                         [exit.]




scene vii.
gloucester's castle.

enter cornwall, regan, goneril, [edmund the] bastard, and
servants.

  corn. [to goneril] post speedily to my lord your husband, show
him
     this letter. the army of france is landed.- seek out the
traitor
     gloucester.
                                  [exeunt some of the servants.]
  reg. hang him instantly.
  gon. pluck out his eyes.
  corn. leave him to my displeasure. edmund, keep you our sister
     company. the revenges we are bound to take upon your
traitorous
     father are not fit for your beholding. adv
 
 ___________________________
 
l, my lord of gloucester.

                     enter [oswald the] steward.

     how now? where's the king?
  osw. my lord of gloucester hath convey'd him hence.
     some five or six and thirty of his knights,
     hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
     who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
     are gone with him towards dover, where they boast
     to have well-armed friends.
  corn. get horses for your mistress.
  gon. farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
  corn. edmund, farewell.
                           exeunt goneril, [edmund, and oswald].
     go seek the traitor gloucester,
     pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
                                        [exeunt other servants.]
     though well we may not pass upon his life
     without the form of justice, yet our power
     shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
     may blame, but not control.

            enter gloucester, brought in by two or three.

     who's there? the
 
 ___________________________
 
y villain!                               draw and fight.
  1. serv. nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
  reg. give me thy sword. a peasant stand up thus?
                        she takes a sword and runs at him behind.
  1. serv. o, i am slain! my lord, you have one eye left
     to see some mischief on him. o!                     he dies.
  corn. lest it see more, prevent it. out, vile jelly!
     where is thy lustre now?
  glou. all dark and comfortless! where's my son edmund?
     edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
     to quit this horrid act.
  reg. out, treacherous villain!
     thou call'st on him that hates thee. it was he
     that made the overture of thy treasons to us;
     who is too good to pity thee.
  glou. o my follies! then edgar was abus'd.
     kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
  reg. go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
     his way to dover.
                                     exit [one] with gloucester.
  
 
 ___________________________
 
over?
  edg. ay, master.
  glou. there is a cliff, whose high and bending head
     looks fearfully in the confined deep.
     bring me but to the very brim of it,
     and i'll repair the misery thou dost bear
     with something rich about me. from that place
     i shall no leading need.
  edg. give me thy arm.
     poor tom shall lead thee.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
before the duke of albany's palace.

enter goneril and [edmund the] bastard.

  gon. welcome, my lord. i marvel our mild husband
     not met us on the way.

                     enter [oswald the] steward.

     now, where's your master?
  osw. madam, within, but never man so chang'd.
     i told him of the army that was landed:
     he smil'd at it. i told him you were coming:
     his answer was, 'the worse.' of gloucester's treachery
     and of the loyal service of his son
     when i inform'd him, then he call'd me sot
     and told me 
 
 ___________________________
 
i had turn'd the wrong side out.
     what most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
     what like, offensive.
  gon. [to edmund] then shall you go no further.
     it is the cowish terror of his spirit,
     that dares not undertake. he'll not feel wrongs
     which tie him to an answer. our wishes on the way
     may prove effects. back, edmund, to my brother.
     hasten his musters and conduct his pow'rs.
     i must change arms at home and give the distaff
     into my husband's hands. this trusty servant
     shall pass between us. ere long you are like to hear
     (if you dare venture in your own behalf)
     a mistress's command. wear this.          [gives a favour.]
     spare speech.
     decline your head. this kiss, if it durst speak,
     would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
     conceive, and fare thee wel
 
 ___________________________
 
d important tears hath pitied.
     no blown ambition doth our arms incite,
     but love, dear love, and our ag'd father's right.
     soon may i hear and see him!
                                                         exeunt.




scene v.
gloucester's castle.

enter regan and [oswald the] steward.

  reg. but are my brother's pow'rs set forth?
  osw. ay, madam.
  reg. himself in person there?
  osw. madam, with much ado.
     your sister is the better soldier.
  reg. lord edmund spake not with your lord at home?
  osw. no, madam.
  reg. what might import my sister's letter to him?
  osw. i know not, lady.
  reg. faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
     it was great ignorance, gloucester's eyes being out,
     to let him live. where he arrives he moves
     all hearts against us. edmund, i think, is gone,
     in pity of his misery, to dispatch
     his nighted life; moreover, to descry
     the strength o' th' enemy.
  osw. i must needs after him, m
 
 ___________________________
 
adam, with my letter.
  reg. our troops set forth to-morrow. stay with us.
     the ways are dangerous.
  osw. i may not, madam.
     my lady charg'd my duty in this business.
  reg. why should she write to edmund? might not you
     transport her purposes by word? belike,
     something- i know not what- i'll love thee much-
     let me unseal the letter.
  osw. madam, i had rather-
  reg. i know your lady does not love her husband;
     i am sure of that; and at her late being here
     she gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
     to noble edmund. i know you are of her bosom.
  osw. i, madam?
  reg. i speak in understanding. y'are! i know't.
     therefore i do advise you take this n
 
 ___________________________
 
ote.
     my lord is dead; edmund and i have talk'd,
     and more convenient is he for my hand
     than for your lady's. you may gather more.
     if you do find him, pray you give him this;
     and when your mistress hears thus much from you,
     i pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
     so farewell.
     if you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
     preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
  osw. would i could meet him, madam! i should show
     what party i do follow.
  reg. fare thee well.      
 
 ___________________________
 
  che vore ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be
the
     harder. chill be plain with you.
  osw. out, dunghill!
                                                     they fight.
  edg. chill pick your teeth, zir. come! no matter vor your
foins.
                                                 [oswald falls.]
  osw. slave, thou hast slain me. villain, take my purse.
     if ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
     and give the letters which thou find'st about me
     to edmund earl of gloucester. seek him out
     upon the british party. o, untimely death! death!
                                                        he dies.
  edg. i know thee well. a serviceable villain,
     as duteous to the vices of thy mistress
     as badness would desire.
  glou. what, is he dead?
  edg. sit you down, father; rest you.
     let's see his pockets; these letters that he speaks of
     may be my friends. he's dead. i am only sorry
     he had no other deathsman. let u
 
 ___________________________
 
993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act v. scene i.
the british camp near dover.

enter, with drum and colours, edmund, regan, gentleman, and
soldiers.

  edm. know of the duke if his last purpose hold,
     or whether since he is advis'd by aught
     to change the course. he's full of alteration
     and self-reproving. bring his constant pleasure.
                                              [exit an officer.]
  reg. our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
  edm. tis to be doubted, madam.
  reg. now, sweet lord,
     you know the goodness i intend upon you.
     tell me- but truly- but then sp
 
 ___________________________
 

     i can produce a champion that will prove
     what is avouched there. if you miscarry,
     your business of the world hath so an end,
     and machination ceases. fortune love you!
  alb. stay till i have read the letter.
  edg. i was forbid it.
     when time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
     and i'll appear again.
  alb. why, fare thee well. i will o'erlook thy paper.
                                                   exit [edgar].

                            enter edmund.

  edm. the enemy 's in view; draw up your powers.
     here is the guess of their true strength and forces
     by diligent discovery; but your haste
     is now urg'd on you.
  alb. we will greet the time.                             exit.
  edm. to both these sisters have i sworn my love;
     each jealous of the other, as the stung
     are of the adder. which of them shall i take?
     both? one? or neither? neither can be enjoy'd,
     if both remain alive. to take the widow

 
 ___________________________
 
ter edgar,

  edg. away, old man! give me thy hand! away!
     king lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.
     give me thy hand! come on!
  glou. no further, sir. a man may rot even here.
  edg. what, in ill thoughts again? men must endure
     their going hence, even as their coming hither;
     ripeness is all. come on.
  glou. and that's true too.                             exeunt.




scene iii.
the british camp, near dover.

enter, in conquest, with drum and colours, edmund; lear and
cordelia
as prisoners; soldiers, captain.

  edm. some officers take them away. good guard
     until their greater pleasures first be known
     that are to censure them.
  cor. we are not the first
     who with best meaning have incurr'd the worst.
     for thee, oppressed king, am i cast down;
     myself could else outfrown false fortune's frown.
     shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
  lear. no, no, no, no! come, let's away to prison.
     we two a
 
 ___________________________
 

  gon. holla, holla!
     that eye that told you so look'd but asquint.
  reg. lady, i am not well; else i should answer
     from a full-flowing stomach. general,
     take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
     dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine.
     witness the world that i create thee here
     my lord and master.
  gon. mean you to enjoy him?
  alb. the let-alone lies not in your good will.
  edm. nor in thine, lord.
  alb. half-blooded fellow, yes.
  reg. [to edmund] let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.

  alb. stay yet; hear reason. edmund, i arrest thee
     on capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
     this gilded serpent [points to goneril]. for your claim,
fair
        sister,
     i bar it in the interest of my wife.
     'tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
     and i, her husband, contradict your banes.
     if you will marry, make your loves to me;
     my lady is bespoke.
  gon. an interlude!
  alb. thou art arm'd, glo
 
 ___________________________
 
in my name, have in my name
     took their discharge.
  reg. my sickness grows upon me.
  alb. she is not well. convey her to my tent.
                                              [exit regan, led.]

                           enter a herald.

     come hither, herald. let the trumpet sound,
     and read out this.
  capt. sound, trumpet!                        a trumpet sounds.

  her. (reads) 'if any man of quality or degree within the lists
of
     the army will maintain upon edmund, supposed earl of
gloucester,
     that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third
sound
     of the trumpet. he is bold in his defence.'

  edm. sound!                                     first trumpet.
  her. again!                                    second trumpet.
  her. again!                                     third trumpet.
                                         trumpet answers within.

    enter edgar, armed, at the third sound, a trumpet before him.

  alb. a
 
 ___________________________
 
sk him his purposes, why he appears
     upon this call o' th' trumpet.
  her. what are you?
     your name, your quality? and why you answer
     this present summons?
  edg. know my name is lost;
     by treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
     yet am i noble as the adversary
     i come to cope.
  alb. which is that adversary?
  edg. what's he that speaks for edmund earl of gloucester?
  edm. himself. what say'st thou to him?
  edg. draw thy sword,
     that, if my speech offend a noble heart,
     thy arm may do thee justice. here is mine.
     behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
     my oath, and my profession. i protest-
     maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
     despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
     thy valour and thy heart- thou art a traitor;
     false to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
     c
 
 ___________________________
 
ide looks so fair and warlike,
     and that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
     what safe and nicely i might well delay
     by rule of knighthood, i disdain and spurn.
     back do i toss those treasons to thy head;
     with the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
     which- for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise-
     this sword of mine shall give them instant way
     where they shall rest for ever. trumpets, speak!
                                 alarums. fight. [edmund falls.]
  alb. save him, save him!
  gon. this is mere practice, gloucester.
     by th' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
     an unknown opposite. thou art not vanquish'd,
     but cozen'd and beguil'd.
  alb. shut your mouth, dame,
     or with this paper shall i stop it. [shows her her letter to
     edmund.]- [to edmund]. hold, sir.
     [to goneril] thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
     no tearing, lady! i perceive you know it.
  gon. say if i do- the laws
 
 ___________________________
 

  gon. ask me not what i know.                             exit.
  alb. go after her. she's desperate; govern her.
                                              [exit an officer.]
  edm. what, you have charg'd me with, that have i done,
     and more, much more. the time will bring it out.
     'tis past, and so am i.- but what art thou
     that hast this fortune on me? if thou'rt noble,
     i do forgive thee.
  edg. let's exchange charity.
     i am no less in blood than thou art, edmund;
     if more, the more th' hast wrong'd me.
     my name is edgar and thy father's son.
     the gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
     make instruments to scourge us.
     the dark and vicious place where thee he got
     cost him his eyes.
  edm. th' hast spoken right; 'tis true.
     the wheel is come full circle; i am here.
  alb. methought thy very gait did prophesy
     a royal nobleness. i must embrace thee.
     let sorrow split my heart if ever i
     did hate thee,
 
 ___________________________
 
                        enter kent.

  edg. here comes kent.
  alb. produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
                                               [exit gentleman.]
     this judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble
     touches us not with pity. o, is this he?
     the time will not allow the compliment
     that very manners urges.
  kent. i am come
     to bid my king and master aye good night.
     is he not here?
  alb. great thing of us forgot!
     speak, edmund, where's the king? and where's cordelia?
                 the bodies of goneril and regan are brought in.
     seest thou this object, kent?
  kent. alack, why thus?
  edm. yet edmund was belov'd.
     the one the other poisoned for my sake,
     and after slew herself.
  alb. even so. cover their faces.
  edm. i pant for life. some good i mean to do,
     despite of mine own nature. quickly send
     (be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
     is on the life of lear and on corde
 
 ___________________________
 
.
  alb. run, run, o, run!
  edg. to who, my lord? who has the office? send
     thy token of reprieve.
  edm. well thought on. take my sword;
     give it the captain.
  alb. haste thee for thy life.                    [exit edgar.]
  edm. he hath commission from thy wife and me
     to hang cordelia in the prison and
     to lay the blame upon her own despair
     that she fordid herself.
  alb. the gods defend her! bear him hence awhile.
                                          [edmund is borne off.]

    enter lear, with cordelia [dead] in his arms, [edgar,
captain,
                        and others following].

  lear. howl, howl, howl, howl! o, you are men of stone.
     had i your tongues and eyes, i'ld use them so
     that heaven's vault should crack. she's gone for ever!
     i know when one is dead, and when one lives.
     she's dead as earth. lend me a looking glass.
     if that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
     why, then she lives.
  kent
 
 ___________________________
 
very man-
  lear. i'll see that straight.
  kent. that from your first of difference and decay
     have followed your sad steps.
  lear. you're welcome hither.
  kent. nor no man else! all's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
     your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
     and desperately are dead.
  lear. ay, so i think.
  alb. he knows not what he says; and vain is it
     that we present us to him.
  edg. very bootless.

                           enter a captain.

  capt. edmund is dead, my lord.
  alb. that's but a trifle here.
     you lords and noble friends, know our intent.
     what comfort to this great decay may come
     shall be applied. for us, we will resign,
     during the life of this old majesty,
     to him our absolute power; [to edgar and kent] you to your
        rights;
     with boot, and such addition as your honours
     have more than merited.- all friends shall taste
     the wages of their virtue, and all foes
     the cup of their