the tragedy of king lear

by william shakespeare




dramatis personae

      lear, king of britain.
      king of france.
      duke of burgundy.
      duke of cornwall.
      duke of albany.
      earl of kent.
      earl of gloucester.
      edgar, son of gloucester.
      edmund, bastard son to gloucester.
      curan, a courtier.
      old man, tenant to gloucester.
      doctor.
      lear's fool.
      oswald, steward to goneril.
      a captain under edmund's command.
      gentlemen.
      a herald.
      servants to cornwall.

      goneril, daughter to lear.
      regan, daughter to lear.
      cordelia, daughter to lear.

      knights attending on lear, officers, messengers, soldiers,
        attendants.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
 
 ___________________________
 
edm. [comes forward] no, my lord.
  glou. my lord of kent. remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  edm. my services to your lordship.
  kent. i must love you, and sue to know you better.
  edm. sir, i shall study deserving.
  glou. he hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 sound a sennet.
     the king is coming.

      enter one bearing a coronet; then lear; then the dukes of
      albany and cornwall; next, goneril, regan, cordelia, with
                              followers.

  lear. attend the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.
  glou. i shall, my liege.
                                 exeunt [gloucester and edmund].
  lear. meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
     give me the map there. know we have divided
     in three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
     to shake all cares and business from our age,
     conferring them on younger strengths while we
     unburthe
 
 ___________________________
 
 several dowers, that future strife
     may be prevented now. the princes, france and burgundy,
     great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
     long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
     and here are to be answer'd. tell me, my daughters
     (since now we will divest us both of rule,
     interest of territory, cares of state),
     which of you shall we say doth love us most?
     that we our largest bounty may extend
     where nature doth with merit challenge. goneril,
     our eldest-born, speak first.
  gon. sir, i love you more than words can wield the matter;
     dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
     beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;
     no less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
     as much as child e'er lov'd, or father found;
     a love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.
     beyond all manner of so much i love you.
  cor. [aside] what shall cordelia speak? love, and be silent.
  lear. of all these bou
 
 ___________________________
 
  only she comes too short, that i profess
     myself an enemy to all other joys
     which the most precious square of sense possesses,
     and find i am alone felicitate
     in your dear highness' love.
  cor. [aside] then poor cordelia!
     and yet not so; since i am sure my love's
     more richer than my tongue.
  lear. to thee and thine hereditary ever
     remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
     no less in space, validity, and pleasure
     than that conferr'd on goneril.- now, our joy,
     although the last, not least; to whose young love
     the vines of france and milk of burgundy
     strive to be interest; what can you say to draw
     a third more opulent than your sisters? speak.
  cor. nothing, my lord.
  lear. nothing?
  cor. nothing.
  lear. nothing can come of nothing. speak again.
  cor. unhappy that i am, i cannot heave
     my heart into my mouth. i love your majesty
     according to my bond; no more nor less.
  lear. how, how, cord
 
 ___________________________
 
e world,
     and on the sixth to turn thy hated back
     upon our kingdom. if, on the tenth day following,
     thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
     the moment is thy death. away! by jupiter,
     this shall not be revok'd.
  kent. fare thee well, king. since thus thou wilt appear,
     freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
     [to cordelia] the gods to their dear shelter take thee,
maid,
     that justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
     [to regan and goneril] and your large speeches may your
deeds
        approve,
     that good effects may spring from words of love.
     thus kent, o princes, bids you all adieu;
     he'll shape his old course in a country new.
exit.

  flourish. enter gloucester, with france and burgundy;
attendants.

  glou. here's france and burgundy, my noble lord.
  lear. my lord of burgundy,
     we first address toward you, who with this king
     hath rivall'd for our daughter. what in the least
     will yo
 
 ___________________________
 
g. shall i hear from you anon?
  edm. i do serve you in this business.
                                                     exit edgar.
     a credulous father! and a brother noble,
     whose nature is so far from doing harms
     that he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
     my practices ride easy! i see the business.
     let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
     all with me's meet that i can fashion fit.
exit.




scene iii.
the duke of albany's palace.

enter goneril and [her] steward [oswald].

  gon. did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
  osw. ay, madam.
  gon. by day and night, he wrongs me! every hour
     he flashes into one gross crime or other
     that sets us all at odds. i'll not endure it.
     his knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
     on every trifle. when he returns from hunting,
     i will not speak with him. say i am sick.
     if you come slack of former services,
     you shall do well; the fau
 
 ___________________________
 
 to lie.
  lear. an you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipp'd.
  fool. i marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. they'll
have me
     whipp'd for speaking true; thou'lt have me whipp'd for
lying;
     and sometimes i am whipp'd for holding my peace. i had
rather be
     any kind o' thing than a fool! and yet i would not be thee,
     nuncle. thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left
nothing
     i' th' middle. here comes one o' the parings.

                            enter goneril.

  lear. how now, daughter? what makes that frontlet on? methinks
you
     are too much o' late i' th' frown.
  fool. thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care
for
     her frowning. now thou art an o without a figure. i am
better
     than thou art now: i am a fool, thou art nothing.
     [to goneril] yes, forsooth, i will hold my tongue. so your
face
     bids me, though you say nothing. mum, mum!

            he that keeps nor crust nor crum,
            weary
 
 ___________________________
 
nerate bastard, i'll not trouble thee;
     yet have i left a daughter.
  gon. you strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble
     make servants of their betters.

                            enter albany.

  lear. woe that too late repents!- o, sir, are you come?
     is it your will? speak, sir!- prepare my horses.
     ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
     more hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
     than the sea-monster!
  alb. pray, sir, be patient.
  lear. [to goneril] detested kite, thou liest!
     my train are men of choice and rarest parts,
     that all particulars of duty know
     and in the most exact regard support
     the worships of their name.- o most small fault,
     how ugly didst thou in cordelia show!
     which, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature
     from the fix'd place; drew from my heart all love
     and added to the gall. o lear, lear, lear!
     beat at this gate that let thy folly in  [strikes his head.]
     and
 
 ___________________________
 
 contempt, that she may feel
     how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
     to have a thankless child! away, away!                exit.
  alb. now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
  gon. never afflict yourself to know the cause;
     but let his disposition have that scope
     that dotage gives it.

                             enter lear.

  lear. what, fifty of my followers at a clap?
     within a fortnight?
  alb. what's the matter, sir?
  lear. i'll tell thee. [to goneril] life and death! i am asham'd
     that thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
     that these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
     should make thee worth them. blasts and fogs upon thee!
     th' untented woundings of a father's curse
     pierce every sense about thee!- old fond eyes,
     beweep this cause again, i'll pluck ye out,
     and cast you, with the waters that you lose,
     to temper clay. yea, is it come to this?
     let it be so. yet have i left a daughter
 
 ___________________________
 
,
     who i am sure is kind and comfortable.
     when she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
     she'll flay thy wolvish visage. thou shalt find
     that i'll resume the shape which thou dost think
     i have cast off for ever; thou shalt, i warrant thee.
                            exeunt [lear, kent, and attendants].
  gon. do you mark that, my lord?
  alb. i cannot be so partial, goneril,
     to the great love i bear you -
  gon. pray you, content.- what, oswald, ho!
     [to the fool] you, sir, more knave than fool, after your
master!
  fool. nuncle lear, nuncle lear, tarry! take the fool with thee.


          a fox when one has caught her,
          and such a daughter,
          should sure to the slaughter,
          if my cap would buy a halter.
          so the fool follows after.                       exit.
  gon. this man hath had good counsel! a hundred 
 
 ___________________________
 
t do't;
     they would not, could not do't. 'tis worse than murther
     to do upon respect such violent outrage.
     resolve me with all modest haste which way
     thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
     coming from us.
  kent. my lord, when at their home
     i did commend your highness' letters to them,
     ere i was risen from the place that show'd
     my duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
     from goneril his mistress salutations;
     deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
     which presently they read; on whose contents,
     they summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
     commanded me to follow and attend
     the leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
     and meeting here the other messenger,
     whose welcome i perceiv'd had poison'd mine-
     being the very fellow which of late
     display'd so saucily against your highness-
     having more man than wit abo
 
 ___________________________
 
                                      tucket within.
  lear. who put my man i' th' stocks?
  corn. what trumpet's that?
  reg. i know't- my sister's. this approves her letter,
     that she would soon be here.

                     enter [oswald the] steward.

     is your lady come?
  lear. this is a slave, whose easy-borrowed pride
     dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
     out, varlet, from my sight!
  corn. what means your grace?

                            enter goneril.

  lear. who stock'd my servant? regan, i have good hope
     thou didst not know on't.- who comes here? o heavens!
     if you do love old men, if your sweet sway
     allow obedience- if yourselves are old,
     make it your cause! send down, and take my part!
     [to goneril] art not asham'd to look upon this beard?-
     o regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
  gon. why not by th' hand, sir? how have i offended?
     all's not offence that indiscretion finds
     and dotage t
 
 ___________________________
 
ore
     will i give place or notice.
  lear. i gave you all-
  reg. and in good time you gave it!
  lear. made you my guardians, my depositaries;
     but kept a reservation to be followed
     with such a number. what, must i come to you
     with five-and-twenty, regan? said you so?
  reg. and speak't again my lord. no more with me.
  lear. those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd
     when others are more wicked; not being the worst
     stands in some rank of praise. [to goneril] i'll go with
thee.
     thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
     and thou art twice her love.
  gon. hear, me, my lord.
     what need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,
     to follow in a house where twice so many
     have a command to tend you?
  reg. what need one?
  lear. o, reason not the need! our basest beggars
     are in the poorest thing superfluous.
     allow not nature more than nature needs,
     man's life is cheap as beast's. thou art a lady:
     if only 
 
 ___________________________
 
    but if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
     thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. when the mind's free,
     the body's delicate. the tempest in my mind
     doth from my senses take all feeling else
     save what beats there. filial ingratitude!
     is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
     for lifting food to't? but i will punish home!
     no, i will weep no more. in such a night
     'to shut me out! pour on; i will endure.
     in such a night as this! o regan, goneril!
     your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all!
     o, that way madness lies; let me shun that!
     no more of that.
  kent. good my lord, enter here.
  lear. prithee go in thyself; seek thine own ease.
     this tempest will not give me leave to ponder
     on things would hurt me more. but i'll go in.
     [to the fool] in, boy; go first.- you houseless poverty-
     nay, get thee in. i'll pray, and then i'll sleep.
                                                    exit 
 
 ___________________________
 
ring in their evidence.
     [to edgar] thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.
     [to the fool] and thou, his yokefellow of equity,
     bench by his side. [to kent] you are o' th' commission,
     sit you too.
  edg. let us deal justly.

          sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
            thy sheep be in the corn;
          and for one blast of thy minikin mouth
            thy sheep shall take no harm.

     purr! the cat is gray.
  lear. arraign her first. 'tis goneril. i here take my oath
before
     this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor king her
father.
  fool. come hither, mistress. is your name goneril?
  lear. she cannot deny it.
  fool. cry you mercy, i took you for a joint-stool.
  lear. and here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
     what store her heart is made on. stop her there!
     arms, arms! sword! fire! corruption in the place!
     false justicer, why hast thou let her scape?
  edg. bless thy five wits!
  kent. o pity
 
 ___________________________
 
p.
     how light and portable my pain seems now,
     when that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
     he childed as i fathered! tom, away!
     mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
     when false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
     in thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
     what will hap more to-night, safe scape the king!
     lurk, lurk.                                         [exit.]




scene vii.
gloucester's castle.

enter cornwall, regan, goneril, [edmund the] bastard, and
servants.

  corn. [to goneril] post speedily to my lord your husband, show
him
     this letter. the army of france is landed.- seek out the
traitor
     gloucester.
                                  [exeunt some of the servants.]
  reg. hang him instantly.
  gon. pluck out his eyes.
  corn. leave him to my displeasure. edmund, keep you our sister
     company. the revenges we are bound to take upon your
traitorous
     father are not fit for your behol
 
 ___________________________
 
er [oswald the] steward.

     how now? where's the king?
  osw. my lord of gloucester hath convey'd him hence.
     some five or six and thirty of his knights,
     hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
     who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
     are gone with him towards dover, where they boast
     to have well-armed friends.
  corn. get horses for your mistress.
  gon. farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
  corn. edmund, farewell.
                           exeunt goneril, [edmund, and oswald].
     go seek the traitor gloucester,
     pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
                                        [exeunt other servants.]
     though well we may not pass upon his life
     without the form of justice, yet our power
     shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
     may blame, but not control.

            enter gloucester, brought in by two or three.

     who's there? the traitor?
  reg. ingrateful fox! 'tis he.
  corn. bi
 
 ___________________________
 
t thou know dover?
  edg. ay, master.
  glou. there is a cliff, whose high and bending head
     looks fearfully in the confined deep.
     bring me but to the very brim of it,
     and i'll repair the misery thou dost bear
     with something rich about me. from that place
     i shall no leading need.
  edg. give me thy arm.
     poor tom shall lead thee.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
before the duke of albany's palace.

enter goneril and [edmund the] bastard.

  gon. welcome, my lord. i marvel our mild husband
     not met us on the way.

                     enter [oswald the] steward.

     now, where's your master?
  osw. madam, within, but never man so chang'd.
     i told him of the army that was landed:
     he smil'd at it. i told him you were coming:
     his answer was, 'the worse.' of gloucester's treachery
     and of the loyal service of his son
     when i inform'd him, then he call'd me sot
     
 
 ___________________________
 
 your head. this kiss, if it durst speak,
     would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
     conceive, and fare thee well.
  edm. yours in the ranks of death!                        exit.
  gon. my most dear gloucester!
     o, the difference of man and man!
     to thee a woman's services are due;
     my fool usurps my body.
  osw. madam, here comes my lord.                          exit.

                            enter albany.

  gon. i have been worth the whistle.
  alb. o goneril,
     you are not worth the dust which the rude wind
     blows in your face! i fear your disposition.
     that nature which contemns it origin
     cannot be bordered certain in itself.
     she that herself will sliver and disbranch
     from her material sap, perforce must wither
     and come to deadly use.
  gon. no more! the text is foolish.
  alb. wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
     filths savour but themselves. what have you done?
     tigers, not daughters, what
 
 ___________________________
 
ide-piercing sight!
  lear. nature 's above art in that respect. there's your press
     money. that fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper. draw
me
     a clothier's yard. look, look, a mouse! peace, peace; this
piece
     of toasted cheese will do't. there's my gauntlet; i'll prove
it
     on a giant. bring up the brown bills. o, well flown, bird!
i'
     th' clout, i' th' clout! hewgh! give the word.
  edg. sweet marjoram.
  lear. pass.
  glou. i know that voice.
  lear. ha! goneril with a white beard? they flatter'd me like a
dog,
     and told me i had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones
     were there. to say 'ay' and 'no' to everything i said! 'ay'
and
     'no' too was no good divinity. when the rain came to wet me
     once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder
would
     not peace at my bidding; there i found 'em, there i smelt
'em
     out. go to, they are not men o' their words! they told me i
was
     everything. 'tis a lie- i am 
 
 ___________________________
 
  their papers, is more lawful.             reads the letter.

       'let our reciprocal vows be rememb'red. you have many
     opportunities to cut him off. if your will want not, time
and
     place will be fruitfully offer'd. there is nothing done, if
he
     return the conqueror. then am i the prisoner, and his bed my
     jail; from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply
the
     place for your labour.
           'your (wife, so i would say) affectionate servant,

'goneril.'

     o indistinguish'd space of woman's will!
     a plot upon her virtuous husband's life,
     and the exchange my brother! here in the sands
     thee i'll rake up, the post unsanctified
     of murtherous lechers; and in the mature time
     with this ungracious paper strike the sight
     of the death-practis'd duke, for him 'tis well
     that of thy death and business i can tell.
  glou. the king is mad. how stiff is my vile sense,
     that i stand up, and have ingenious f
 
 ___________________________
 
ruth-
     do you not love my sister?
  edm. in honour'd love.
  reg. but have you never found my brother's way
     to the forfended place?
  edm. that thought abuses you.
  reg. i am doubtful that you have been conjunct
     and bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.
  edm. no, by mine honour, madam.
  reg. i never shall endure her. dear my lord,
     be not familiar with her.
  edm. fear me not.
     she and the duke her husband!

       enter, with drum and colours, albany, goneril, soldiers.

  gon. [aside] i had rather lose the battle than that sister
     should loosen him and me.
  alb. our very loving sister, well bemet.
     sir, this i hear: the king is come to his daughter,
     with others whom the rigour of our state
     forc'd to cry out. where i could not be honest,
     i never yet was valiant. for this business,
     it toucheth us as france invades our land,
     not bolds the king, with others whom, i fear,
     most just and heavy causes make 
 
 ___________________________
 
up your powers.
     here is the guess of their true strength and forces
     by diligent discovery; but your haste
     is now urg'd on you.
  alb. we will greet the time.                             exit.
  edm. to both these sisters have i sworn my love;
     each jealous of the other, as the stung
     are of the adder. which of them shall i take?
     both? one? or neither? neither can be enjoy'd,
     if both remain alive. to take the widow
     exasperates, makes mad her sister goneril;
     and hardly shall i carry out my side,
     her husband being alive. now then, we'll use
     his countenance for the battle, which being done,
     let her who would be rid of him devise
     his speedy taking off. as for the mercy
     which he intends to lear and to cordelia-
     the battle done, and they within our power,
     shall never see his pardon; for my state
     stands on me to defend, not to debate.                exit.




scene ii.
a field between the two c
 
 ___________________________
 
en
     are as the time is. to be tender-minded
     does not become a sword. thy great employment
     will not bear question. either say thou'lt do't,
     or thrive by other means.
  capt. i'll do't, my lord.
  edm. about it! and write happy when th' hast done.
     mark- i say, instantly; and carry it so
     as i have set it down.
  capt. i cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;
     if it be man's work, i'll do't.                       exit.

          flourish. enter albany, goneril, regan, soldiers.

  alb. sir, you have show'd to-day your valiant strain,
     and fortune led you well. you have the captives
     who were the opposites of this day's strife.
     we do require them of you, so to use them
     as we shall find their merits and our safety
     may equally determine.
  edm. sir, i thought it fit
     to send the old and miserable king
     to some retention and appointed guard;
     whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
     to pluck the co
 
 ___________________________
 
, prisoners, patrimony;
     dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine.
     witness the world that i create thee here
     my lord and master.
  gon. mean you to enjoy him?
  alb. the let-alone lies not in your good will.
  edm. nor in thine, lord.
  alb. half-blooded fellow, yes.
  reg. [to edmund] let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.

  alb. stay yet; hear reason. edmund, i arrest thee
     on capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
     this gilded serpent [points to goneril]. for your claim,
fair
        sister,
     i bar it in the interest of my wife.
     'tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
     and i, her husband, contradict your banes.
     if you will marry, make your loves to me;
     my lady is bespoke.
  gon. an interlude!
  alb. thou art arm'd, gloucester. let the trumpet sound.
     if none appear to prove upon thy person
     thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
     there is my pledge [throws down a glove]! i'll prove it on
thy

 
 ___________________________
 
ive them instant way
     where they shall rest for ever. trumpets, speak!
                                 alarums. fight. [edmund falls.]
  alb. save him, save him!
  gon. this is mere practice, gloucester.
     by th' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
     an unknown opposite. thou art not vanquish'd,
     but cozen'd and beguil'd.
  alb. shut your mouth, dame,
     or with this paper shall i stop it. [shows her her letter to
     edmund.]- [to edmund]. hold, sir.
     [to goneril] thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
     no tearing, lady! i perceive you know it.
  gon. say if i do- the laws are mine, not thine.
     who can arraign me for't?
  alb. most monstrous!
     know'st thou this paper?
  gon. ask me not what i know.                             exit.
  alb. go after her. she's desperate; govern her.
                                              [exit an officer.]
  edm. what, you have charg'd me with, that have i done,
     and more, much mor
 
 ___________________________
 
heir bodies, be they alive or dead.
                                               [exit gentleman.]
     this judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble
     touches us not with pity. o, is this he?
     the time will not allow the compliment
     that very manners urges.
  kent. i am come
     to bid my king and master aye good night.
     is he not here?
  alb. great thing of us forgot!
     speak, edmund, where's the king? and where's cordelia?
                 the bodies of goneril and regan are brought in.
     seest thou this object, kent?
  kent. alack, why thus?
  edm. yet edmund was belov'd.
     the one the other poisoned for my sake,
     and after slew herself.
  alb. even so. cover their faces.
  edm. i pant for life. some good i mean to do,
     despite of mine own nature. quickly send
     (be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
     is on the life of lear and on cordelia.
     nay, send in time.
  alb. run, run, o, run!
  edg. to who, my lord? 