the tragedy of king lear

by william shakespeare




dramatis personae

      lear, king of britain.
      king of france.
      duke of burgundy.
      duke of cornwall.
      duke of albany.
      earl of kent.
      earl of gloucester.
      edgar, son of gloucester.
      edmund, bastard son to gloucester.
      curan, a courtier.
      old man, tenant to gloucester.
      doctor.
      lear's fool.
      oswald, steward to goneril.
      a captain under edmund's command.
      gentlemen.
      a herald.
      servants to cornwall.

      goneril, daughter to lear.
      regan, daughter to lear.
      cordelia, daughter to lear.

      knights attending on lear, officers, messengers, soldiers,
        attendants.



 
 ___________________________
 

     lag of a brother? why bastard? wherefore base?
     when my dimensions are as well compact,
     my mind as generous, and my shape as true,
     as honest madam's issue? why brand they us
     with base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
     who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
     more composition and fierce quality
     than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
     go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
     got 'tween asleep and wake? well then,
     legitimate edgar, i must have your land.
     our father's love is to the bastard edmund
     as to th' legitimate. fine word- 'legitimate'!
     well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
     and my invention thrive, edmund the base
     shall top th' legitimate. i grow; i prosper.
     now, gods, stand up for bastards!

                          enter gloucester.

  glou. kent banish'd thus? and france in choler parted?
     and the king gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     confin'd to exhib
 
 ___________________________
 
     bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
     till our oldness cannot relish them. i begin to find an idle
     and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who
sways,
     not as it hath power, but as it is suffer'd. come to me,
that
     of this i may speak more. if our father would sleep till i
     wak'd him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and
live
     the beloved of your brother,
                                                        'edgar.'

     hum! conspiracy? 'sleep till i wak'd him, you should enjoy
half
     his revenue.' my son edgar! had he a hand to write this? a
heart
     and brain to breed it in? when came this to you? who brought
it?
  edm. it was not brought me, my lord: there's the cunning of it.
i
     found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
  glou. you know the character to be your brother's?
  edm. if the matter were good, my lord, i durst swear it were
his;
     but in respect of that, i
 
 ___________________________
 
n enforc'd obedience of
     planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a
divine
     thrusting on. an admirable evasion of whore-master man, to
lay
     his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! my father
     compounded with my mother under the dragon's tail, and my
     nativity was under ursa major, so that it follows i am rough
and
     lecherous. fut! i should have been that i am, had the
     maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my
bastardizing.
     edgar-

                             enter edgar.

     and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy.
my
     cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like tom o'
bedlam.
     o, these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa, sol, la,
mi.
  edg. how now, brother edmund? what serious contemplation are
you
     in?
  edm. i am thinking, brother, of a prediction i read this other
day,
     what should follow these eclipses.
  edg. do you busy yourself with that?
  edm. i p
 
 ___________________________
 
ar my
     lord speak. pray ye, go! there's my key. if you do stir
abroad,
     go arm'd.
  edg. arm'd, brother?
  edm. brother, i advise you to the best. go arm'd. i am no
honest man
     if there be any good meaning toward you. i have told you
what i
     have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and
     horror of it. pray you, away!
  edg. shall i hear from you anon?
  edm. i do serve you in this business.
                                                     exit edgar.
     a credulous father! and a brother noble,
     whose nature is so far from doing harms
     that he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
     my practices ride easy! i see the business.
     let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
     all with me's meet that i can fashion fit.
exit.




scene iii.
the duke of albany's palace.

enter goneril and [her] steward [oswald].

  gon. did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
  osw. ay, madam.
  gon. by d
 
 ___________________________
 
kely wars toward 'twixt the two
dukes
     of cornwall and albany?
  edm. not a word.
  cur. you may do, then, in time. fare you well, sir.      exit.
  edm. the duke be here to-night? the better! best!
     this weaves itself perforce into my business.
     my father hath set guard to take my brother;
     and i have one thing, of a queasy question,
     which i must act. briefness and fortune, work!
     brother, a word! descend! brother, i say!

                             enter edgar.

     my father watches. o sir, fly this place!
     intelligence is given where you are hid.
     you have now the good advantage of the night.
     have you not spoken 'gainst the duke of cornwall?
     he's coming hither; now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
     and regan with him. have you nothing said
     upon his party 'gainst the duke of albany?
     advise yourself.
  edg. i am sure on't, not a word.
  edm. i hear my father coming. pardon me!
     in cunning i must draw my sw
 
 ___________________________
 
ord upon you.
     draw, seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.-
     yield! come before my father. light, ho, here!
     fly, brother.- torches, torches!- so farewell.
                                                     exit edgar.
     some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
     of my more fierce endeavour. [stabs his arm.] i have seen
        drunkards
     do more than this in sport.- father, father!-
     stop, stop! no help?

             enter gloucester, and servants with torches.

  glou. now, edmund, where's the villain?
  edm. here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
     mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
     to stand 's auspicious mistress.
  glou. but where is he?
  edm. 
 
 ___________________________
 
oyal and natural boy, i'll work the means
     to make thee capable.

                enter cornwall, regan, and attendants.

  corn. how now, my noble friend? since i came hither
     (which i can call but now) i have heard strange news.
  reg. if it be true, all vengeance comes too short
     which can pursue th' offender. how dost, my lord?
  glou. o madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
  reg. what, did my father's godson seek your life?
     he whom my father nam'd? your edgar?
  glou. o lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
  reg. was he not companion with the riotous knights
     that tend upon my father?
  glou. i know not, madam. 'tis too bad, too bad!
  edm. yes, madam, he was of that consort.
  reg. no marvel then though he were ill affected.
     'tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     to have th' expense and waste of his revenues.
     i have this present evening from my sister
     been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
    
 
 ___________________________
 
   but misery. i know 'tis from cordelia,
     who hath most fortunately been inform'd
     of my obscured course- and [reads] 'shall find time
     from this enormous state, seeking to give
     losses their remedies'- all weary and o'erwatch'd,
     take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
     this shameful lodging.
     fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.
                                                         sleeps.




scene iii.
the open country.

enter edgar.

  edg. i heard myself proclaim'd,
     and by the happy hollow of a tree
     escap'd the hunt. no port is free, no place
     that guard and most unusual vigilance
     does not attend my taking. whiles i may scape,
     i will preserve myself; and am bethought
     to take the basest and most poorest shape
     that ever penury, in contempt of man,
     brought near to beast. my face i'll grime with filth,
     blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots,
     and with presented 
 
 ___________________________
 
ace
     the winds and persecutions of the sky.
     the country gives me proof and precedent
     of bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
     strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
     pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
     and with this horrible object, from low farms,
     poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
     sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
     enforce their charity. 'poor turlygod! poor tom!'
     that's something yet! edgar i nothing am.             exit.




scene iv.
before gloucester's castle; kent in the stocks.

enter lear, fool, and gentleman.

  lear. 'tis strange that they should so depart from home,
     and not send back my messenger.
  gent. as i learn'd,
     the night before there was no purpose in them
     of this remove.
  kent. hail to thee, noble master!
  lear. ha!
     mak'st thou this shame thy pastime?
  kent. no, my lord.
  fool. ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters. horse
 
 ___________________________
 
l what wretches feel,
     that thou mayst shake the superflux to them
     and show the heavens more just.
  edg. [within] fathom and half, fathom and half! poor tom!

                     enter fool [from the hovel].

  fool. come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit. help me, help
me!
  kent. give me thy hand. who's there?
  fool. a spirit, a spirit! he says his name's poor tom.
  kent. what art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw?
     come forth.

                 enter edgar [disguised as a madman].

  edg. away! the foul fiend follows me! through the sharp
hawthorn
     blows the cold wind. humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm
thee.
  lear. hast thou given all to thy two daughters, and art thou
come
     to this?
  edg. who gives anything to poor tom? whom the foul fiend hath
led
     through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlpool,
o'er
     bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and
     halters in his pew, set ratsbane b
 
 ___________________________
 
ay be ready for our
     apprehension.
  edm. [aside] if i find him comforting the king, it will stuff
his
     suspicion more fully.- i will persever in my course of
loyalty,
     though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
  corn. i will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer
     father in my love.
                                                         exeunt.




scene vi.
a farmhouse near gloucester's castle.

enter gloucester, lear, kent, fool, and edgar.

  glou. here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. i
will
     piece out the comfort with what addition i can. i will not
be
     long from you.
  kent. all the power of his wits have given way to his
impatience.
     the gods reward your kindness!
                                              exit [gloucester].
  edg. frateretto calls me, and tells me nero is an angler in the
     lake of darkness. pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
  fool. prithee, nuncle, te
 
 ___________________________
 
madman be a gentleman
or a
     yeoman.
  lear. a king, a king!
  fool. no, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son; for
he's a
     mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.
  lear. to have a thousand with red burning spits
     come hizzing in upon 'em-
  edg. the foul fiend bites my back.
  fool. he's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's
     health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
  lear. it shall be done; i will arraign them straight.
     [to edgar] come, sit thou here, most learned justicer.
     [to the fool] thou, sapient sir, sit here. now, you
she-foxes!
  edg. look, where he stands and glares! want'st thou eyes at
trial,
     madam?

             come o'er the bourn, bessy, to me.

  fool.      her boat hath a leak,
             and she must not speak
           why she dares not come over to thee.

  edg. the foul fiend haunts poor tom in the voice of a
nightingale.
     hoppedance cries in tom's belly for two white 
 
 ___________________________
 
herring. croak
     not, black angel; i have no food for thee.
  kent. how do you, sir? stand you not so amaz'd.
     will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
  lear. i'll see their trial first. bring in their evidence.
     [to edgar] thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.
     [to the fool] and thou, his yokefellow of equity,
     bench by his side. [to kent] you are o' th' commission,
     sit you too.
  edg. let us deal justly.

          sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
            thy sheep be in the corn;
          and for one blast of thy minikin mouth
            thy sheep shall take no harm.

     purr! the cat is gray.
  lear. arraign her first. 'tis goneril. i here take my oath
before
 
 
 ___________________________
 
ongrel grim,
           hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
           bobtail tyke or trundle-tall-
           tom will make them weep and wail;
           for, with throwing thus my head,
           dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
     do de, de, de. sessa! come, march to wakes and fairs and
market
     towns. poor tom, thy horn is dry.
  lear. then let them anatomize regan. see what breeds about her
     heart. is there any cause in nature that makes these hard
     hearts? [to edgar] you, sir- i entertain you for one of my
     hundred; only i do not like the fashion of your garments.
you'll
     say they are persian attire; but let them be chang'd.
  kent. now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
  lear. make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
     so, so, so. we'll go to supper i' th' morning. so, so, so.
  fool. and i'll go to bed at noon.

                          enter gloucester.

  glou. come hither, friend. where is the king my master?
  k
 
 ___________________________
 
  with thine, and all that offer to defend him,
     stand in assured loss. take up, take up!
     and follow me, that will to some provision
     give thee quick conduct.
  kent. oppressed nature sleeps.
     this rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
     which, if convenience will not allow,
     stand in hard cure. [to the fool] come, help to bear thy
master.
     thou must not stay behind.
  glou. come, come, away!
                                         exeunt [all but edgar].
  edg. when we our betters see bearing our woes,
     we scarcely think our miseries our foes.
     who alone suffers suffers most i' th' mind,
     leaving free things and happy shows behind;
     but then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip
     when grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
     how light and portable my pain seems now,
     when that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
     he childed as i fathered! tom, away!
     mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
 
 ___________________________
 
 left
     to see some mischief on him. o!                     he dies.
  corn. lest it see more, prevent it. out, vile jelly!
     where is thy lustre now?
  glou. all dark and comfortless! where's my son edmund?
     edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
     to quit this horrid act.
  reg. out, treacherous villain!
     thou call'st on him that hates thee. it was he
     that made the overture of thy treasons to us;
     who is too good to pity thee.
  glou. o my follies! then edgar was abus'd.
     kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
  reg. go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
     his way to dover.
                                     exit [one] with gloucester.
     how is't, my lord? how look you?
  corn. i have receiv'd a hurt. follow me, lady.
     turn out that eyeless villain. throw this slave
     upon the dunghill. regan, i bleed apace.
     untimely comes this hurt. give me your arm.
                                  exit [cornwall, l
 
 ___________________________
 
 william
shakespeare is copyright 1990-1993 by world library, inc., and is
provided by project gutenberg etext of carnegie mellon university
with permission.  electronic and machine readable copies may be
distributed so long as such copies (1) are for your or others
personal use only, and (2) are not distributed or used
commercially.  prohibited commercial distribution includes by any
service that charges for download time or for membership.>>



act iv. scene i.
the heath.

enter edgar.

  edg. yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd,
     than still contemn'd and flatter'd. to be worst,
     the lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
     stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.
     the lamentable change is from the best;
     the worst returns to laughter. welcome then,
     thou unsubstantial air that i embrace!
     the wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
     owes nothing to thy blasts.

                 enter gloucester, led by an old man
 
 ___________________________
 
,
     life would not yield to age.
  old man. o my good lord,
     i have been your tenant, and your father's tenant,
     these fourscore years.
  glou. away, get thee away! good friend, be gone.
     thy comforts can do me no good at all;
     thee they may hurt.
  old man. you cannot see your way.
  glou. i have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
     i stumbled when i saw. full oft 'tis seen
     our means secure us, and our mere defects
     prove our commodities. ah dear son edgar,
     the food of thy abused father's wrath!
     might i but live to see thee in my touch,
     i'ld say i had eyes again!
  old man. how now? who's there?
  edg. [aside] o gods! who is't can say 'i am at the worst'?
     i am worse than e'er i was.
  old man. 'tis poor mad tom.
  edg. [aside] and worse i may be yet. the worst is not
     so long as we can say 'this is the worst.'
  old man. fellow, where goest?
  glou. is it a beggarman?
  old man. madman and beggar too.
  glou. 
 
 ___________________________
 
 more.
     if you do find him, pray you give him this;
     and when your mistress hears thus much from you,
     i pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
     so farewell.
     if you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
     preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
  osw. would i could meet him, madam! i should show
     what party i do follow.
  reg. fare thee well.                                   exeunt.




scene vi.
the country near dover.

enter gloucester, and edgar [like a peasant].

  glou. when shall i come to th' top of that same hill?
  edg. you do climb up it now. look how we labour.
  glou. methinks the ground is even.
  edg. horrible steep.
     hark, do you hear the sea?
  glou. no, truly.
  edg. why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
     by your eyes' anguish.
  glou. so may it be indeed.
     methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st
     in better phrase and matter than thou didst.
  edg. y'are much deceiv'd. in nothin
 
 ___________________________
 
 hear thee going.
  edg. now fare ye well, good sir.
  glou. with all my heart.
  edg. [aside]. why i do trifle thus with his despair
     is done to cure it.
  glou. o you mighty gods!                            he kneels.
     this world i do renounce, and, in your sights,
     shake patiently my great affliction off.
     if i could bear it longer and not fall
     to quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
     my snuff and loathed part of nature should
     burn itself out. if edgar live, o, bless him!
     now, fellow, fare thee well.
                                  he falls [forward and swoons].
  edg. gone, sir, farewell.-
     and yet i know not how conceit may rob
     the treasury of life when life itself
     yields to the theft. had he been where he thought,
     by this had thought been past.- alive or dead?
     ho you, sir! friend! hear you, sir? speak!-
     thus might he pass indeed. yet he revives.
     what are you, sir?
  glou. away, and let me
 
 ___________________________
 
me biding.
  glou. hearty thanks.
     the bounty and the benison of heaven
     to boot, and boot!

                     enter [oswald the] steward.

  osw. a proclaim'd prize! most happy!
     that eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh
     to raise my fortunes. thou old unhappy traitor,
     briefly thyself remember. the sword is out
     that must destroy thee.
  glou. now let thy friendly hand
     put strength enough to't.
                                             [edgar interposes.]
  osw. wherefore, bold peasant,
     dar'st thou support a publish'd traitor? hence!
     lest that th' infection of his fortune take
     like hold on thee. let go his arm.
  edg. chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'cagion.
  osw. let go, slave, or thou diest!
  edg. good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor voke pass. an
chud
     ha' bin zwagger'd out of my life, 'twould not ha' bin zo
long as
     'tis by a vortnight. nay, come not near th' old man. keep
out,

 
 ___________________________
 
 has lost.
     desire him to go in. trouble him no more
     till further settling.
  cor. will't please your highness walk?
  lear. you must bear with me.
     pray you now, forget and forgive. i am old and foolish.
                              exeunt. manent kent and gentleman.
  gent. holds it true, sir, that the duke of cornwall was so
slain?
  kent. most certain, sir.
  gent. who is conductor of his people?
  kent. as 'tis said, the bastard son of gloucester.
  gent. they say edgar, his banish'd son, is with the earl of
kent
     in germany.
  kent. report is changeable. 'tis time to look about; the powers
of
     the kingdom approach apace.
  gent. the arbitrement is like to be bloody.
     fare you well, sir.                                 [exit.]
  kent. my point and period will be throughly wrought,
     or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.        exit.




<<this electronic version of the complete works of william
shakespeare is copyright 19
 
 ___________________________
 
ir, you speak nobly.
  reg. why is this reason'd?
  gon. combine together 'gainst the enemy;
     for these domestic and particular broils
     are not the question here.
  alb. let's then determine
     with th' ancient of war on our proceeding.
  edm. i shall attend you presently at your tent.
  reg. sister, you'll go with us?
  gon. no.
  reg. 'tis most convenient. pray you go with us.
  gon. [aside] o, ho, i know the riddle.- i will go.

          [as they are going out,] enter edgar [disguised].

  edg. if e'er your grace had speech with man so poor,
     hear me one word.
  alb. i'll overtake you.- speak.
                              exeunt [all but albany and edgar].
  edg. before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
     if you have victory, let the trumpet sound
     for him that brought it. wretched though i seem,
     i can produce a champion that will prove
     what is avouched there. if you miscarry,
     your business of the world hath so an end,
 
 
 ___________________________
 
    and machination ceases. fortune love you!
  alb. stay till i have read the letter.
  edg. i was forbid it.
     when time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
     and i'll appear again.
  alb. why, fare thee well. i will o'erlook thy paper.
                                                   exit [edgar].

                            enter edmund.

  edm. the enemy 's in view; draw up your powers.
     here is the guess of their true strength and forces
     by diligent discovery; but your haste
     is now urg'd on you.
  alb. we will greet the time.                             exit.
  edm. to both these sisters have i sworn my love;
     each jealous of the other, as the stung
     are of the adder. which of them shall i take?
     both? one? or neither? neither can be enjoy'd,

 
 ___________________________
 
,
     let her who would be rid of him devise
     his speedy taking off. as for the mercy
     which he intends to lear and to cordelia-
     the battle done, and they within our power,
     shall never see his pardon; for my state
     stands on me to defend, not to debate.                exit.




scene ii.
a field between the two camps.

alarum within. enter, with drum and colours, the powers of france
over the stage, cordelia with her father in her hand, and exeunt.

enter edgar and gloucester.

  edg. here, father, take the shadow of this tree
     for your good host. pray that the right may thrive.
     if ever i return to you again,
     i'll bring you comfort.
  glou. grace go with you, sir!
                                                   exit [edgar].

               alarum and retreat within. enter edgar,

  edg. away, old man! give me thy hand! away!
     king lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.
     give me thy hand! come on!
  glou. no 
 
 ___________________________
 
egree within the lists
of
     the army will maintain upon edmund, supposed earl of
gloucester,
     that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third
sound
     of the trumpet. he is bold in his defence.'

  edm. sound!                                     first trumpet.
  her. again!                                    second trumpet.
  her. again!                                     third trumpet.
                                         trumpet answers within.

    enter edgar, armed, at the third sound, a trumpet before him.

  alb. ask him his purposes, why he appears
     upon this call o' th' trumpet.
  her. what are you?
     your name, your quality? and why you answer
     this present summons?
  edg. know my name is lost;
     by treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
     yet am i noble as the adversary
     i come to cope.
  alb. which is that adversary?
  edg. what's he that speaks for edmund earl of gloucester?
  edm. himself. what say'st 
 
 ___________________________
 
alb. go after her. she's desperate; govern her.
                                              [exit an officer.]
  edm. what, you have charg'd me with, that have i done,
     and more, much more. the time will bring it out.
     'tis past, and so am i.- but what art thou
     that hast this fortune on me? if thou'rt noble,
     i do forgive thee.
  edg. let's exchange charity.
     i am no less in blood than thou art, edmund;
     if more, the more th' hast wrong'd me.
     my name is edgar and thy father's son.
     the gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
     make instruments to scourge us.
     the dark and vicious place where thee he got
     cost him his eyes.
  edm. th' hast spoken right; 'tis true.
     the wheel is come full circle; i am here.
  alb. methought thy very gait did prophesy
     a royal nobleness. i must embrace thee.
     let sorrow split my heart if ever i
     did hate thee, or thy father!
  edg. worthy prince, i know't.
  alb. where have y
 
 ___________________________
 
ter slew herself.
  alb. even so. cover their faces.
  edm. i pant for life. some good i mean to do,
     despite of mine own nature. quickly send
     (be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
     is on the life of lear and on cordelia.
     nay, send in time.
  alb. run, run, o, run!
  edg. to who, my lord? who has the office? send
     thy token of reprieve.
  edm. well thought on. take my sword;
     give it the captain.
  alb. haste thee for thy life.                    [exit edgar.]
  edm. he hath commission from thy wife and me
     to hang cordelia in the prison and
     to lay the blame upon her own despair
     that she fordid herself.
  alb. the gods defend her! bear him hence awhile.
                                          [edmund is borne off.]

    enter lear, with cordelia [dead] in his arms, [edgar,
captain,
                        and others following].

  lear. howl, howl, howl, howl! o, you are men of stone.
     had i your tongues and eyes, i
 
 ___________________________
 
d desperately are dead.
  lear. ay, so i think.
  alb. he knows not what he says; and vain is it
     that we present us to him.
  edg. very bootless.

                           enter a captain.

  capt. edmund is dead, my lord.
  alb. that's but a trifle here.
     you lords and noble friends, know our intent.
     what comfort to this great decay may come
     shall be applied. for us, we will resign,
     during the life of this old majesty,
     to him our absolute power; [to edgar and kent] you to your
        rights;
     with boot, and such addition as your honours
     have more than merited.- all friends shall taste
     the wages of their virtue, and all foes
     the cup of their deservings.- o, see, see!
  lear. and my poor fool is hang'd! no, no, no life!
     why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
     and thou no breath at all? thou'lt come no more,
     never, never, never, never, never!
     pray you undo this button. thank you, sir.
     do 
 
 ___________________________
 
     look there, look there!                            he dies.
  edg. he faints! my lord, my lord!
  kent. break, heart; i prithee break!
  edg. look up, my lord.
  kent. vex not his ghost. o, let him pass! he hates him
     that would upon the rack of this tough world
     stretch him out longer.
  edg. he is gone indeed.
  kent. the wonder is, he hath endur'd so long.
     he but usurp'd his life.
  alb. bear them from hence. our present business
     is general woe. [to kent and edgar] friends of my soul, you
        twain
     rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain.
  kent. i have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
     my master calls me; i must not say no.
  alb. the weight of this sad time we must obey,
     speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
     the oldest have borne most; we that are young
     shall never see so much, nor live so long.
                                       exeunt with a dead march.


the end
