
the yellow wallpaper


it is very seldom that mere ordinary people like john and myself secure
ancestral halls for the summer.

a colonial mansion, a hereditary estate, i would say a haunted house,
and reach the height of romantic felicity--but that would be asking too
much of fate!

still i will proudly declare that there is something queer about it.

else, why should it be let so cheaply? and why have stood so long
untenanted?

john laughs at me, of course, but one expects that in marriage.

john is practical in the extreme. he has no patience with faith, an
intense horror of superstition, and he scoffs openly at any talk of
things not to be felt and seen and put down in figures.

john is a physician, and perhaps--(i would not say it to a living
soul, of course, but this is dead paper and a great relief to my
mind)--perhaps that is one reason i do not get well faster.

you see he does not believe i am sick!

and what can one do?

if a physician of high standing, and one's own husband, a
 
 ___________________________
 
 and
journeys, and air, and exercise, and am absolutely forbidden to "work"
until i am well again.

personally, i disagree with their ideas.

personally, i believe that congenial work, with excitement and change,
would do me good.

but what is one to do?

i did write for a while in spite of them; but it does exhaust me a good
deal--having to be so sly about it, or else meet with heavy opposition.

i sometimes fancy that in my condition if i had less opposition and more
society and stimulus--but john says the very worst thing i can do is to
think about my condition, and i confess it always makes me feel bad.

so i will let it alone and talk about the house.

the most beautiful place! it is quite alone, standing well back from the
road, quite three miles from the village. it makes me think of english
places that you read about, for there are hedges and walls and gates
that lock, and lots of separate little houses for the gardeners and
people.

there is a delicious garden! i never saw such a 
 
 ___________________________
 
garden--large and shady,
full of box-bordered paths, and lined with long grape-covered arbors
with seats under them.

there were greenhouses, too, but they are all broken now.

there was some legal trouble, i believe, something about the heirs and
coheirs; anyhow, the place has been empty for years.

that spoils my ghostliness, i am afraid, but i don't care--there is
something strange about the house--i can feel it.

i even said so to john one moonlight evening, but he said what i felt
was a draught, and shut the window.

i get unreasonably angry with john sometimes. i'm sure i never used to
be so sensitive. i think it is due to this nervous condition.

but john says if i feel so, i shall neglect proper self-control; so i
take pains to control myself--before him, at least, and that makes me
very tired.

i don't like our room a bit. i wanted one downstairs that opened on the
piazza and had roses all over the window, and such prett
 
 ___________________________
 
y old-fashioned
chintz hangings! but john would not hear of it.

he said there was only one window and not room for two beds, and no near
room for him if he took another.

he is very careful and loving, and hardly lets me stir without special
direction.

i have a schedule prescription for each hour in the day; he takes all
care from me, and so i feel basely ungrateful not to value it more.

he said we came here solely on my account, that i was to have perfect
rest and all the air i could get. "your exercise depends on your
strength, my
 
 ___________________________
 
rovoke study, and when you follow the
lame uncertain curves for a little distance they suddenly commit
suicide--plunge off at outrageous angles, destroy themselves in unheard
of contradictions.

the color is repellent, almost revolting; a smouldering unclean yellow,
strangely faded by the slow-turning sunlight.

it is a dull yet lurid orange in some places, a sickly sulphur tint in
others.

no wonder the children hated it! i should hate it myself if i had to
live in this room long.

there comes john, and i must put this away,--he hates to have me write a
word.


we have been here two weeks, and i haven't felt like writing before,
since that first day.

i am sitting by the window now, up in this atrocious nursery, and
there is nothing to hinder my writing as much as i please, save lack of
strength.

john is away all day, and even some nights when his cases are serious.

i am glad my case is not serious!

but these nervous troubles are dreadfully depressing.

john does not know how much i re
 
 ___________________________
 
ally suffer. he knows there is no reason
to suffer, and that satisfies him.

of course it is only nervousness. it does weigh on me so not to do my
duty in any way!

i meant to be such a help to john, such a real rest and comfort, and
here i am a comparative burden already!

nobody would believe what an effort it is to do what little i am
able,--to dress and entertain, and order things.

it is fortunate mary is so good with the baby. such a dear baby!

and yet i cannot be with him, it makes me so nervous.

i suppose john never was nervous in his life. he laughs at me so about
this wall-paper!

at first he meant to repaper the room, but afterwards he said that i
was letting it get the better
 
 ___________________________
 
ake him uncomfortable just for a whim.

i'm really getting quite fond of the big room, all but that horrid
paper.

out of one window i can see the garden, those mysterious deepshaded
arbors, the riotous old-fashioned flowers, and bushes and gnarly trees.

out of another i get a lovely view of the bay and a little private wharf
belonging to the estate. there is a beautiful shaded lane that runs
down there from the house. i always fancy i see people walking in these
numerous paths and arbors, but john has cautioned me not to give way to
fancy in the least. he says that with my imaginative power and habit of
story-making, a nervous weakness like mine is sure to lead to all manner
of excited fancies, and that i ought to use my will and good sense to
check the tendency. so i try.

i think sometimes that if i were only well enough to write a little it
would relieve the press of ideas and rest me.

but i find i get pretty tired when i try.

it is so discouraging not to have any advice and compani
 
 ___________________________
 
onship about
my work. when i get really well, john says we will ask cousin henry and
julia down for a long visit; but he says he would as soon put fireworks
in my pillow-case as to let me have those stimulating people about now.

i wish i could get well faster.

but i must not think about that. this paper looks to me as if it knew
what a vicious influence it had!

there is a recurrent spot where the pattern lolls like a broken neck and
two bulbous eyes stare at you upside down.

i get positively angry with the impertinence of it and the
everlas
 
 ___________________________
 
nursery things out, and no wonder! i
never saw such ravages as the children have made here.

the wall-paper, as i said before, is torn off in spots, and it sticketh
closer than a brother--they must have had perseverance as well as
hatred.

then the floor is scratched and gouged and splintered, the plaster
itself is dug out here and there, and this great heavy bed which is all
we found in the room, looks as if it had been through the wars.

but i don't mind it a bit--only the paper.

there comes john's sister. such a dear girl as she is, and so careful of
me! i must not let her find me writing.

she is a perfect and enthusiastic housekeeper, and hopes for no better
profession. i verily believe she thinks it is the writing which made me
sick!

but i can write when she is out, and see her a long way off from these
windows.

there is one that commands the road, a lovely shaded winding road, and
one that just looks off over the country. a lovely country, too, full of
great elms and velvet meado
 
 ___________________________
 
ws.

this wall-paper has a kind of sub-pattern in a different shade, a
particularly irritating one, for you can only see it in certain lights,
and not clearly then.

but in the places where it isn't faded and where the sun is just so--i
can see a strange, provoking, formless sort of figure, that seems to
skulk about behind that silly and conspicuous front design.

there's sister on the stairs!


well, the fourth of july is over! the people are gone and i am tired
out. john thought it might do me good to see a little company, so we
just had mother and nellie and the children down for a week.

of course i didn't do a thing. jennie sees to everything now.

but it tired me all the same.

john says if i don't pick up faster he shall send me to weir mitchell in
the fall.

but i don't want to go there at all. i had a friend who was in his hands
once, and she says he is just like john and my brother, only more so!

besides, it is such an undertaking to go so far.

i don'
 
 ___________________________
 
t feel as if it was worth while to turn my hand over for anything,
and i'm getting dreadfully fretful and querulous.

i cry at nothing, and cry most of the time.

of course i don't when john is here, or anybody else, but when i am
alone.

and i am alone a good deal just now. john is kept in town very often by
serious cases, and jennie is good and lets me alone when i want her to.

so i walk a little in the garden or down that lovely lane, sit on the
porch under the roses, and lie down up here a good deal.

i'm getting really fond of the room in spite of the wall-paper. perhaps
because of the wall-paper.

it dwells in my mind so!

i lie here on this great immovable bed--it is nailed down, i
believe--and follow that pattern about by the hour. it is as good as
gymnastics, 
 
 ___________________________
 
r a frieze, and that adds
wonderfully to the confusion.

there is one end of the room where it is almost intact, and there, when
the crosslights fade and the low sun shines directly upon it, i can
almost fancy radiation after all,--the interminable grotesques seem to
form around a common centre and rush off in headlong plunges of equal
distraction.

it makes me tired to follow it. i will take a nap i guess.

i don't know why i should write this.

i don't want to.

i don't feel able.

and i know john would think it absurd. but i must say what i feel and
think in some way--it is such a relief!

but the effort is getting to be greater than the relief.

half the time now i am awfully lazy, and lie down ever so much.

john says i musn't lose my strength, and has me take cod liver oil and
lots of tonics and things, to say nothing of ale and wine and rare meat.

dear john! he loves me very dearly, and hates to have me sick. i tried
to have a real earnest reasonable talk with him the other day, an
 
 ___________________________
 
d tell
him how i wish he would let me go and make a visit to cousin henry and
julia.

but he said i wasn't able to go, nor able to stand it after i got there;
and i did not make out a very good case for myself, for i was crying
before i had finished.

it is getting to be a great effort for me to think straight. just this
nervous weakness i suppose.

and dear john gathered me up in his arms, and just carried me upstairs
and laid me on the bed, and sat by me and read to me till it tired my
head.

he said i was his darling and his comfort and all he had, and that i
must take care of myself for his sake, and keep well.

he says no one but myself can help me out of it, that i must use my will
and self-control and not let any silly fancies run away with me.

there's one comfort, the baby is well and happy, and does not have to
occupy this nursery with the hor
 
 ___________________________
 
rid wall-paper.

if we had not used it, that blessed child would have! what a fortunate
escape! why, i wouldn't have a child of mine, an impressionable little
thing, live in such a room for worlds.

i never thought of it before, but it is lucky that john kept me here
after all, i can stand it so much easier than a baby, you see.

of course i never mention it to them any more--i am too wise,--but i
keep watch of it all the same.

there are things in that paper that nobody knows but me, or ever will.

behind that outside pattern the dim shapes get clearer every day.

it is always the same shape, only very numerous.

and it is like a woman stooping down and creeping about behind that
pattern. i don't like it a bit. i wonder--i begin to think--i wi
 
 ___________________________
 
sh john
would take me away from here!

it is so hard to talk with john about my case, because he is so wise,
and because he loves me so.

but i tried it last night.

it was moonlight. the moon shines in all around just as the sun does.

i hate to see it sometimes, it creeps so slowly, and always comes in by
one window or another.

john was asleep and i hated to waken him, so i kept still and watched
the moonlight on that undulating wall-paper till i felt creepy.

the faint figure behind seemed to shake the pattern, just as if she
wanted to get out.

i got up softly and went to feel and see if the paper did move, and when
i came back john was awake.

"what is it, little girl?" he said. "don't go walking about like
that--you'll get cold."

i though it was a good time to talk, so i told him that i really was not
gaining here, an
 
 ___________________________
 
aper.

at night in any kind of light, in twilight, candle light, lamplight, and
worst of all by moonlight, it becomes bars! the outside pattern i mean,
and the woman behind it is as plain as can be.

i didn't realize for a long time what the thing was that showed behind,
that dim sub-pattern, but now i am quite sure it is a woman.

by daylight she is subdued, quiet. i fancy it is the pattern that keeps
her so still. it is so puzzling. it keeps me quiet by the hour.

i lie down ever so much now. john says it is good for me, and to sleep
all i can.

indeed he started the habit by making me lie down for an hour after each
meal.

it is a very bad habit i am convinced, for you see i don't sleep.

and that cultivates deceit, for i don't tell them i'm awake--o no!

the fact is i am getting a little afraid of john.

he seems very queer sometimes, and even jennie has an inexplicable look.

it strikes me occasionally, just as a scientific hypothesis,--that
perhaps it is the paper!

i have watched jo
 
 ___________________________
 
 him
several times looking at the paper! and jennie too. i caught jennie with
her hand on it once.

she didn't know i was in the room, and when i asked her in a quiet, a
very quiet voice, with the most restrained manner possible, what she
was doing with the paper--she turned around as if she had been caught
stealing, and looked quite angry--asked me why i should frighten her so!

then she said that the paper stained everything it touched, that she had
found yellow smooches on all my clothes and john's, and she wished we
would be more careful!

did not that sound innocent? but i know she was studying that pattern,
and i am determined that nobody shall find it out but myself!


life is very much more exciting now than it used to be. you see i have
something more to expect, to look forward to, to watch. i really do eat
better, and am more quiet than i was.

john is so pleased to see me improve! he laughed a little the other day,
and said i seemed to be flourishing in spite of my wall-paper.


 
 ___________________________
 
e!

and i'll tell you why--privately--i've seen her!

i can see her out of every one of my windows!

it is the same woman, i know, for she is always creeping, and most women
do not creep by daylight.

i see her on that long road under the trees, creeping along, and when a
carriage comes she hides under the blackberry vines.

i don't blame her a bit. it must be very humiliating to be caught
creeping by daylight!

i always lock the door when i creep by daylight. i can't do it at night,
for i know john would suspect something at once.

and john is so queer now, that i don't want to irritate him. i wish he
would take another room! besides, i don't want anybody to get that woman
out at night but myself.

i often wonder if i could see her out of all the windows at once.

but, turn as fast as i can, i can only see out of one at one time.

and though i always see her, she may be able to creep faster than i can
turn!

i have watched her sometimes away off in the open country, creeping as
fast as a 
 
 ___________________________
 
cloud shadow in a high wind.

if only that top pattern could be gotten off from the under one! i mean
to try it, little by little.

i have found out another funny thing, but i shan't tell it this time! it
does not do to trust people too much.

there are only two more days to get this paper off, and i believe john
is beginning to notice. i don't like the look in his eyes.

and i heard him ask jennie a lot of professional questions about me. she
had a very good report to give.

she said i slept a good deal in the daytime.

john knows i don't sleep very well at night, for all i'm so quiet!

he asked me all sorts of questions, too, and pretended to be very loving
and kind.

as if i couldn't see through him!

still, i don't wonder he acts so, sleeping under this paper for three
months.

it only interests me,
 
 ___________________________
 
 but i feel sure john and jennie are secretly
affected by it.


hurrah! this is the last day, but it is enough. john is to stay in town
over night, and won't be out until this evening.

jennie wanted to sleep with me--the sly thing! but i told her i should
undoubtedly rest better for a night all alone.

that was clever, for really i wasn't alone a bit! as soon as it was
moonlight and that poor thing began to crawl and shake the pattern, i
got up and ran to help her.

i pulled and she shook, i shook and she pulled, and before morning we
had peeled off yards of that paper.

a strip about as high as my head and 
 
 ___________________________
 
ts are gone, and the things are gone,
and there is nothing left but that great bedstead nailed down, with the
canvas mattress we found on it.

we shall sleep downstairs to-night, and take the boat home to-morrow.

i quite enjoy the room, now it is bare again.

how those children did tear about here!

this bedstead is fairly gnawed!

but i must get to work.

i have locked the door and thrown the key down into the front path.

i don't want to go out, and i don't want to have anybody come in, till
john comes.

i want to astonish him.

i've got a rope up here that even jennie did not find. if that woman
does get out, and tries to get away, i can tie her!

but i forgot i could not reach far without anything to stand on!

this bed will not move!

i tried to lift and push it until i was lame, and then i got so angry i
bit off a little piece at one corner--but it hurt my teeth.

then i peeled off all the paper i could reach standing on the floor.
it sticks horribly and the pattern just enjoys it! 
 
 ___________________________
 
t me
out in the road there!

i suppose i shall have to get back behind the pattern when it comes
night, and that is hard!

it is so pleasant to be out in this great room and creep around as i
please!

i don't want to go outside. i won't, even if jennie asks me to.

for outside you have to creep on the ground, and everything is green
instead of yellow.

but here i can creep smoothly on the floor, and my shoulder just fits in
that long smooch around the wall, so i cannot lose my way.

why there's john at the door!

it is no use, young man, you can't open it!

how he does call and pound!

now he's crying for an axe.

it would be a shame to break down that beautiful door!

"john dear!" said i in the gentlest voice, "the key is down by the front
steps, under a plantain leaf!"

that silenced him for a few moments.

then he said--very quietly indeed, "open the door, my darling!"

"i can't," said i. "the key is down by the front door under a plantain
leaf!"

and then i said it again, several times