 parish at morton."

"that village a few miles off?

"aye."

"and what is he?"

"he is a parson."

i remembered the answer of the old housekeeper at the parsonage, when i
had asked to see the clergyman.  "this, then, was his father's
residence?"

"aye; old mr. rivers lived here, and his father, and grandfather, and
gurt (great) grandfather afore him."

"the name, then, of that gentleman, is mr. st. john rivers?"

"aye; st. john is like his kirstened name."

"and his sisters are called diana and mary rivers?"

"yes."

"their father is dead?"

"dead three weeks sin' of a stroke."

"they have no mother?"

"the mistress has been dead this mony a year."

"have you lived with the family long?"

"i've lived here thirty year.  i nursed them all three."

"that proves you must have been an honest and faithful servant.  i will
say so much for you, though you have had the incivility to call me a
beggar."

she again regarded me with a surprised stare.  "i believe," she said, "i
was quite mista'en in my though
 
 ___________________________
 
ened; my faculties, heaven-bestowed, paralysed--made useless.  you
hear now how i contradict myself.  i, who preached contentment with a
humble lot, and justified the vocation even of hewers of wood and drawers
of water in god's service--i, his ordained minister, almost rave in my
restlessness.  well, propensities and principles must be reconciled by
some means."

he left the room.  in this brief hour i had learnt more of him than in
the whole previous month: yet still he puzzled me.

diana and mary rivers became more sad and silent as the day approached
for leaving their brother and their home.  they both tried to appear as
usual; but the sorrow they had to struggle against was one that could not
be entirely conquered or concealed.  diana intimated that this would be a
different parting from any they had ever yet known.  it would probably,
as far as st. john was concerned, be a parting for years: it might be a
parting for life.

"he will sacrifice all to his long-framed resolves," she said: "nat
 
 ___________________________
 
cle engaged afterwards in more
prosperous undertakings: it appears he realised a fortune of twenty
thousand pounds.  he was never married, and had no near kindred but
ourselves and one other person, not more closely related than we.  my
father always cherished the idea that he would atone for his error by
leaving his possessions to us; that letter informs us that he has
bequeathed every penny to the other relation, with the exception of
thirty guineas, to be divided between st. john, diana, and mary rivers,
for the purchase of three mourning rings.  he had a right, of course, to
do as he pleased: and yet a momentary damp is cast on the spirits by the
receipt of such news.  mary and i would have esteemed ourselves rich with
a thousand pounds each; and to st. john such a sum would have been
valuable, for the good it would have enabled him to do."

this explanation given, the subject was dropped, and no further reference
made to it by either mr. rivers or his sisters.  the next day i left
marsh end 
 
 ___________________________
 
read or write much; but he can find his way
without being led by the hand: the sky is no longer a blank to him--the
earth no longer a void.  when his first-born was put into his arms, he
could see that the boy had inherited his own eyes, as they once
were--large, brilliant, and black.  on that occasion, he again, with a
full heart, acknowledged that god had tempered judgment with mercy.

my edward and i, then, are happy: and the more so, because those we most
love are happy likewise.  diana and mary rivers are both married:
alternately, once every year, they come to see us, and we go to see them.
diana's husband is a captain in the navy, a gallant officer and a good
man.  mary's is a clergyman, a college friend of her brother's, and, from
his attainments and principles, worthy of the connection.  both captain
fitzjames and mr. wharton love their wives, and are loved by them.

as to st. john rivers, he left england: he went to india.  he entered on
the path he had marked for himself; he pursues it