if,
therefore, the authorship of other works of fiction has been attributed
to me, an honour is awarded where it is not merited; and consequently,
denied where it is justly due.

this explanation will serve to rectify mistakes which may already have
been made, and to prevent future errors.

currer bell.

_april_ 13_th_, 1848.




chapter i


there was no possibility of taking a walk that day.  we had been
wandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning; but
since dinner (mrs. reed, when there was no company, dined early) the cold
winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and a rain so
penetrating, that further out-door exercise was now out of the question.

i was glad of it: i never liked long walks, especially on chilly
afternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight, with
nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings of bessie,
the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of my physical inferiority to
eliza, john, and georgiana
 
 ___________________________
 
 reed.

the said eliza, john, and georgiana were now clustered round their mama
in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and with
her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor crying)
looked perfectly happy.  me, she had dispensed from joining the group;
saying, "she regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a
distance; but that until she heard from bessie, and could discover by her
own observation, that i was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a
 
 ___________________________
 
 was an object of terror.

so was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying a distant
crowd surrounding a gallows.

each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undeveloped
understanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting: as
interesting as the tales bessie sometimes narrated on winter evenings,
when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, having brought her
ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sit about it, and
while she got up mrs. reed's lace frills, and crimped her nightcap
borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love and adventure
taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (as at a later period i
discovered) from the pages of pamela, and henry, earl of moreland.

with bewick on my knee, i was then happy: happy at least in my way.  i
feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon.  the breakfast-
room door opened.

"boh!  madam mope!" cried the voice of john reed; then he paused: he
found the room ap
 
 ___________________________
 
parently empty.

"where the dickens is she!" he continued.  "lizzy!  georgy! (calling to
his sisters) joan is not here: tell mama she is run out into the rain--bad
animal!"

"it is well i drew the curtain," thought i; and i wished fervently he
might not discover my hiding-place: nor would john reed have found it out
himself; he was not quick either of vision or conception; but eliza just
put her head in at the door, and said at once--

"she is in the window-seat, to be sure, jack."

and i came out immediately, for i trembled at the idea of being dragged
forth by the said jack.

"what do you want?" i asked, with awkward diffidence.

"say, 'what do you want, master reed?'" was the answer.  "i want you to
come here;" and seating himself in an arm-chair, he intimated by a
gesture that i was t
 
 ___________________________
 
o approach and stand before him.

john reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years older than i,
for i was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingy and
unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs and
large extremities.  he gorged himself habitually at table, which made him
bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheeks.  he ought
now to have been at school; but his mama had taken him home for a month
or two, "on account of his delicate health."  mr. miles, the master,
affirmed 
 
 ___________________________
 
for his mother and sisters, and an antipathy
to me.  he bullied and punished me; not two or three times in the week,
nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve i had feared
him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when he came near.
there were moments when i was bewildered by the terror he inspired,
because i had no appeal whatever against either his menaces or his
inflictions; the servants did not like to offend their young master by
taking my part against him, and mrs. reed was blind and deaf on the
subject: she never saw him strike or heard him abuse me, though he did
both now and then in her very presence, more frequently, however, behind
her back.

habitually obedient to john, i came up to his chair: he spent some three
minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as he could without
damaging the roots: i knew he would soon strike, and while dreading the
blow, i mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would
presently deal it.  i wonder if he 
 
 ___________________________
 
read that notion in my face; for, all
at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly and strongly.  i tottered,
and on regaining my equilibrium retired back a step or two from his
chair.

"that is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since," said he,
"and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for the look
you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!"

accustomed to john reed's abuse, i never had an idea of replying to it;
my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the
insult.

"what were you doing behind the curtain?" he asked.

"i was reading."

"show the book."

i returned to the window and fetched it thence.

"you have no business to take our books; you are a dependent, mama says;
you have no money; your father left you none; you ought to beg, and not
to live here with gentlemen's children like us, and eat the same meals we
do, and wear clot
 
 ___________________________
 
eadlong at me: i felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: he had
closed with a desperate thing.  i really saw in him a tyrant, a murderer.
i felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down my neck, and was
sensible of somewhat pungent suffering: these sensations for the time
predominated over fear, and i received him in frantic sort.  i don't very
well know what i did with my hands, but he called me "rat!  rat!" and
bellowed out aloud.  aid was near him: eliza and georgiana had run for
mrs. reed, who was gone upstairs: she now came upon the scene, followed
by bessie and her maid abbot.  we were parted: i heard the words--

"dear! dear!  what a fury to fly at master john!"

"did ever anybody see such a picture of passion!"

then mrs. reed subjoined--

"take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there."  four hands were
immediately laid upon me, and i was borne upstairs.




chapter ii


i resisted all the way: a new thing for me, and a circumstance which
greatly strengthened the bad
 
 ___________________________
 
 felt resolved, in my desperation, to go all lengths.

"hold her arms, miss abbot: she's like a mad cat."

"for shame! for shame!" cried the lady's-maid.  "what shocking conduct,
miss eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress's son!  your
young master."

"master!  how is he my master?  am i a servant?"

"no; you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep.
there, sit down, and think over your wickedness."

they had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by mrs. reed,
and had thrust me upon a stool: my impulse was to rise from it like a
spring; their two pair of hands arrested me instantly.

"if you don't sit still, you must be tied down," said bessie.  "miss
abbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine directly."

miss abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessary ligature.  this
preparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy it inferred, took a
little of the excitement out of me.

"don't take them off," i cried; "i will not stir."

in guara
 
 ___________________________
 
with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on my face, as
incredulous of my sanity.

"she never did so before," at last said bessie, turning to the abigail.

"but it was always in her," was the reply.  "i've told missis often my
opinion about the child, and missis agreed with me.  she's an underhand
little thing: i never saw a girl of her age with so much cover."

bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said--"you ought to
be aware, miss, that you are under obligations to mrs. reed: she keeps
you: if she were to turn you off, you would have to go to the poorhouse."

i had nothing to say to these words: they were not new to me: my very
first recollections of existence included hints of the same kind.  this
reproach of my dependence had become a vague sing-song in my ear: very
painful and crushing, but only half intelligible.  miss abbot joined in--

"and you ought not to think yourself on an equality with the misses reed
and master reed, because missis kindly allows you to
 
 ___________________________
 
spread with a snowy marseilles
counterpane.  scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned easy-chair
near the head of the bed, also white, with a footstool before it; and
looking, as i thought, like a pale throne.

this room was chill, because it seldom had a fire; it was silent, because
remote from the nursery and kitchen; solemn, because it was known to be
so seldom entered.  the house-maid alone came here on saturdays, to wipe
from the mirrors and the furniture a week's quiet dust: and mrs. reed
herself, at far intervals, visited it to review the contents of a certain
secret drawer in the wardrobe, where were stored divers parchments, her
jewel-casket, and a miniature of her deceased husband; and in those last
words lies the secret of the red-room--the spell which kept it so lonely
in spite of its grandeur.

mr. reed had been dead nine years: it was in this chamber he breathed his
last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin was borne by the
undertaker's men; and, since that day, a sen
 
 ___________________________
 
e of
the tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, bessie's evening stories
represented as coming out of lone, ferny dells in moors, and appearing
before the eyes of belated travellers.  i returned to my stool.

superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet her hour for
complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of the revolted slave
was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; i had to stem a rapid rush
of retrospective thought before i quailed to the dismal present.

all john reed's violent tyrannies, all his sisters' proud indifference,
all his mother's aversion, all the servants' partiality, turned up in my
disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well.  why was i always
suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, for ever condemned?  why
could i never please?  why was it useless to try to win any one's favour?
eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected.  georgiana, who had
a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite, a captious and insolent carriage,
was un
 
 ___________________________
 
ver
eating or drinking more, and letting myself die.

what a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon!  how all my
brain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection!  yet in what
darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought!  i could
not answer the ceaseless inward question--_why_ i thus suffered; now, at
the distance of--i will not say how many years, i see it clearly.

i was a discord in gateshead hall: i was like nobody there; i had nothing
in harmony with mrs. reed or her children, or her chosen vassalage.  if
they did not love me, in fact, as little did i love them.  they were not
bound to regard with affection a thing that could not sympathise with one
amongst them; a heterogeneous thing, opposed to them in temperament, in
capacity, in propensities; a useless thing, incapable of serving their
interest, or adding to their pleasure; a noxious thing, cherishing the
germs of indignation at their treatment, of contempt of their judgment.  i
know that had i b
 
 ___________________________
 
een a sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome,
romping child--though equally dependent and friendless--mrs. reed would
have endured my presence more complacently; her children would have
entertained for me more of the cordiality of fellow-feeling; the servants
would have been less prone to make me the scapegoat of the nursery.

daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past four o'clock, and the
beclouded afternoon was tending to drear twilight.  i heard the rain
still beating continuously on the staircase window, and the wind howling
in the grove behind the hall; i grew by degrees cold as a stone, a
 
 ___________________________
 
nd then
my courage sank.  my habitual mood of humiliation, self-doubt, forlorn
depression, fell damp on the embers of my decaying ire.  all said i was
wicked, and perhaps i might be so; what thought had i been but just
conceiving of starving myself to death?  that certainly was a crime: and
was i fit to die?  or was the vault under the chancel of gateshead church
an inviting bourne?  in such vault i had been told did mr. reed lie
buried; and led by this thought to recall his idea, i dwelt on it with
gathering dread.  i could not remember him; but i knew that he was my own
uncle--my mother's brother--that he had taken me when a parentless infant
to his house; and that in his last moments he had required a promise of
mrs. reed that she would rear and maintain me as one of her own children.
mrs. reed probably considered she had kept this promise; and so she had,
i dare say, as well as her nature would permit her; but h
 
 ___________________________
 
ow could she
really like an interloper not of her race, and unconnected with her,
after her husband's death, by any tie?  it must have been most irksome to
find herself bound by a hard-wrung pledge to stand in the stead of a
parent to a strange child she could not love, and to see an uncongenial
alien permanently intruded on her own family group.

a singular notion dawned upon me.  i doubted not--never doubted--that if
mr. reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly; and now, as i
sat looking at the white bed and overshadowed walls--occasionally also
turning a fascinated eye towards the dimly gleaning mirror--i began to
recall what i had heard of dead men, troubled in their graves by the
violation of their last wishes, revisiting the earth to punish the
perjured and avenge the oppressed; and i thought mr. reed's spirit,
harassed by the wrongs of his sister's child, might quit its
abode--whether in the church v
 
 ___________________________
 
 my cry.

"what for?  are you hurt?  have you seen something?" again demanded
bessie.

"oh!  i saw a light, and i thought a ghost would come."  i had now got
hold of bessie's hand, and she did not snatch it from me.

"she has screamed out on purpose," declared abbot, in some disgust.  "and
what a scream!  if she had been in great pain one would have excused it,
but she only wanted to bring us all here: i know her naughty tricks."

"what is all this?" demanded another voice peremptorily; and mrs. reed
came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustling stormily.
"abbot and bessie, i believe i gave orders that jane eyre should be left
in the red-room till i came to her myself."

"miss jane screamed so loud, ma'am," pleaded bessie.

"let her go," was the only answer.  "loose bessie's hand, child: you
cannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured.  i abhor
artifice, particularly in children; it is my duty to show you that tricks
will not answer: you will now stay here an 
 
 ___________________________
 
hour longer, and it is only on
condition of perfect submission and stillness that i shall liberate you
then."

"o aunt! have pity!  forgive me!  i cannot endure it--let me be punished
some other way!  i shall be killed if--"

"silence!  this violence is all most repulsive:" and so, no doubt, she
felt it.  i was a precocious actress in her eyes; she sincerely looked on
me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, and dangerous
duplicity.

bessie and abbot having retreated, mrs. reed, impatient of my now frantic
anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked me in, without
farther parley.  i heard her sweeping away; and soon after she was gone,
i suppose i had a species of fit: unconsciousness closed the scene.




chapter iii


the next thing i remember is, waking up with a feeling as if i had had a
frightful nightmare, and seeing before me a terrible red glare, crossed
with thick black bars.  i heard voices, too, speaking with a hollow
sound, and as if muffled 
 
 ___________________________
 
nutes more the cloud of bewilderment dissolved: i knew quite
well that i was in my own bed, and that the red glare was the nursery
fire.  it was night: a candle burnt on the table; bessie stood at the bed-
foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair near my
pillow, leaning over me.

i felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protection and
security, when i knew that there was a stranger in the room, an
individual not belonging to gateshead, and not related to mrs. reed.
turning from bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious to me
than that of abbot, for instance, would have been), i scrutinised the
face of the gentleman: i knew him; it was mr. lloyd, an apothecary,
sometimes called in by mrs. reed when the servants were ailing: for
herself and the children she employed a physician.

"well, who am i?" he asked.

i pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: he took it,
smiling and saying, "we shall do very well by-and-by."  then he lai
 
 ___________________________
 
e, and vanished"--"a great
black dog behind him"--"three loud raps on the chamber door"--"a light in
the churchyard just over his grave," etc., etc.

at last both slept: the fire and the candle went out.  for me, the
watches of that long night passed in ghastly wakefulness; strained by
dread: such dread as children only can feel.

no severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of the red-
room; it only gave my nerves a shock of which i feel the reverberation to
this day.  yes, mrs. reed, to you i owe some fearful pangs of mental
suffering, but i ought to forgive you, for you knew not what you did:
while rending my heart-strings, you thought you were only uprooting my
bad propensities.

next day, by noon, i was up and dressed, and sat wrapped in a shawl by
the nursery hearth.  i felt physically weak and broken down: but my worse
ailment was an unutterable wretchedness of mind: a wretchedness which
kept drawing from me silent tears; no sooner had i wiped one salt drop
from my ch
 
 ___________________________
 
eek than another followed.  yet, i thought, i ought to have
been happy, for none of the reeds were there, they were all gone out in
the carriage with their mama.  abbot, too, was sewing in another room,
and bessie, as she moved hither and thither, putting away toys and
arranging drawers, addressed to me every now and then a word of unwonted
kindness.  this state of things should have been to me a paradise of
peace, accustomed as i was to a life of ceaseless reprimand and thankless
fagging; but, in fact, my racked nerves were now in such a state that no
calm could soothe, and no pleasur
 
 ___________________________
 
rse," said
he; "you can go down; i'll give miss jane a lecture till you come back."

bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, because
punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at gateshead hall.

"the fall did not make you ill; what did, then?" pursued mr. lloyd when
bessie was gone.

"i was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark."

i saw mr. lloyd smile and frown at the same time.

"ghost!  what, you are a baby after all!  you are afraid of ghosts?"

"of mr. reed's ghost i am: he died in that room, and was laid out there.
neither bessie nor any one else will go into it at night, if they can
help it; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without a candle,--so cruel
that i think i shall never forget it."

"nonsense!  and is it that makes you so miserable?  are you afraid now in
daylight?"

"no: but night will come again before long: and besides,--i am
unhappy,--very unhappy, for other things."

"what other things?  can you tell me some of them?"

how much 
 
 ___________________________
 
analyse their
feelings; and if the analysis is partially effected in thought, they know
not how to express the result of the process in words.  fearful, however,
of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving my grief by
imparting it, i, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a meagre,
though, as far as it went, true response.

"for one thing, i have no father or mother, brothers or sisters."

"you have a kind aunt and cousins."

again i paused; then bunglingly enounced--

"but john reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the red-room."

mr. lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.

"don't you think gateshead hall a very beautiful house?" asked he.  "are
you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?"

"it is not my house, sir; and abbot says i have less right to be here
than a servant."

"pooh! you can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place?"

"if i had anywhere else to go, i should be glad to leave it; but i can
never get away from ga
 
 ___________________________
 
teshead till i am a woman."

"perhaps you may--who knows?  have you any relations besides mrs. reed?"

"i think not, sir."

"none belonging to your father?"

"i don't know.  i asked aunt reed once, and she said possibly i might
have some poor, low relations called eyre, but she knew nothing about
them."

"if you had such, would you like to go to them?"

i reflected.  poverty looks grim to grown people; still more so to
children: they have not much idea of industrious, working, respectable
poverty; they think of the word only as connected with ragged clothes,
scanty food, fireless grates, rude manners, and debasing vices: poverty
for me was synonymous with degradation.

"no; i should
 
 ___________________________
 
ven if they were kind to you?"

i shook my head: i could not see how poor people had the means of being
kind; and then to learn to speak like them, to adopt their manners, to be
uneducated, to grow up like one of the poor women i saw sometimes nursing
their children or washing their clothes at the cottage doors of the
village of gateshead: no, i was not heroic enough to purchase liberty at
the price of caste.

"but are your relatives so very poor?  are they working people?"

"i cannot tell; aunt reed says if i have any, they must be a beggarly
set: i should not like to go a begging."

"would you like to go to school?"

again i reflected: i scarcely knew what school was: bessie sometimes
spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks, wore
backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel and precise: john
reed hated his school, and abused his master; but john reed's tastes were
no rule for mine, and if bessie's accounts of school-discipline (gathered
from the young ladies
 
 ___________________________
 
.

"well, well! who knows what may happen?" said mr. lloyd, as he got up.
"the child ought to have change of air and scene," he added, speaking to
himself; "nerves not in a good state."

bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heard rolling up
the gravel-walk.

"is that your mistress, nurse?" asked mr. lloyd.  "i should like to speak
to her before i go."

bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the way out.
in the interview which followed between him and mrs. reed, i presume,
from after-occurrences, that the apothecary ventured to recommend my
being sent to school; and the recommendation was no doubt readily enough
adopted; for as abbot said, in discussing the subject with bessie when
both sat sewing in the nursery one night, after i was in bed, and, as
they thought, asleep, "missis was, she dared say, glad enough to get rid
of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child, who always looked as if she
were watching everybody, and scheming plots underhand."  abb
 
 ___________________________
 
ot, i think,
gave me credit for being a sort of infantine guy fawkes.

on that same occasion i learned, for the first time, from miss abbot's
communications to bessie, that my father had been a poor clergyman; that
my mother had married him against the wishes of her friends, who
considered the match beneath her; that my grandfather reed was so
irritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without a shilling; that
after my mother and father had been married a year, the latter caught the
typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a large manufacturing town
where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was then prevalent:
that my mother took the infection from him, and both died within a month
of each other.

bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, "poor miss jane
is to be pitied, too, abbot."

"yes," r
 
 ___________________________
 
lsh
rabbit for supper."

"so could i--with a roast onion.  come, we'll go down."  they went.




chapter iv


from my discourse with mr. lloyd, and from the above reported conference
between bessie and abbot, i gathered enough of hope to suffice as a
motive for wishing to get well: a change seemed near,--i desired and
waited it in silence.  it tarried, however: days and weeks passed: i had
regained my normal state of health, but no new allusion was made to the
subject over which i brooded.  mrs. reed surveyed me at times with a
severe eye, but seldom addressed me: since my illness, she had drawn a
more marked line of separation than ever between me and her own children;
appointing me a small closet to sleep in by myself, condemning me to take
my meals alone, and pass all my time in the nursery, while my cousins
were constantly in the drawing-room.  not a hint, however, did she drop
about sending me to school: still i felt an instinctive certainty that
she would not long endure me under the 
 
 ___________________________
 
t he
was already with his mama.  i heard him in a blubbering tone commence the
tale of how "that nasty jane eyre" had flown at him like a mad cat: he
was stopped rather harshly--

"don't talk to me about her, john: i told you not to go near her; she is
not worthy of notice; i do not choose that either you or your sisters
should associate with her."

here, leaning over the banister, i cried out suddenly, and without at all
deliberating on my words--

"they are not fit to associate with me."

mrs. reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this strange and
audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the stair, swept me like a
whirlwind into the nursery, and crushing me down on the edge of my crib,
dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place, or utter one
syllable during the remainder of the day.

"what would uncle reed say to you, if he were alive?" was my scarcely
voluntary demand.  i say scarcely voluntary, for it seemed as if my
tongue pronounced words without my will consenting
 
 ___________________________
 
 to their utterance:
something spoke out of me over which i had no control.

"what?" said mrs. reed under her breath: her usually cold composed grey
eye became troubled with a look like fear; she took her hand from my arm,
and gazed at me as if she really did not know whether i were child or
fiend.  i was now in for it.

"my uncle reed is in heaven, and can see all you do and think; and so can
papa and mama: they know how you shut me up all day long, and how you
wish me dead."

mrs. reed soon rallied her spirits: she shook me most soundly, she boxed
both my ears, and then left me without a word.  bessie supplied the
hiatus by a homily of an hour's length, in which she proved beyond a
doubt that i was the most wicked and abandoned child ever reared under a
roof.  i half believed her; for i felt indeed only bad feelings surging
in my breast.

november, december, and half of january passed away.  christmas and the
new year had been celebrated at gateshead with the usual festive ch
 
 ___________________________
 
n
hum of conversation as the drawing-room door opened and closed.  when
tired of this occupation, i would retire from the stairhead to the
solitary and silent nursery: there, though somewhat sad, i was not
miserable.  to speak truth, i had not the least wish to go into company,
for in company i was very rarely noticed; and if bessie had but been kind
and companionable, i should have deemed it a treat to spend the evenings
quietly with her, instead of passing them under the formidable eye of
mrs. reed, in a room full of ladies and gentlemen.  but bessie, as soon
as she had dressed her young ladies, used to take herself off to the
lively regions of the kitchen and housekeeper's room, generally bearing
the candle along with her.  i then sat with my doll on my knee till the
fire got low, glancing round occasionally to make sure that nothing worse
than myself haunted the shadowy room; and when the embers sank to a dull
red, i undressed hastily, tugging at knots and strings as i best might,
and s
 
 ___________________________
 
 summoned
to their mama; eliza was putting on her bonnet and warm garden-coat to go
and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she was fond: and not less
so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper and hoarding up the money she
thus obtained.  she had a turn for traffic, and a marked propensity for
saving; shown not only in the vending of eggs and chickens, but also in
driving hard bargains with the gardener about flower-roots, seeds, and
slips of plants; that functionary having orders from mrs. reed to buy of
his young lady all the products of her parterre she wished to sell: and
eliza would have sold the hair off her head if she could have made a
handsome profit thereby.  as to her money, she first secreted it in odd
corners, wrapped in a rag or an old curl-paper; but some of these hoards
having been discovered by the housemaid, eliza, fearful of one day losing
her valued treasure, consented to intrust it to her mother, at a usurious
rate of interest--fifty or sixty per cent.; which inter
 
 ___________________________
 
indow for?"

i was spared the trouble of answering, for bessie seemed in too great a
hurry to listen to explanations; she hauled me to the washstand,
inflicted a merciless, but happily brief scrub on my face and hands with
soap, water, and a coarse towel; disciplined my head with a bristly
brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then hurrying me to the top of the
stairs, bid me go down directly, as i was wanted in the breakfast-room.

i would have asked who wanted me: i would have demanded if mrs. reed was
there; but bessie was already gone, and had closed the nursery-door upon
me.  i slowly descended.  for nearly three months, i had never been
called to mrs. reed's presence; restricted so long to the nursery, the
breakfast, dining, and drawing-rooms were become for me awful regions, on
which it dismayed me to intrude.

i now stood in the empty hall; before me was the breakfast-room door, and
i stopped, intimidated and trembling.  what a miserable little poltroon
had fear, engendered of unjus
 
 ___________________________
 
t punishment, made of me in those days!  i
feared to return to the nursery, and feared to go forward to the parlour;
ten minutes i stood in agitated hesitation; the vehement ringing of the
breakfast-room bell decided me; i _must_ enter.

"who could want me?" i asked inwardly, as with both hands i turned the
stiff door-handle, which, for a second or two, resisted my efforts.  "what
should i see besides aunt reed in the apartment?--a man or a woman?"  the
handle turned, the door unclosed, and passing through and curtseying low,
i looked up at--a black pillar!--such, at least, appeared to me, at first
sight, the straight, narrow, sable-clad shape standing erect on the rug:
the grim face at the top was like a carved mask, placed above the shaft
by way of capital.

mrs. reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she made a signal to
me to approach; i did so, and she introduced me to the stony stranger
w
 
 ___________________________
 
ch?" was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutiny for
some minutes.  presently he addressed me--"your name, little girl?"

"jane eyre, sir."

in uttering these words i looked up: he seemed to me a tall gentleman;
but then i was very little; his features were large, and they and all the
lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.

"well, jane eyre, and are you a good child?"

impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little world held a
contrary opinion: i was silent.  mrs. reed answered for me by an
expressive shake of the head, adding soon, "perhaps the less said on that
subject the better, mr. brocklehurst."

"sorry indeed to hear it! she and i must have some talk;" and bending
from the perpendicular, he installed his person in the arm-chair opposite
mrs. reed's.  "come here," he said.

i stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight before him.
what a face he had, now that it was almost on a level with mine! what a
great nose! and what a mouth! and what 
 
 ___________________________
 
,--a good
little child, whose soul is now in heaven.  it is to be feared the same
could not be said of you were you to be called hence."

not being in a condition to remove his doubt, i only cast my eyes down on
the two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed, wishing myself far
enough away.

"i hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you repent of ever having
been the occasion of discomfort to your excellent benefactress."

"benefactress! benefactress!" said i inwardly: "they all call mrs. reed
my benefactress; if so, a benefactress is a disagreeable thing."

"do you say your prayers night and morning?" continued my interrogator.

"yes, sir."

"do you read your bible?"

"sometimes."

"with pleasure?  are you fond of it?"

"i like revelations, and the book of daniel, and genesis and samuel, and
a little bit of exodus, and some parts of kings and chronicles, and job
and jonah."

"and the psalms?  i hope you like them?"

"no, sir."

"no? oh, shocking!  i have a little boy, younger than y
 
 ___________________________
 
verse of a psalm! angels sing psalms;' says he, 'i wish to be a little
angel here below;' he then gets two nuts in recompense for his infant
piety."

"psalms are not interesting," i remarked.

"that proves you have a wicked heart; and you must pray to god to change
it: to give you a new and clean one: to take away your heart of stone and
give you a heart of flesh."

i was about to propound a question, touching the manner in which that
operation of changing my heart was to be performed, when mrs. reed
interposed, telling me to sit down; she then proceeded to carry on the
conversation herself.

"mr. brocklehurst, i believe i intimated in the letter which i wrote to
you three weeks ago, that this little girl has not quite the character
and disposition i could wish: should you admit her into lowood school, i
should be glad if the superintendent and teachers were requested to keep
a strict eye on her, and, above all, to guard against her worst fault, a
tendency to deceit.  i mention this in your
 
 ___________________________
 
 hearing, jane, that you may
not attempt to impose on mr. brocklehurst."

well might i dread, well might i dislike mrs. reed; for it was her nature
to wound me cruelly; never was i happy in her presence; however carefully
i obeyed, however strenuously i strove to please her, my efforts were
still repulsed and repaid by such sentences as the above.  now, uttered
before a stranger, the accusation cut me to the heart; i dimly perceived
that she was already obliterating hope from the new phase of existence
which she destined me to enter; i felt, though i could not have expressed
the feeling, that she was sowing aversion 
 
 ___________________________
 
  my second daughter,
augusta, went with her mama to visit the school, and on her return she
exclaimed: 'oh, dear papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at lowood
look, with their hair combed behind their ears, and their long pinafores,
and those little holland pockets outside their frocks--they are almost
like poor people's children! and,' said she, 'they looked at my dress and
mama's, as if they had never seen a silk gown before.'"

"this is the state of things i quite approve," returned mrs. reed; "had i
sought all england over, i could scarcely have found a system more
exactly fitting a child like jane eyre.  consistency, my dear mr.
brocklehurst; i advocate consistency in all things."

"consistency, madam, is the first of christian duties; and it has been
observed in every arrangement connected with the establishment of lowood:
plain fare, simple attire, unsophisticated accommodations, hardy and
active habits; such is the order of the day in the house and its
inhabitants."

"quite rig
 
 ___________________________
 
mr. brocklehurst; remember me to mrs. and miss brocklehurst,
and to augusta and theodore, and master broughton brocklehurst."

"i will, madam.  little girl, here is a book entitled the 'child's
guide,' read it with prayer, especially that part containing 'an account
of the awfully sudden death of martha g---, a naughty child addicted to
falsehood and deceit.'"

with these words mr. brocklehurst put into my hand a thin pamphlet sewn
in a cover, and having rung for his carriage, he departed.

mrs. reed and i were left alone: some minutes passed in silence; she was
sewing, i was watching her.  mrs. reed might be at that time some six or
seven and thirty; she was a woman of robust frame, square-shouldered and
strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout, not obese: she had a somewhat
large face, the under jaw being much developed and very solid; her brow
was low, her chin large and prominent, mouth and nose sufficiently
regular; under her light eyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of ruth; her
skin w
 
 ___________________________
 
rds from her arm-chair, i examined her
figure; i perused her features.  in my hand i held the tract containing
the sudden death of the liar, to which narrative my attention had been
pointed as to an appropriate warning.  what had just passed; what mrs.
reed had said concerning me to mr. brocklehurst; the whole tenor of their
conversation, was recent, raw, and stinging in my mind; i had felt every
word as acutely as i had heard it plainly, and a passion of resentment
fomented now within me.

mrs. reed looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, her fingers
at the same time suspended their nimble movements.

"go out of the room; return to the nursery," was her mandate.  my look or
something else must have struck her as offensive, for she spoke with
extreme though suppressed irritation.  i got up, i went to the door; i
came back again; i walked to the window, across the room, then close up
to her.

_speak_ i must: i had been trodden on severely, and _must_ turn: but how?
what strength ha
 
 ___________________________
 
d i to dart retaliation at my antagonist?  i gathered my
energies and launched them in this blunt sentence--

"i am not deceitful: if i were, i should say i loved you; but i declare i
do not love you: i dislike you the worst of anybody in the world except
john reed; and this book about the liar, you may give to your girl,
georgiana, for it is she who tells lies, and not i."

mrs. reed's hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of ice
continued to dwell freezingly on mine.

"what more have you to say?" she asked, rather in the tone in which a
person might address an opponent of adult age than such as is ordinarily
used to a child.

that eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy i had.  shaking from
head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement, i continued--

"i am glad you are no relation of mine: i will never call you aunt again
as long as i live.  i will n
 
 ___________________________
 
ever come to see you when i am grown up; and
if any one asks me how i liked you, and how you treated me, i will say
the very thought of you makes me sick, and that you treated me with
miserable cruelty."

"how dare you affirm that, jane eyre?"

"how dare i, mrs. reed?  how dare i?  because it is the _truth_.  you
think i have no feelings, and that i can do without one bit of love or
kindness; but i cannot live so: and you have no pity.  i shall remember
how you thrust me back--roughly and violently thrust me back--into the
red-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day; though i was in agony;
though i cried out, while suffocating with distress, 'have mercy!  have
mercy, aunt reed!'  and that punishment you made me suffer because your
wicked boy struck me
 
 ___________________________
 
--knocked me down for nothing.  i will tell anybody
who asks me questions, this exact tale.  people think you a good woman,
but you are bad, hard-hearted.  _you_ are deceitful!"

{how dare i, mrs. reed?  how dare i?  because it is the truth: p30.jpg}

ere i had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to exult, with
the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, i ever felt.  it seemed as if
an invisible bond had burst, and that i had struggled out into unhoped-
for liberty.  not without cause was this sentiment: mrs. reed looked
frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she was lifting up her
hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twisting her face as if she
would cry.

"jane, y
 
 ___________________________
 
ou are under a mistake: what is the matter with you?  why do you
tremble so violently?  would you like to drink some water?"

"no, mrs. reed."

"is there anything else you wish for, jane?  i assure you, i desire to be
your friend."

"not you.  you told mr. brocklehurst i had a bad character, a deceitful
disposition; and i'll let everybody at lowood know what you are, and what
you have done."

"jane, you don't understand these things: children must be corrected for
their faults."

"deceit is not my fault!" i cried out in a savage, high voice.

"but you are passionate, jane, that you must allow: and now return to the
nursery--there's 
 
 ___________________________
 
a dear--and lie down a little."

"i am not your dear; i cannot lie down: send me to school soon, mrs.
reed, for i hate to live here."

"i will indeed send her to school soon," murmured mrs. reed _sotto voce_;
and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.

i was left there alone--winner of the field.  it was the hardest battle i
had fought, and the first victory i had gained: i stood awhile on the
rug, where mr. brocklehurst had stood, and i enjoyed my conqueror's
solitude.  first, i smiled to myself and felt elate; but this fierce
pleasure subsided in me as fast as did the accelerated throb of my
pulses.  a child cannot quarrel with its elders, as i had done; cannot
gi
 
 ___________________________
 
ve its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as i had given mine, without
experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse and the chill of reaction.  a
ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, devouring, would have been a
meet emblem of my mind when i accused and menaced mrs. reed: the same
ridge, black and blasted after the flames are dead, would have
represented as meetly my subsequent condition, when half-an-hour's
silence and reflection had shown me the madness of my conduct, and the
dreariness of my hated and hating position.

something of vengeance i had tasted for the first time; as aromatic wine
it seemed, on swallowing, warm and racy: its after-flavour, metallic and
corroding, gave me a sensation as if i had been poisoned.  willingly
would i now have gone and as
 
 ___________________________
 
ked mrs. reed's pardon; but i knew, partly
from experience and partly from instinct, that was the way to make her
repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-exciting every turbulent impulse
of my nature.

i would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fierce speaking;
fain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling than that of sombre
indignation.  i took a book--some arabian tales; i sat down and
endeavoured to read.  i could make no sense of the subject; my own
thoughts swam always between me an
 
 ___________________________
 
t shall i do?--what shall i do?"

all at once i heard a clear voice call, "miss jane! where are you?  come
to lunch!"

it was bessie, i knew well enough; but i did not stir; her light step
came tripping down the path.

"you naughty little thing!" she said.  "why don't you come when you are
called?"

bessie's presence, compared with the thoughts over which i had been
brooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhat cross.
the fact is, after my conflict with and victory over mrs. reed, i was not
disposed to care much for the nursemaid's transitory anger; and i _was_
disposed to bask in her youthful lightness of heart.  i just put my two
arms round her and said, "come, bessie! don't scold."

the action was more frank and fearless than any i was habituated to
indulge in: somehow it pleased her.

"you are a strange child, miss jane," she said, as she looked down at me;
"a little roving, solitary thing: and you are going to school, i
suppose?"

i nodded.

"and won't you be sorry
 
 ___________________________
 
gain, bessie, because i
have got used to you, and i shall soon have another set of people to
dread."

"if you dread them they'll dislike you."

"as you do, bessie?"

"i don't dislike you, miss; i believe i am fonder of you than of all the
others."

"you don't show it."

"you little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way of talking.  what
makes you so venturesome and hardy?"

"why, i shall soon be away from you, and besides"--i was going to say
something about what had passed between me and mrs. reed, but on second
thoughts i considered it better to remain silent on that head.

"and so you're glad to leave me?"

"not at all, bessie; indeed, just now i'm rather sorry."

"just now! and rather!  how coolly my little lady says it!  i dare say
now if i were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn't give it me: you'd say
you'd _rather_ not."

"i'll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down."  bessie stooped; we
mutually embraced, and i followed her into the house quite comforted.
that afternoon lapsed i
 
 ___________________________
 
sie was the only person yet risen; she had lit a fire in
the nursery, where she now proceeded to make my breakfast.  few children
can eat when excited with the thoughts of a journey; nor could i.  bessie,
having pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and
bread she had prepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and
put them into my bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet,
and wrapping herself in a shawl, she and i left the nursery.  as we
passed mrs. reed's bedroom, she said, "will you go in and bid missis good-
bye?"

"no, bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone down to
supper, and said i need not disturb her in the morning, or my cousins
either; and she told me to remember that she had always been my best
friend, and to speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly."

"what did you say, miss?"

"nothing: i covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned from her to
the wall."

"that was wrong, miss jane."

"it was quite rig
 
 ___________________________
 
ge: when we reached it,
we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire: my trunk, which had
been carried down the evening before, stood corded at the door.  it
wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after that hour had struck,
the distant roll of wheels announced the coming coach; i went to the door
and watched its lamps approach rapidly through the gloom.

"is she going by herself?" asked the porter's wife.

"yes."

"and how far is it?"

"fifty miles."

"what a long way!  i wonder mrs. reed is not afraid to trust her so far
alone."

the coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horses and its
top laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urged haste; my
trunk was hoisted up; i was taken from bessie's neck, to which i clung
with kisses.

"be sure and take good care of her," cried she to the guard, as he lifted
me into the inside.

"ay, ay!" was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voice exclaimed "all
right," and on we drove.  thus was i severed from bessi
 
 ___________________________
 
vage tribes hold that doctrine, but christians and
civilised nations disown it."

"how?  i don't understand."

"it is not violence that best overcomes hate--nor vengeance that most
certainly heals injury."

"what then?"

"read the new testament, and observe what christ says, and how he acts;
make his word your rule, and his conduct your example."

"what does he say?"

"love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate
you and despitefully use you."

"then i should love mrs. reed, which i cannot do; i should bless her son
john, which is impossible."

in her turn, helen burns asked me to explain, and i proceeded forthwith
to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments.
bitter and truculent when excited, i spoke as i felt, without reserve or
softening.

helen heard me patiently to the end: i expected she would then make a
remark, but she said nothing.

"well," i asked impatiently, "is not mrs. reed a hard-hearted, bad
woman?"

"she has been unkind t
 
 ___________________________
 
eeted.  a long stride measured the schoolroom, and presently
beside miss temple, who herself had risen, stood the same black column
which had frowned on me so ominously from the hearthrug of gateshead.  i
now glanced sideways at this piece of architecture.  yes, i was right: it
was mr. brocklehurst, buttoned up in a surtout, and looking longer,
narrower, and more rigid than ever.

i had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition; too well i
remembered the perfidious hints given by mrs. reed about my disposition,
&c.; the promise pledged by mr. brocklehurst to apprise miss temple and
the teachers of my vicious nature.  all along i had been dreading the
fulfilment of this promise,--i had been looking out daily for the "coming
man," whose information respecting my past life and conversation was to
brand me as a bad child for ever: now there he was.

he stood at miss temple's side; he was speaking low in her ear: i did not
doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy; and i watched 
 
 ___________________________
 
rd!"

of my own accord i could not have stirred; i was paralysed: but the two
great girls who sit on each side of me, set me on my legs and pushed me
towards the dread judge, and then miss temple gently assisted me to his
very feet, and i caught her whispered counsel--

"don't be afraid, jane, i saw it was an accident; you shall not be
punished."

the kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.

"another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite," thought i; and
an impulse of fury against reed, brocklehurst, and co. bounded in my
pulses at the conviction.  i was no helen burns.

"fetch that stool," said mr. brocklehurst, pointing to a very high one
from which a monitor had just risen: it was brought.

"place the child upon it."

and i was placed there, by whom i don't know: i was in no condition to
note particulars; i was only aware that they had hoisted me up to the
height of mr. brocklehurst's nose, that he was within a yard of me, and
that a spread of shot orange and purple silk p
 
 ___________________________
 
you.  besides this earth, and besides
the race of men, there is an invisible world and a kingdom of spirits:
that world is round us, for it is everywhere; and those spirits watch us,
for they are commissioned to guard us; and if we were dying in pain and
shame, if scorn smote us on all sides, and hatred crushed us, angels see
our tortures, recognise our innocence (if innocent we be: as i know you
are of this charge which mr. brocklehurst has weakly and pompously
repeated at second-hand from mrs. reed; for i read a sincere nature in
your ardent eyes and on your clear front), and god waits only the
separation of spirit from flesh to crown us with a full reward.  why,
then, should we ever sink overwhelmed with distress, when life is so soon
over, and death is so certain an entrance to happiness--to glory?"

i was silent; helen had calmed me; but in the tranquillity she imparted
there was an alloy of inexpressible sadness.  i felt the impression of
woe as she spoke, but i could not tell whence 
 
 ___________________________
 
 asked, looking down at my face.  "have you cried
your grief away?"

"i am afraid i never shall do that."

"why?"

"because i have been wrongly accused; and you, ma'am, and everybody else,
will now think me wicked."

"we shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child.  continue to
act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us."

"shall i, miss temple?"

"you will," said she, passing her arm round me.  "and now tell me who is
the lady whom mr. brocklehurst called your benefactress?"

"mrs. reed, my uncle's wife.  my uncle is dead, and he left me to her
care."

"did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord?"

"no, ma'am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my uncle, as i have often
heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died that she would
always keep me."

"well now, jane, you know, or at least i will tell you, that when a
criminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak in his own defence.
you have been charged with falsehood; defend yourself to me as well as
you ca
 
 ___________________________
 
rrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary.  thus restrained
and simplified, it sounded more credible: i felt as i went on that miss
temple fully believed me.

in the course of the tale i had mentioned mr. lloyd as having come to see
me after the fit: for i never forgot the, to me, frightful episode of the
red-room: in detailing which, my excitement was sure, in some degree, to
break bounds; for nothing could soften in my recollection the spasm of
agony which clutched my heart when mrs. reed spurned my wild supplication
for pardon, and locked me a second time in the dark and haunted chamber.

i had finished: miss temple regarded me a few minutes in silence; she
then said--

"i know something of mr. lloyd; i shall write to him; if his reply agrees
with your statement, you shall be publicly cleared from every imputation;
to me, jane, you are clear now."

she kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where i was well
contented to stand, for i derived a child's pleasure from the
con
 
 ___________________________
 
mount; all
within their boundary of rock and heath seemed prison-ground, exile
limits.  i traced the white road winding round the base of one mountain,
and vanishing in a gorge between two; how i longed to follow it farther!
i recalled the time when i had travelled that very road in a coach; i
remembered descending that hill at twilight; an age seemed to have
elapsed since the day which brought me first to lowood, and i had never
quitted it since.  my vacations had all been spent at school: mrs. reed
had never sent for me to gateshead; neither she nor any of her family had
ever been to visit me.  i had had no communication by letter or message
with the outer world: school-rules, school-duties, school-habits and
notions, and voices, and faces, and phrases, and costumes, and
preferences, and antipathies--such was what i knew of existence.  and now
i felt that it was not enough; i tired of the routine of eight years in
one afternoon.  i desired liberty; for liberty i gasped; for liberty i
utte
 
 ___________________________
 
dent during the
noontide recreation, i told her i had a prospect of getting a new
situation where the salary would be double what i now received (for at
lowood i only got 15 pounds per annum); and requested she would break the
matter for me to mr. brocklehurst, or some of the committee, and
ascertain whether they would permit me to mention them as references.  she
obligingly consented to act as mediatrix in the matter.  the next day she
laid the affair before mr. brocklehurst, who said that mrs. reed must be
written to, as she was my natural guardian.  a note was accordingly
addressed to that lady, who returned for answer, that "i might do as i
pleased: she had long relinquished all interference in my affairs."  this
note went the round of the committee, and at last, after what appeared to
me most tedious delay, formal leave was given me to better my condition
if i could; and an assurance added, that as i had always conducted myself
well, both as teacher and pupil, at lowood, a testimonial 
 
 ___________________________
 
 dare say they've not kept you too well at school: miss
reed is the head and shoulders taller than you are; and miss georgiana
would make two of you in breadth."

"georgiana is handsome, i suppose, bessie?"

"very.  she went up to london last winter with her mama, and there
everybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with her: but his
relations were against the match; and--what do you think?--he and miss
georgiana made it up to run away; but they were found out and stopped.  it
was miss reed that found them out: i believe she was envious; and now she
and her sister lead a cat and dog life together; they are always
quarrelling--"

"well, and what of john reed?"

"oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish.  he went to college,
and he got--plucked, i think they call it: and then his uncles wanted him
to be a barrister, and study the law: but he is such a dissipated young
man, they will never make much of him, i think."

"what does he look like?"

"he is very tall: some people
 
 ___________________________
 
 call him a fine-looking young man; but he
has such thick lips."

"and mrs. reed?"

"missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but i think she's not
quite easy in her mind: mr. john's conduct does not please her--he spends
a deal of money."

"did she send you here, bessie?"

"no, indeed: but i have long wanted to see you, and when i heard that
there had been a letter from you, and that you were going to another part
of the country, i thought i'd just set off, and get a look at you before
you were quite out of my reach."

"i am afraid you are disappointed in me, bessie
 
 ___________________________
 
onfess i was not quite indifferent to its import: at eighteen most
people wish to please, and the conviction that they have not an exterior
likely to second that desire brings anything but gratification.

"i dare say you are clever, though," continued bessie, by way of solace.
"what can you do?  can you play on the piano?"

"a little."

there was one in the room; bessie went and opened it, and then asked me
to sit down and give her a tune: i played a waltz or two, and she was
charmed.

"the miss reeds could not play as well!" said she exultingly.  "i always
said you would surpass them in learning: and can you draw?"

"that is one of my paintings over the chimney-piece."  it was a landscape
in water colours, of which i had made a present to the superintendent, in
acknowledgment of her obliging mediation with the committee on my behalf,
and which she had framed and glazed.

"well, that is beautiful, miss jane!  it is as fine a picture as any miss
reed's drawing-master could paint, let alone t
 
 ___________________________
 
ench?"

"yes, bessie, i can both read it and speak it."

"and you can work on muslin and canvas?"

"i can."

"oh, you are quite a lady, miss jane!  i knew you would be: you will get
on whether your relations notice you or not.  there was something i
wanted to ask you.  have you ever heard anything from your father's
kinsfolk, the eyres?"

"never in my life."

"well, you know missis always said they were poor and quite despicable:
and they may be poor; but i believe they are as much gentry as the reeds
are; for one day, nearly seven years ago, a mr. eyre came to gateshead
and wanted to see you; missis said you were at school fifty miles off; he
seemed so much disappointed, for he could not stay: he was going on a
voyage to a foreign country, and the ship was to sail from london in a
day or two.  he looked quite a gentleman, and i believe he was your
father's brother."

"what foreign country was he going to, bessie?"

"an island thousands of miles off, where they make wine--the butler did
tel
 
 ___________________________
 
m the plainness of the servant and
carriage, mrs. fairfax is not a very dashing person: so much the better;
i never lived amongst fine people but once, and i was very miserable with
them.  i wonder if she lives alone except this little girl; if so, and if
she is in any degree amiable, i shall surely be able to get on with her;
i will do my best; it is a pity that doing one's best does not always
answer.  at lowood, indeed, i took that resolution, kept it, and
succeeded in pleasing; but with mrs. reed, i remember my best was always
spurned with scorn.  i pray god mrs. fairfax may not turn out a second
mrs. reed; but if she does, i am not bound to stay with her! let the
worst come to the worst, i can advertise again.  how far are we on our
road now, i wonder?"

i let down the window and looked out; millcote was behind us; judging by
the number of its lights, it seemed a place of considerable magnitude,
much larger than lowton.  we were now, as far as i could see, on a sort
of common; but ther
 
 ___________________________
 
her age: and so she was, no doubt, physically speaking; but then
there was an expression of almost insupportable haughtiness in her
bearing and countenance.  she had roman features and a double chin,
disappearing into a throat like a pillar: these features appeared to me
not only inflated and darkened, but even furrowed with pride; and the
chin was sustained by the same principle, in a position of almost
preternatural erectness.  she had, likewise, a fierce and a hard eye: it
reminded me of mrs. reed's; she mouthed her words in speaking; her voice
was deep, its inflections very pompous, very dogmatical,--very
intolerable, in short.  a crimson velvet robe, and a shawl turban of some
gold-wrought indian fabric, invested her (i suppose she thought) with a
truly imperial dignity.

blanche and mary were of equal stature,--straight and tall as poplars.
mary was too slim for her height, but blanche was moulded like a dian.  i
regarded her, of course, with special interest.  first, i wished to see

 
 ___________________________
 
at moonlight night when i heard the cry; and it was on
the afternoon of the day following i was summoned downstairs by a message
that some one wanted me in mrs. fairfax's room.  on repairing thither, i
found a man waiting for me, having the appearance of a gentleman's
servant: he was dressed in deep mourning, and the hat he held in his hand
was surrounded with a crape band.

"i daresay you hardly remember me, miss," he said, rising as i entered;
"but my name is leaven: i lived coachman with mrs. reed when you were at
gateshead, eight or nine years since, and i live there still."

"oh, robert! how do you do?  i remember you very well: you used to give
me a ride sometimes on miss georgiana's bay pony.  and how is bessie?  you
are married to bessie?"

"yes, miss: my wife is very hearty, thank you; she brought me another
little one about two months since--we have three now--and both mother and
child are thriving."

"and are the family well at the house, robert?"

"i am sorry i can't give you be
 
 ___________________________
 
 suddenly: it brought on a stroke.  she
was three days without speaking; but last tuesday she seemed rather
better: she appeared as if she wanted to say something, and kept making
signs to my wife and mumbling.  it was only yesterday morning, however,
that bessie understood she was pronouncing your name; and at last she
made out the words, 'bring jane--fetch jane eyre: i want to speak to
her.'  bessie is not sure whether she is in her right mind, or means
anything by the words; but she told miss reed and miss georgiana, and
advised them to send for you.  the young ladies put it off at first; but
their mother grew so restless, and said, 'jane, jane,' so many times,
that at last they consented.  i left gateshead yesterday: and if you can
get ready, miss, i should like to take you back with me early to-morrow
morning."

"yes, robert, i shall be ready: it seems to me that i ought to go."

"i think so too, miss.  bessie said she was sure you would not refuse:
but i suppose you will have to ask l
 
 ___________________________
 
nd equivocal demonstrations--threw down his
cue and followed me from the room.

"well, jane?" he said, as he rested his back against the schoolroom door,
which he had shut.

"if you please, sir, i want leave of absence for a week or two."

"what to do?--where to go?"

"to see a sick lady who has sent for me."

"what sick lady?--where does she live?"

"at gateshead; in ---shire."

"-shire?  that is a hundred miles off!  who may she be that sends for
people to see her that distance?"

"her name is reed, sir--mrs. reed."

"reed of gateshead?  there was a reed of gateshead, a magistrate."

"it is his widow, sir."

"and what have you to do with her?  how do you know her?"

"mr. reed was my uncle--my mother's brother."

"the deuce he was!  you never told me that before: you always said you
had no relations."

"none that would own me, sir.  mr. reed is dead, and his wife cast me
off."

"why?"

"because i was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked me."

"but reed left children?--you must have cousi
 
 ___________________________
 
ns?  sir george lynn was
talking of a reed of gateshead yesterday, who, he said, was one of the
veriest rascals on town; and ingram was mentioning a georgiana reed of
the same place, who was much admired for her beauty a season or two ago
in london."

"john reed is dead, too, sir: he ruined himself and half-ruined his
family, and is supposed to have committed suicide.  the news so shocked
his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack."

"and what good can you do her?  nonsense, jane!  i would never think of
running a hundred miles to see an old lady who will, perhaps, be dead
before you reach her: besides, you say she cast you off."

"yes, sir, but that is long ago; and when her circumstances were very
different: i could not be easy to neglect her
 
 ___________________________
 
ll
perceive the necessity of it."

"to get her out of my bride's way, who might otherwise walk over her
rather too emphatically?  there's sense in the suggestion; not a doubt of
it.  adele, as you say, must go to school; and you, of course, must march
straight to--the devil?"

"i hope not, sir; but i must seek another situation somewhere."

"in course!" he exclaimed, with a twang of voice and a distortion of
features equally fantastic and ludicrous.  he looked at me some minutes.

"and old madam reed, or the misses, her daughters, will be solicited by
you to seek a place, i suppose?"

"no, sir; i am not on such terms with my relatives as would justify me in
asking favours of them--but i shall advertise."

"you shall walk up the pyramids of egypt!" he growled.  "at your peril
you advertise!  i wish i had only offered you a sovereign instead of ten
pounds.  give me back nine pounds, jane; i've a use for it."

"and so have i, sir," i returned, putting my hands and my purse behind
me.  "i could
 
 ___________________________
 
ed in there before going up to the hall.  it was
very clean and neat: the ornamental windows were hung with little white
curtains; the floor was spotless; the grate and fire-irons were burnished
bright, and the fire burnt clear.  bessie sat on the hearth, nursing her
last-born, and robert and his sister played quietly in a corner.

"bless you!--i knew you would come!" exclaimed mrs. leaven, as i entered.

"yes, bessie," said i, after i had kissed her; "and i trust i am not too
late.  how is mrs. reed?--alive still, i hope."

"yes, she is alive; and more sensible and collected than she was.  the
doctor says she may linger a week or two yet; but he hardly thinks she
will finally recover."

"has she mentioned me lately?"

"she was talking of you only this morning, and wishing you would come,
but she is sleeping now, or was ten minutes ago, when i was up at the
house.  she generally lies in a kind of lethargy all the afternoon, and
wakes up about six or seven.  will you rest yourself here an ho
 
 ___________________________
 
 how easy i felt under the total neglect of the one and the semi-
sarcastic attentions of the other--eliza did not mortify, nor georgiana
ruffle me.  the fact was, i had other things to think about; within the
last few months feelings had been stirred in me so much more potent than
any they could raise--pains and pleasures so much more acute and
exquisite had been excited than any it was in their power to inflict or
bestow--that their airs gave me no concern either for good or bad.

"how is mrs. reed?" i asked soon, looking calmly at georgiana, who
thought fit to bridle at the direct address, as if it were an unexpected
liberty.

"mrs. reed?  ah! mama, you mean; she is extremely poorly: i doubt if you
can see her to-night."

"if," said i, "you would just step upstairs and tell her i am come, i
should be much obliged to you."

georgiana almost started, and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide.  "i
know she had a particular wish to see me," i added, "and i would not
defer attending to her d
 
 ___________________________
 
esire longer than is absolutely necessary."

"mama dislikes being disturbed in an evening," remarked eliza.  i soon
rose, quietly took off my bonnet and gloves, uninvited, and said i would
just step out to bessie--who was, i dared say, in the kitchen--and ask
her to ascertain whether mrs. reed was disposed to receive me or not to-
night.  i went, and having found bessie and despatched her on my errand,
i proceeded to take further measures.  it had heretofore been my habit
always to shrink from arrogance: received as i had been to-day, i should,
a year ago, have resolved to quit gateshead the very next morning; now,
it was disclosed to me all at once that that would be a foolish plan.  i
had taken a journey of a hundred miles to see my aunt, and i must stay
with her till she was bette
 
 ___________________________
 
th amber hangings as of old; there the toilet-table, the armchair,
and the footstool, at which i had a hundred times been sentenced to
kneel, to ask pardon for offences by me uncommitted.  i looked into a
certain corner near, half-expecting to see the slim outline of a once
dreaded switch which used to lurk there, waiting to leap out imp-like and
lace my quivering palm or shrinking neck.  i approached the bed; i opened
the curtains and leant over the high-piled pillows.

well did i remember mrs. reed's face, and i eagerly sought the familiar
image.  it is a happy thing that time quells the longings of vengeance
and hushes the promptings of rage and aversion.  i had left this woman in
bitterness and hate, and i came back to her now with no other emotion
than a sort of ruth for her great sufferings, and a strong yearning to
forget and forgive all injuries--to be reconciled and clasp hands in
amity.

the well-known face was there: stern, relentless as ever--there was that
peculiar eye which no
 
 ___________________________
 
thing could melt, and the somewhat raised,
imperious, despotic eyebrow.  how often had it lowered on me menace and
hate! and how the recollection of childhood's terrors and sorrows revived
as i traced its harsh line now!  and yet i stooped down and kissed her:
she looked at me.

"is this jane eyre?" she said.

"yes, aunt reed.  how are you, dear aunt?"

i had once vowed that i would never call her aunt again: i thought it no
sin to forget and break that vow now.  my fingers had fastened on her
hand which lay outside the sheet: had she pressed mine kindly, i should
at that moment have experienced true pleasure.  but unimpressionable
natures are not so soon softened, nor are natural antipathies so readily
eradicated.  mrs. reed took her hand away, and, turning her face rather
from me, she remarked that the night was w
 
 ___________________________
 
used me,
daily and hourly, with her incomprehensible disposition, and her sudden
starts of temper, and her continual, unnatural watchings of one's
movements!  i declare she talked to me once like something mad, or like a
fiend--no child ever spoke or looked as she did; i was glad to get her
away from the house.  what did they do with her at lowood?  the fever
broke out there, and many of the pupils died.  she, however, did not die:
but i said she did--i wish she had died!"

"a strange wish, mrs. reed; why do you hate her so?"

"i had a dislike to her mother always; for she was my husband's only
sister, and a great favourite with him: he opposed the family's disowning
her when she made her low marriage; and when news came of her death, he
wept like a simpleton.  he would send for the baby; though i entreated
him rather to put it out to nurse and pay for its maintenance.  i hated
it the first time i set my eyes on it--a sickly, whining, pining thing!
it would wail in its cradle all night long
 
 ___________________________
 
--not screaming heartily like
any other child, but whimpering and moaning.  reed pitied it; and he used
to nurse it and notice it as if it had been his own: more, indeed, than
he ever noticed his own at that age.  he would try to make my children
friendly to the little beggar: the darlings could not bear it, and he was
angry with them when they showed their dislike.  in his last illness, he
had it brought continually to his bedside; and but an hour before he
died, he bound me by vow to keep the creature.  i would as soon have been
charged with a pauper brat out of a workhou
 
 ___________________________
 
 two-thirds of my income
goes in paying the interest of mortgages.  john gambles dreadfully, and
always loses--poor boy!  he is beset by sharpers: john is sunk and
degraded--his look is frightful--i feel ashamed for him when i see him."

she was getting much excited.  "i think i had better leave her now," said
i to bessie, who stood on the other side of the bed.

"perhaps you had, miss: but she often talks in this way towards night--in
the morning she is calmer."

i rose.  "stop!" exclaimed mrs. reed, "there is another thing i wished to
say.  he threatens me--he continually threatens me with his own death, or
mine: and i dream sometimes that i see him laid out with a great wound in
his throat, or with a swollen and blackened face.  i am come to a strange
pass: i have heavy troubles.  what is to be done?  how is the money to be
had?"

bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative draught: she
succeeded with difficulty.  soon after, mrs. reed grew more composed, and
sank into a do
 
 ___________________________
 
mined not to seem at a loss for occupation or
amusement: i had brought my drawing materials with me, and they served me
for both.

provided with a case of pencils, and some sheets of paper, i used to take
a seat apart from them, near the window, and busy myself in sketching
fancy vignettes, representing any scene that happened momentarily to
shape itself in the ever-shifting kaleidoscope of imagination: a glimpse
of sea between two rocks; the rising moon, and a ship crossing its disk;
a group of reeds and water-flags, and a naiad's head, crowned with lotus-
flowers, rising out of them; an elf sitting in a hedge-sparrow's nest,
under a wreath of hawthorn-bloom.

one morning i fell to sketching a face: what sort of a face it was to be,
i did not care or know.  i took a soft black pencil, gave it a broad
point, and worked away.  soon i had traced on the paper a broad and
prominent forehead and a square lower outline of visage: that contour
gave me pleasure; my fingers proceeded actively to fil
 
 ___________________________
 
n at length released?"

in pondering the great mystery, i thought of helen burns, recalled her
dying words--her faith--her doctrine of the equality of disembodied
souls.  i was still listening in thought to her well-remembered
tones--still picturing her pale and spiritual aspect, her wasted face and
sublime gaze, as she lay on her placid deathbed, and whispered her
longing to be restored to her divine father's bosom--when a feeble voice
murmured from the couch behind: "who is that?"

i knew mrs. reed had not spoken for days: was she reviving?  i went up to
her.

"it is i, aunt reed."

"who--i?" was her answer.  "who are you?" looking at me with surprise and
a sort of alarm, but still not wildly.  "you are quite a stranger to
me--where is bessie?"

"she is at the lodge, aunt."

"aunt," she repeated.  "who calls me aunt?  you are not one of the
gibsons; and yet i know you--that face, and the eyes and forehead, are
quiet familiar to me: you are like--why, you are like jane eyre!"

i said nothi
 
 ___________________________
 
 you
declared you abhorred me the worst of anybody in the world; the
unchildlike look and voice with which you affirmed that the very thought
of me made you sick, and asserted that i had treated you with miserable
cruelty.  i could not forget my own sensations when you thus started up
and poured out the venom of your mind: i felt fear as if an animal that i
had struck or pushed had looked up at me with human eyes and cursed me in
a man's voice.--bring me some water!  oh, make haste!"

"dear mrs. reed," said i, as i offered her the draught she required,
"think no more of all this, let it pass away from your mind.  forgive me
for my passionate language: i was a child then; eight, nine years have
passed since that day."

she heeded nothing of what i said; but when she had tasted the water and
drawn breath, she went on thus--

"i tell you i could not forget it; and i took my revenge: for you to be
adopted by your uncle, and placed in a state of ease and comfort, was
what i could not endure.  i 
 
 ___________________________
 
 followed.  i yet lingered half-an-hour
longer, hoping to see some sign of amity: but she gave none.  she was
fast relapsing into stupor; nor did her mind again rally: at twelve
o'clock that night she died.  i was not present to close her eyes, nor
were either of her daughters.  they came to tell us the next morning that
all was over.  she was by that time laid out.  eliza and i went to look
at her: georgiana, who had burst out into loud weeping, said she dared
not go.  there was stretched sarah reed's once robust and active frame,
rigid and still: her eye of flint was covered with its cold lid; her brow
and strong traits wore yet the impress of her inexorable soul.  a strange
and solemn object was that corpse to me.  i gazed on it with gloom and
pain: nothing soft, nothing sweet, nothing pitying, or hopeful, or
subduing did it inspire; only a grating anguish for _her_ woes--not _my_
loss--and a sombre tearless dismay at the fearfulness of death in such a
form.

eliza surveyed her parent ca
 
 ___________________________
 
 later, what it was to
come back from church to lowood, to long for a plenteous meal and a good
fire, and to be unable to get either.  neither of these returnings was
very pleasant or desirable: no magnet drew me to a given point,
increasing in its strength of attraction the nearer i came.  the return
to thornfield was yet to be tried.

my journey seemed tedious--very tedious: fifty miles one day, a night
spent at an inn; fifty miles the next day.  during the first twelve hours
i thought of mrs. reed in her last moments; i saw her disfigured and
discoloured face, and heard her strangely altered voice.  i mused on the
funeral day, the coffin, the hearse, the black train of tenants and
servants--few was the number of relatives--the gaping vault, the silent
church, the solemn service.  then i thought of eliza and georgiana; i
beheld one the cynosure of a ball-room, the other the inmate of a convent
cell; and i dwelt on and analysed their separate peculiarities of person
and character.  the eve
 
 ___________________________
 
 black satin and
pearl-grey silk.  "it might pass for the present," he said; "but he would
yet see me glittering like a parterre."

glad was i to get him out of the silk warehouse, and then out of a
jewellers shop: the more he bought me, the more my cheek burned with a
sense of annoyance and degradation.  as we re-entered the carriage, and i
sat back feverish and fagged, i remembered what, in the hurry of events,
dark and bright, i had wholly forgotten--the letter of my uncle, john
eyre, to mrs. reed: his intention to adopt me and make me his legatee.
"it would, indeed, be a relief," i thought, "if i had ever so small an
independency; i never can bear being dressed like a doll by mr.
rochester, or sitting like a second danae with the golden shower falling
daily round me.  i will write to madeira the moment i get home, and tell
my uncle john i am going to be married, and to whom: if i had but a
prospect of one day bringing mr. rochester an accession of fortune, i
could better endure to be ke
 
 ___________________________
 
osed to the draught and glow
of a furnace: mentally, i still possessed my soul, and with it the
certainty of ultimate safety.  the soul, fortunately, has an
interpreter--often an unconscious, but still a truthful interpreter--in
the eye.  my eye rose to his; and while i looked in his fierce face i
gave an involuntary sigh; his gripe was painful, and my over-taxed
strength almost exhausted.

"never," said he, as he ground his teeth, "never was anything at once so
frail and so indomitable.  a mere reed she feels in my hand!"  (and he
shook me with the force of his hold.)  "i could bend her with my finger
and thumb: and what good would it do if i bent, if i uptore, if i crushed
her?  consider that eye: consider the resolute, wild, free thing looking
out of it, defying me, with more than courage--with a stern triumph.
whatever i do with its cage, i cannot get at it--the savage, beautiful
creature!  if i tear, if i rend the slight prison, my outrage will only
let the captive loose.  conqueror i 
 
 ___________________________
 
etly side by side under one slab.
(i have seen their grave; it formed part of the pavement of a huge
churchyard surrounding the grim, soot-black old cathedral of an overgrown
manufacturing town in ---shire.)  they left a daughter, which, at its
very birth, charity received in her lap--cold as that of the snow-drift i
almost stuck fast in to-night.  charity carried the friendless thing to
the house of its rich maternal relations; it was reared by an aunt-in-
law, called (i come to names now) mrs. reed of gateshead.  you start--did
you hear a noise?  i daresay it is only a rat scrambling along the
rafters of the adjoining schoolroom: it was a barn before i had it
repaired and altered, and barns are generally haunted by rats.--to
proceed.  mrs. reed kept the orphan ten years: whether it was happy or
not with her, i cannot say, never having been told; but at the end of
that time she transferred it to a place you know--being no other than
lowood school, where you so long resided yourself.  it se
 
 ___________________________
 
olid probability.  circumstances knit
themselves, fitted themselves, shot into order: the chain that had been
lying hitherto a formless lump of links was drawn out straight,--every
ring was perfect, the connection complete.  i knew, by instinct, how the
matter stood, before st. john had said another word; but i cannot expect
the reader to have the same intuitive perception, so i must repeat his
explanation.

"my mother's name was eyre; she had two brothers; one a clergyman, who
married miss jane reed, of gateshead; the other, john eyre, esq.,
merchant, late of funchal, madeira.  mr. briggs, being mr. eyre's
solicitor, wrote to us last august to inform us of our uncle's death, and
to say that he had left his property to his brother the clergyman's
orphan daughter, overlooking us, in consequence of a quarrel, never
forgiven, between him and my father.  he wrote again a few weeks since,
to intimate that the heiress was lost, and asking if we knew anything of
her.  a name casually written on a 
 
 ___________________________
 
ith a sudden sweep.  religion
called--angels beckoned--god commanded--life rolled together like a
scroll--death's gates opening, showed eternity beyond: it seemed, that
for safety and bliss there, all here might be sacrificed in a second.  the
dim room was full of visions.

"could you decide now?" asked the missionary.  the inquiry was put in
gentle tones: he drew me to him as gently.  oh, that gentleness! how far
more potent is it than force!  i could resist st. john's wrath: i grew
pliant as a reed under his kindness.  yet i knew all the time, if i
yielded now, i should not the less be made to repent, some day, of my
former rebellion.  his nature was not changed by one hour of solemn
prayer: it was only elevated.

"i could decide if i were but certain," i answered: "were i but convinced
that it is god's will i should marry you, i could vow to marry you here
and now--come afterwards what would!"

"my prayers are heard!" ejaculated st. john.  he pressed his hand firmer
on my head, as if he 