to sit about it, and
while she got up mrs. reed's lace frills, and crimped her nightcap
borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love and adventure
taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (as at a later period i
discovered) from the pages of pamela, and henry, earl of moreland.

with bewick on my knee, i was then happy: happy at least in my way.  i
feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon.  the breakfast-
room door opened.

"boh!  madam mope!" cried the voice of john reed; then he paused: he
found the room apparently empty.

"where the dickens is she!" he continued.  "lizzy!  georgy! (calling to
his sisters) joan is not here: tell mama she is run out into the rain--bad
animal!"

"it is well i drew the curtain," thought i; and i wished fervently he
might not discover my hiding-place: nor would john reed have found it out
himself; he was not quick either of vision or conception; but eliza just
put her head in at the door, and said at once--

"she is in the window-
 
 ___________________________
 
seat, to be sure, jack."

and i came out immediately, for i trembled at the idea of being dragged
forth by the said jack.

"what do you want?" i asked, with awkward diffidence.

"say, 'what do you want, master reed?'" was the answer.  "i want you to
come here;" and seating himself in an arm-chair, he intimated by a
gesture that i was to approach and stand before him.

john reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years older than i,
for i was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingy and
unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs and
large extremities.  he gorged himself habitually at table, which made him
bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheeks.  he ought
now to have been at school; but his mama had taken him home for a month
or two, "on account of his delicate health."  mr. miles, the master,
affirmed 
 
 ___________________________
 
e
blow, i mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would
presently deal it.  i wonder if he read that notion in my face; for, all
at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly and strongly.  i tottered,
and on regaining my equilibrium retired back a step or two from his
chair.

"that is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since," said he,
"and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for the look
you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!"

accustomed to john reed's abuse, i never had an idea of replying to it;
my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the
insult.

"what were you doing behind the curtain?" he asked.

"i was reading."

"show the book."

i returned to the window and fetched it thence.

"you have no business to take our books; you are a dependent, mama says;
you have no money; your father left you none; you ought to beg, and not
to live here with gentlemen's children like us, and eat the same meals we
do, and wear clot
 
 ___________________________
 
e one of
the tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, bessie's evening stories
represented as coming out of lone, ferny dells in moors, and appearing
before the eyes of belated travellers.  i returned to my stool.

superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet her hour for
complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of the revolted slave
was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; i had to stem a rapid rush
of retrospective thought before i quailed to the dismal present.

all john reed's violent tyrannies, all his sisters' proud indifference,
all his mother's aversion, all the servants' partiality, turned up in my
disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well.  why was i always
suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, for ever condemned?  why
could i never please?  why was it useless to try to win any one's favour?
eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected.  georgiana, who had
a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite, a captious and insolent carriage,
was un
 
 ___________________________
 
not analyse their
feelings; and if the analysis is partially effected in thought, they know
not how to express the result of the process in words.  fearful, however,
of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving my grief by
imparting it, i, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a meagre,
though, as far as it went, true response.

"for one thing, i have no father or mother, brothers or sisters."

"you have a kind aunt and cousins."

again i paused; then bunglingly enounced--

"but john reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the red-room."

mr. lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.

"don't you think gateshead hall a very beautiful house?" asked he.  "are
you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?"

"it is not my house, sir; and abbot says i have less right to be here
than a servant."

"pooh! you can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place?"

"if i had anywhere else to go, i should be glad to leave it; but i can
never get away from ga
 
 ___________________________
 
rty at
the price of caste.

"but are your relatives so very poor?  are they working people?"

"i cannot tell; aunt reed says if i have any, they must be a beggarly
set: i should not like to go a begging."

"would you like to go to school?"

again i reflected: i scarcely knew what school was: bessie sometimes
spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks, wore
backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel and precise: john
reed hated his school, and abused his master; but john reed's tastes were
no rule for mine, and if bessie's accounts of school-discipline (gathered
from the young ladies of a family where she had lived before coming to
gateshead) were somewhat appalling, her details of certain
accomplishments attained by these same young ladies were, i thought,
equally attractive.  she boasted of beautiful paintings of landscapes and
flowers by them executed; of songs they could sing and pieces they could
play, of purses they could net, of french books they could transl
 
 ___________________________
 
h
extreme though suppressed irritation.  i got up, i went to the door; i
came back again; i walked to the window, across the room, then close up
to her.

_speak_ i must: i had been trodden on severely, and _must_ turn: but how?
what strength had i to dart retaliation at my antagonist?  i gathered my
energies and launched them in this blunt sentence--

"i am not deceitful: if i were, i should say i loved you; but i declare i
do not love you: i dislike you the worst of anybody in the world except
john reed; and this book about the liar, you may give to your girl,
georgiana, for it is she who tells lies, and not i."

mrs. reed's hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of ice
continued to dwell freezingly on mine.

"what more have you to say?" she asked, rather in the tone in which a
person might address an opponent of adult age than such as is ordinarily
used to a child.

that eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy i had.  shaking from
head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excite
 
 ___________________________
 
orgiana is handsome, i suppose, bessie?"

"very.  she went up to london last winter with her mama, and there
everybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with her: but his
relations were against the match; and--what do you think?--he and miss
georgiana made it up to run away; but they were found out and stopped.  it
was miss reed that found them out: i believe she was envious; and now she
and her sister lead a cat and dog life together; they are always
quarrelling--"

"well, and what of john reed?"

"oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish.  he went to college,
and he got--plucked, i think they call it: and then his uncles wanted him
to be a barrister, and study the law: but he is such a dissipated young
man, they will never make much of him, i think."

"what does he look like?"

"he is very tall: some people call him a fine-looking young man; but he
has such thick lips."

"and mrs. reed?"

"missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but i think she's not
quite easy in h
 
 ___________________________
 
 me that before: you always said you
had no relations."

"none that would own me, sir.  mr. reed is dead, and his wife cast me
off."

"why?"

"because i was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked me."

"but reed left children?--you must have cousins?  sir george lynn was
talking of a reed of gateshead yesterday, who, he said, was one of the
veriest rascals on town; and ingram was mentioning a georgiana reed of
the same place, who was much admired for her beauty a season or two ago
in london."

"john reed is dead, too, sir: he ruined himself and half-ruined his
family, and is supposed to have committed suicide.  the news so shocked
his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack."

"and what good can you do her?  nonsense, jane!  i would never think of
running a hundred miles to see an old lady who will, perhaps, be dead
before you reach her: besides, you say she cast you off."

"yes, sir, but that is long ago; and when her circumstances were very
different: i could not be easy to neglect her