girl?"

"jane eyre, sir."

in uttering these words i looked up: he seemed to me a tall gentleman;
but then i was very little; his features were large, and they and all the
lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.

"well, jane eyre, and are you a good child?"

impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little world held a
contrary opinion: i was silent.  mrs. reed answered for me by an
expressive shake of the head, adding soon, "perhaps the less said on that
subject the better, mr. brocklehurst."

"sorry indeed to hear it! she and i must have some talk;" and bending
from the perpendicular, he installed his person in the arm-chair opposite
mrs. reed's.  "come here," he said.

i stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight before him.
what a face he had, now that it was almost on a level with mine! what a
great nose! and what a mouth! and what large prominent teeth!

"no sight so sad as that of a naughty child," he began, "especially a
naughty little girl.  do you know where
 
 ___________________________
 
wo nuts in recompense for his infant
piety."

"psalms are not interesting," i remarked.

"that proves you have a wicked heart; and you must pray to god to change
it: to give you a new and clean one: to take away your heart of stone and
give you a heart of flesh."

i was about to propound a question, touching the manner in which that
operation of changing my heart was to be performed, when mrs. reed
interposed, telling me to sit down; she then proceeded to carry on the
conversation herself.

"mr. brocklehurst, i believe i intimated in the letter which i wrote to
you three weeks ago, that this little girl has not quite the character
and disposition i could wish: should you admit her into lowood school, i
should be glad if the superintendent and teachers were requested to keep
a strict eye on her, and, above all, to guard against her worst fault, a
tendency to deceit.  i mention this in your hearing, jane, that you may
not attempt to impose on mr. brocklehurst."

well might i dread, well might i disli
 
 ___________________________
 
resence; however carefully
i obeyed, however strenuously i strove to please her, my efforts were
still repulsed and repaid by such sentences as the above.  now, uttered
before a stranger, the accusation cut me to the heart; i dimly perceived
that she was already obliterating hope from the new phase of existence
which she destined me to enter; i felt, though i could not have expressed
the feeling, that she was sowing aversion and unkindness along my future
path; i saw myself transformed under mr. brocklehurst's eye into an
artful, noxious child, and what could i do to remedy the injury?

"nothing, indeed," thought i, as i struggled to repress a sob, and
hastily wiped away some tears, the impotent evidences of my anguish.

"deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child," said mr. brocklehurst; "it
is akin to falsehood, and all liars will have their portion in the lake
burning with fire and brimstone; she shall, however, be watched, mrs.
reed.  i will speak to miss temple and the teachers."

"i should wis
 
 ___________________________
 
ire, unsophisticated accommodations, hardy and
active habits; such is the order of the day in the house and its
inhabitants."

"quite right, sir.  i may then depend upon this child being received as a
pupil at lowood, and there being trained in conformity to her position
and prospects?"

"madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of chosen plants,
and i trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimable privilege
of her election."

"i will send her, then, as soon as possible, mr. brocklehurst; for, i
assure you, i feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility that was
becoming too irksome."

"no doubt, no doubt, madam; and now i wish you good morning.  i shall
return to brocklehurst hall in the course of a week or two: my good
friend, the archdeacon, will not permit me to leave him sooner.  i shall
send miss temple notice that she is to expect a new girl, so that there
will be no difficulty about receiving her.  good-bye."

"good-bye, mr. brocklehurst; remember me to mrs. and miss
 
 ___________________________
 
 brocklehurst,
and to augusta and theodore, and master broughton brocklehurst."

"i will, madam.  little girl, here is a book entitled the 'child's
guide,' read it with prayer, especially that part containing 'an account
of the awfully sudden death of martha g---, a naughty child addicted to
falsehood and deceit.'"

with these words mr. brocklehurst put into my hand a thin pamphlet sewn
in a cover, and having rung for his carriage, he departed.

mrs. reed and i were left alone: some minutes passed in silence; she was
sewing, i was watching her.  mrs. reed might be at that time some six or
seven and thirty; she was a woman of robust frame, square-shouldered and
strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout, not obese: she had a somewhat
large face, the under jaw being much developed and very solid; her brow
was low, her chin large and prominen
 
 ___________________________
 
ly under her control;
her children only at times defied her authority and laughed it to scorn;
she dressed well, and had a presence and port calculated to set off
handsome attire.

sitting on a low stool, a few yards from her arm-chair, i examined her
figure; i perused her features.  in my hand i held the tract containing
the sudden death of the liar, to which narrative my attention had been
pointed as to an appropriate warning.  what had just passed; what mrs.
reed had said concerning me to mr. brocklehurst; the whole tenor of their
conversation, was recent, raw, and stinging in my mind; i had felt every
word as acutely as i had heard it plainly, and a passion of resentment
fomented now within me.

mrs. reed looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, her fingers
at the same time suspended their nimble movements.

"go out of the room; return to the nursery," was her mandate.  my look or
something else must have struck her as offensive, for she spoke with
extreme though suppressed irritation.
 
 ___________________________
 
to unhoped-
for liberty.  not without cause was this sentiment: mrs. reed looked
frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she was lifting up her
hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twisting her face as if she
would cry.

"jane, you are under a mistake: what is the matter with you?  why do you
tremble so violently?  would you like to drink some water?"

"no, mrs. reed."

"is there anything else you wish for, jane?  i assure you, i desire to be
your friend."

"not you.  you told mr. brocklehurst i had a bad character, a deceitful
disposition; and i'll let everybody at lowood know what you are, and what
you have done."

"jane, you don't understand these things: children must be corrected for
their faults."

"deceit is not my fault!" i cried out in a savage, high voice.

"but you are passionate, jane, that you must allow: and now return to the
nursery--there's a dear--and lie down a little."

"i am not your dear; i cannot lie down: send me to school soon, mrs.
reed, for i hate to live he
 
 ___________________________
 
re."

"i will indeed send her to school soon," murmured mrs. reed _sotto voce_;
and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.

i was left there alone--winner of the field.  it was the hardest battle i
had fought, and the first victory i had gained: i stood awhile on the
rug, where mr. brocklehurst had stood, and i enjoyed my conqueror's
solitude.  first, i smiled to myself and felt elate; but this fierce
pleasure subsided in me as fast as did the accelerated throb of my
pulses.  a child cannot quarrel with its elders, as i had done; cannot
give its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as i had given mine, without
experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse and the chill of reaction.  a
ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, devouring, would have been a
meet emblem of my mind when i accu
 
 ___________________________
 
r of an hour passed before lessons again began, during which the
schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for that space of time it seemed to
be permitted to talk loud and more freely, and they used their privilege.
the whole conversation ran on the breakfast, which one and all abused
roundly.  poor things! it was the sole consolation they had.  miss miller
was now the only teacher in the room: a group of great girls standing
about her spoke with serious and sullen gestures.  i heard the name of
mr. brocklehurst pronounced by some lips; at which miss miller shook her
head disapprovingly; but she made no great effort to check the general
wrath; doubtless she shared in it.

a clock in the schoolroom struck nine; miss miller left her circle, and
standing in the middle of the room, cried--

"silence!  to your seats!"

discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng was resolved
into order, and comparative silence quelled the babel clamour of tongues.
the upper teachers now punctually resumed thei
 
 ___________________________
 
 the present was vague and strange, and of the
future i could form no conjecture.  i looked round the convent-like
garden, and then up at the house--a large building, half of which seemed
grey and old, the other half quite new.  the new part, containing the
schoolroom and dormitory, was lit by mullioned and latticed windows,
which gave it a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore
this inscription:--

"lowood institution.--this portion was rebuilt a.d. ---, by naomi
brocklehurst, of brocklehurst hall, in this county."  "let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
father which is in heaven."--st. matt. v. 16.

i read these words over and over again: i felt that an explanation
belonged to them, and was unable fully to penetrate their import.  i was
still pondering the signification of "institution," and endeavouring to
make out a connection between the first words and the verse of scripture,
when the sound of a cough close behind me made me tur
 
 ___________________________
 
s here have lost either one or both parents, and this
is called an institution for educating orphans."

"do we pay no money?  do they keep us for nothing?"

"we pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each."

"then why do they call us charity-children?"

"because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teaching, and the
deficiency is supplied by subscription."

"who subscribes?"

"different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in this neighbourhood
and in london."

"who was naomi brocklehurst?"

"the lady who built the new part of this house as that tablet records,
and whose son overlooks and directs everything here."

"why?"

"because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment."

"then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears a watch, and
who said we were to have some bread and cheese?"

"to miss temple?  oh, no!  i wish it did: she has to answer to mr.
brocklehurst for all she does.  mr. brocklehurst buys all our food and
all our clothes."

"does he live here?"
 
 ___________________________
 
ment of the part of eutychus by some half-dozen of little
girls, who, overpowered with sleep, would fall down, if not out of the
third loft, yet off the fourth form, and be taken up half dead.  the
remedy was, to thrust them forward into the centre of the schoolroom, and
oblige them to stand there till the sermon was finished.  sometimes their
feet failed them, and they sank together in a heap; they were then
propped up with the monitors' high stools.

i have not yet alluded to the visits of mr. brocklehurst; and indeed that
gentleman was from home during the greater part of the first month after
my arrival; perhaps prolonging his stay with his friend the archdeacon:
his absence was a relief to me.  i need not say that i had my own reasons
for dreading his coming: but come he did at last.

one afternoon (i had then been three weeks at lowood), as i was sitting
with a slate in my hand, puzzling over a sum in long division, my eyes,
raised in abstraction to the window, caught sight of a figure just
p
 
 ___________________________
 
sed almost instinctively that gaunt outline; and when,
two minutes after, all the school, teachers included, rose _en masse_, it
was not necessary for me to look up in order to ascertain whose entrance
they thus greeted.  a long stride measured the schoolroom, and presently
beside miss temple, who herself had risen, stood the same black column
which had frowned on me so ominously from the hearthrug of gateshead.  i
now glanced sideways at this piece of architecture.  yes, i was right: it
was mr. brocklehurst, buttoned up in a surtout, and looking longer,
narrower, and more rigid than ever.

i had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition; too well i
remembered the perfidious hints given by mrs. reed about my disposition,
&c.; the promise pledged by mr. brocklehurst to apprise miss temple and
the teachers of my vicious nature.  all along i had been dreading the
fulfilment of this promise,--i had been looking out daily for the "coming
man," whose information respecting my past life and con
 
 ___________________________
 
sure they had not been well mended from time to time."

he paused.

"your directions shall be attended to, sir," said miss temple.

"and, ma'am," he continued, "the laundress tells me some of the girls
have two clean tuckers in the week: it is too much; the rules limit them
to one."

"i think i can explain that circumstance, sir.  agnes and catherine
johnstone were invited to take tea with some friends at lowton last
thursday, and i gave them leave to put on clean tuckers for the
occasion."

mr. brocklehurst nodded.

"well, for once it may pass; but please not to let the circumstance occur
too often.  and there is another thing which surprised me; i find, in
settling accounts with the housekeeper, that a lunch, consisting of bread
and cheese, has twice been served out to the girls during the past
fortnight.  how is this?  i looked over the regulations, and i find no
such meal as lunch mentioned.  who introduced this innovation? and by
what authority?"

"i must be responsible for the circumstance, s
 
 ___________________________
 

of our blessed lord himself, calling upon his disciples to take up their
cross and follow him; to his warnings that man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of god; to his
divine consolations, "if ye suffer hunger or thirst for my sake, happy
are ye."  oh, madam, when you put bread and cheese, instead of burnt
porridge, into these children's mouths, you may indeed feed their vile
bodies, but you little think how you starve their immortal souls!"

mr. brocklehurst again paused--perhaps overcome by his feelings.  miss
temple had looked down when he first began to speak to her; but she now
gazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale as marble,
appeared to be assuming also the coldness and fixity of that material;
especially her mouth, closed as if it would have required a sculptor's
chisel to open it, and her brow settled gradually into petrified
severity.

meantime, mr. brocklehurst, standing on the hearth with his hands behind
his back, majes
 
 ___________________________
 
ust be cut off."

miss temple seemed to remonstrate.

"madam," he pursued, "i have a master to serve whose kingdom is not of
this world: my mission is to mortify in these girls the lusts of the
flesh; to teach them to clothe themselves with shame-facedness and
sobriety, not with braided hair and costly apparel; and each of the young
persons before us has a string of hair twisted in plaits which vanity
itself might have woven; these, i repeat, must be cut off; think of the
time wasted, of--"

mr. brocklehurst was here interrupted: three other visitors, ladies, now
entered the room.  they ought to have come a little sooner to have heard
his lecture on dress, for they were splendidly attired in velvet, silk,
and furs.  the two younger of the trio (fine girls of sixteen and
seventeen) had grey beaver hats, then in fashion, shaded with ostrich
plumes, and from under the brim of this graceful head-dress fell a
profusion of light tresses, elaborately curled; the elder lady was
enveloped in a costly velvet
 
 ___________________________
 
 shawl, trimmed with ermine, and she wore a
false front of french curls.

these ladies were deferentially received by miss temple, as mrs. and the
misses brocklehurst, and conducted to seats of honour at the top of the
room.  it seems they had come in the carriage with their reverend
relative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the room
upstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper, questioned
the laundress, and lectured the superintendent.  they now proceeded to
address divers remarks and reproofs to miss smith, who was charged with
the care of the linen and the inspection of the dormitories: but i had no
time to listen to what th
 
 ___________________________
 
ey said; other matters called off and enchanted
my attention.

hitherto, while gathering up the discourse of mr. brocklehurst and miss
temple, i had not, at the same time, neglected precautions to secure my
personal safety; which i thought would be effected, if i could only elude
observation.  to this end, i had sat well back on the form, and while
seeming to be busy with my sum, had held my slate in such a manner as to
conceal my face: i might have escaped notice, had not my treacherous
slate somehow happened to slip from my hand, and falling with an
obtrusive crash, directly drawn every eye upon me; i knew it was al
 
 ___________________________
 
l over
now, and, as i stooped to pick up the two fragments of slate, i rallied
my forces for the worst.  it came.

"a careless girl!" said mr. brocklehurst, and immediately after--"it is
the new pupil, i perceive."  and before i could draw breath, "i must not
forget i have a word to say respecting her."  then aloud: how loud it
seemed to me!  "let the child who broke her slate come forward!"

of my own accord i could not have stirred; i was paralysed: but the two
great girls who sit on each side of me, set me on my legs and pushed me
towards the dread judge, and then miss temple gently assisted me to his
very feet, and i caught her whispered couns
 
 ___________________________
 
el--

"don't be afraid, jane, i saw it was an accident; you shall not be
punished."

the kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.

"another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite," thought i; and
an impulse of fury against reed, brocklehurst, and co. bounded in my
pulses at the conviction.  i was no helen burns.

"fetch that stool," said mr. brocklehurst, pointing to a very high one
from which a monitor had just risen: it was brought.

"place the child upon it."

and i was placed there, by whom i don't know: i was in no condition to
note particulars; i was only aware that they had hoisted me up to the
height of mr. brocklehurst's nose, that he was within a yard of me, and
that a spread of shot orange and purple silk pelisses and a cloud of
silvery plumage extended and waved below me.

mr. brocklehurst hemmed.

"ladies," said he, turning to his 
 
 ___________________________
 
ust watch her: keep
your eyes on her movements, weigh well her words, scrutinise her actions,
punish her body to save her soul: if, indeed, such salvation be possible,
for (my tongue falters while i tell it) this girl, this child, the native
of a christian land, worse than many a little heathen who says its
prayers to brahma and kneels before juggernaut--this girl is--a liar!"

now came a pause of ten minutes, during which i, by this time in perfect
possession of my wits, observed all the female brocklehursts produce
their pocket-handkerchiefs and apply them to their optics, while the
elderly lady swayed herself to and fro, and the two younger ones
whispered, "how shocking!"  mr. brocklehurst resumed.

"this i learned from her benefactress; from the pious and charitable lady
who adopted her in her orphan state, reared her as her own daughter, and
whose kindness, whose generosity the unhappy girl repaid by an
ingratitude so bad, so dreadful, that at last her excellent patroness was
obliged to separa
 
 ___________________________
 
te her from her own young ones, fearful lest her vicious
example should contaminate their purity: she has sent her here to be
healed, even as the jews of old sent their diseased to the troubled pool
of bethesda; and, teachers, superintendent, i beg of you not to allow the
waters to stagnate round her."

with this sublime conclusion, mr. brocklehurst adjusted the top button of
his surtout, muttered something to his family, who rose, bowed to miss
temple, and then all the great people sailed in state from the room.
turning at the door, my judge said--

"let her stand half-an-hour longer on that stool, and let no one speak to
her during the remainder of the day."

there was i, then, mounted aloft; i, who had said i could not bear the
shame of standing on my natural feet in the middle of the room, was now
exposed to general view on a pedestal 
 
 ___________________________
 
e remained silent as an indian.  i was the
first who spoke--

"helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believes to be a
liar?"

"everybody, jane?  why, there are only eighty people who have heard you
called so, and the world contains hundreds of millions."

"but what have i to do with millions?  the eighty, i know, despise me."

"jane, you are mistaken: probably not one in the school either despises
or dislikes you: many, i am sure, pity you much."

"how can they pity me after what mr. brocklehurst has said?"

"mr. brocklehurst is not a god: nor is he even a great and admired man:
he is little liked here; he never took steps to make himself liked.  had
he treated you as an especial favourite, you would have found enemies,
declared or covert, all around you; as it is, the greater number would
offer you sympathy if they dared.  teachers and pupils may look coldly on
you for a day or two, but friendly feelings are concealed in their
hearts; and if you persevere in doing well, these feelings 
 
 ___________________________
 
with other resources than your feeble
self, or than creatures feeble as you.  besides this earth, and besides
the race of men, there is an invisible world and a kingdom of spirits:
that world is round us, for it is everywhere; and those spirits watch us,
for they are commissioned to guard us; and if we were dying in pain and
shame, if scorn smote us on all sides, and hatred crushed us, angels see
our tortures, recognise our innocence (if innocent we be: as i know you
are of this charge which mr. brocklehurst has weakly and pompously
repeated at second-hand from mrs. reed; for i read a sincere nature in
your ardent eyes and on your clear front), and god waits only the
separation of spirit from flesh to crown us with a full reward.  why,
then, should we ever sink overwhelmed with distress, when life is so soon
over, and death is so certain an entrance to happiness--to glory?"

i was silent; helen had calmed me; but in the tranquillity she imparted
there was an alloy of inexpressible sadness.  i felt 
 
 ___________________________
 
e called me to her side.

"is it all over?" she asked, looking down at my face.  "have you cried
your grief away?"

"i am afraid i never shall do that."

"why?"

"because i have been wrongly accused; and you, ma'am, and everybody else,
will now think me wicked."

"we shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child.  continue to
act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us."

"shall i, miss temple?"

"you will," said she, passing her arm round me.  "and now tell me who is
the lady whom mr. brocklehurst called your benefactress?"

"mrs. reed, my uncle's wife.  my uncle is dead, and he left me to her
care."

"did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord?"

"no, ma'am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my uncle, as i have often
heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died that she would
always keep me."

"well now, jane, you know, or at least i will tell you, that when a
criminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak in his own defence.
you have been charged with falsehood; 
 
 ___________________________
 
crimson double
daisies; the sweetbriars gave out, morning and evening, their scent of
spice and apples; and these fragrant treasures were all useless for most
of the inmates of lowood, except to furnish now and then a handful of
herbs and blossoms to put in a coffin.

but i, and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully the beauties of the
scene and season; they let us ramble in the wood, like gipsies, from
morning till night; we did what we liked, went where we liked: we lived
better too.  mr. brocklehurst and his family never came near lowood now:
household matters were not scrutinised into; the cross housekeeper was
gone, driven away by the fear of infection; her successor, who had been
matron at the lowton dispensary, unused to the ways of her new abode,
provided with comparative liberality.  besides, there were fewer to feed;
the sick could eat little; our breakfast-basins were better filled; when
there was no time to prepare a regular dinner, which often happened, she
would give us a large p
 
 ___________________________
 
ll its virulence and the
number of its victims had drawn public attention on the school.  inquiry
was made into the origin of the scourge, and by degrees various facts
came out which excited public indignation in a high degree.  the
unhealthy nature of the site; the quantity and quality of the children's
food; the brackish, fetid water used in its preparation; the pupils'
wretched clothing and accommodations--all these things were discovered,
and the discovery produced a result mortifying to mr. brocklehurst, but
beneficial to the institution.

several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the county subscribed
largely for the erection of a more convenient building in a better
situation; new regulations were made; improvements in diet and clothing
introduced; the funds of the school were intrusted to the management of a
committee.  mr. brocklehurst, who, from his wealth and family
connections, could not be overlooked, still retained the post of
treasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his du
 
 ___________________________
 
ket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.

next day new steps were to be taken; my plans could no longer be confined
to my own breast; i must impart them in order to achieve their success.
having sought and obtained an audience of the superintendent during the
noontide recreation, i told her i had a prospect of getting a new
situation where the salary would be double what i now received (for at
lowood i only got 15 pounds per annum); and requested she would break the
matter for me to mr. brocklehurst, or some of the committee, and
ascertain whether they would permit me to mention them as references.  she
obligingly consented to act as mediatrix in the matter.  the next day she
laid the affair before mr. brocklehurst, who said that mrs. reed must be
written to, as she was my natural guardian.  a note was accordingly
addressed to that lady, who returned for answer, that "i might do as i
pleased: she had long relinquished all interference in my affairs."  this
note went the round of the commit
 
 ___________________________
 
rd."

"so he went?"

"yes; he did not stay many minutes in the house: missis was very high
with him; she called him afterwards a 'sneaking tradesman.'  my robert
believes he was a wine-merchant."

"very likely," i returned; "or perhaps clerk or agent to a
wine-merchant."

bessie and i conversed about old times an hour longer, and then she was
obliged to leave me: i saw her again for a few minutes the next morning
at lowton, while i was waiting for the coach.  we parted finally at the
door of the brocklehurst arms there: each went her separate way; she set
off for the brow of lowood fell to meet the conveyance which was to take
her back to gateshead, i mounted the vehicle which was to bear me to new
duties and a new life in the unknown environs of millcote.




chapter xi


a new chapter in a novel is something like a new scene in a play; and
when i draw up the curtain this time, reader, you must fancy you see a
room in the george inn at millcote, with such large figured papering on
the walls as inn
 
 ___________________________
 
you read much?"

"only such books as came in my way; and they have not been numerous or
very learned."

"you have lived the life of a nun: no doubt you are well drilled in
religious forms;--brocklehurst, who i understand directs lowood, is a
parson, is he not?"

"yes, sir."

"and you girls probably worshipped him, as a convent full of religieuses
would worship their director."

"oh, no."

"you are very cool!  no!  what! a novice not worship her priest!  that
sounds blasphemous."

"i disliked mr. brocklehurst; and i was not alone in the feeling.  he is
a harsh man; at once pompous and meddling; he cut off our hair; and for
economy's sake bought us bad needles and thread, with which we could
hardly sew."

"that was very false economy," remarked mrs. fairfax, who now again
caught the drift of the dialogue.

"and was that the head and front of his offending?" demanded mr.
rochester.

"he starved us when he had the sole superintendence of the provision
department, before the committee was appointed; and
 
 ___________________________
 
 of
the earth; but i experienced firmer trust in myself and my own powers,
and less withering dread of oppression.  the gaping wound of my wrongs,
too, was now quite healed; and the flame of resentment extinguished.

"you shall go into the breakfast-room first," said bessie, as she
preceded me through the hall; "the young ladies will be there."

in another moment i was within that apartment.  there was every article
of furniture looking just as it did on the morning i was first introduced
to mr. brocklehurst: the very rug he had stood upon still covered the
hearth.  glancing at the bookcases, i thought i could distinguish the two
volumes of bewick's british birds occupying their old place on the third
shelf, and gulliver's travels and the arabian nights ranged just above.
the inanimate objects were not changed; but the living things had altered
past recognition.

two young ladies appeared before me; one very tall, almost as tall as
miss ingram--very thin too, with a sallow face and severe mien.  th
 
 ___________________________
 
romising my own peace of
mind--my own security, moral and physical, and that of others.

"i am an orphan, the daughter of a clergyman.  my parents died before i
could know them.  i was brought up a dependant; educated in a charitable
institution.  i will even tell you the name of the establishment, where i
passed six years as a pupil, and two as a teacher--lowood orphan asylum,
---shire: you will have heard of it, mr. rivers?--the rev. robert
brocklehurst is the treasurer."

"i have heard of mr. brocklehurst, and i have seen the school."

"i left lowood nearly a year since to become a private governess.  i
obtained a good situation, and was happy.  this place i was obliged to
leave four days before i came here.  the reason of my departure i cannot
and ought not to explain: it would be useless, dangerous, and would sound
incredible.  no blame attached to me: i am as free from culpability as
any one of you three.  miserable i am, and must be for a time; for the
catastrophe which drove me from a house