s.  "read the letter," she said.

it was short, and thus conceived:--

   "madam,--will you have the goodness to send me the address of my
   niece, jane eyre, and to tell me how she is?  it is my intention to
   write shortly and desire her to come to me at madeira.  providence has
   blessed my endeavours to secure a competency; and as i am unmarried
   and childless, i wish to adopt her during my life, and bequeath her at
   my death whatever i may have to leave.--i am, madam, &c., &c.,

   "john eyre, madeira."

it was dated three years back.

"why did i never hear of this?" i asked.

"because i disliked you too fixedly and thoroughly ever to lend a hand in
lifting you to prosperity.  i could not forget your conduct to me,
jane--the fury with which you once turned on me; the tone in which you
declared you abhorred me the worst of anybody in the world; the
unchildlike look and voice with which you affirmed that the very thought
of me made you sick, and asserted that i had treated you with mi
 
 ___________________________
 
de it like a trampled street.  as you hope ever to be
forgiven, mr. rivers, the high crime and misdemeanour of spoiling a
sanded kitchen, tell me what i wish to know."

"well, then," he said, "i yield; if not to your earnestness, to your
perseverance: as stone is worn by continual dropping.  besides, you must
know some day,--as well now as later.  your name is jane eyre?"

"of course: that was all settled before."

"you are not, perhaps, aware that i am your namesake?--that i was
christened st. john eyre rivers?"

"no, indeed!  i remember now seeing the letter e. comprised in your
initials written in books you have at different times lent me; but i
never asked for what name it stood.  but what then?  surely--"

i stopped: i could not trust myself to entertain, much less to express,
the thought that rushed upon me--that embodied itself,--that, in a
second, stood out a strong, solid probability.  circumstances knit
themselves, fitted themselves, shot into order: the chain that had been
lying hith
 
 ___________________________
 
erto a formless lump of links was drawn out straight,--every
ring was perfect, the connection complete.  i knew, by instinct, how the
matter stood, before st. john had said another word; but i cannot expect
the reader to have the same intuitive perception, so i must repeat his
explanation.

"my mother's name was eyre; she had two brothers; one a clergyman, who
married miss jane reed, of gateshead; the other, john eyre, esq.,
merchant, late of funchal, madeira.  mr. briggs, being mr. eyre's
solicitor, wrote to us last august to inform us of our uncle's death, and
to say that he had left his property to his brother the clergyman's
orphan daughter, overlooking us, in consequence of a quarrel, never
forgiven, between him and my father.  he wrote again a few weeks since,
to intimate that the heiress was lost, and asking if we knew anything of
her.  a name casually written on a slip of paper has enabled me to find