, my plan is broken up:--what this
lawyer and his client say is true: i have been married, and the woman to
whom i was married lives!  you say you never heard of a mrs. rochester at
the house up yonder, wood; but i daresay you have many a time inclined
your ear to gossip about the mysterious lunatic kept there under watch
and ward.  some have whispered to you that she is my bastard half-sister:
some, my cast-off mistress.  i now inform you that she is my wife, whom i
married fifteen years ago,--bertha mason by name; sister of this resolute
personage, who is now, with his quivering limbs and white cheeks, showing
you what a stout heart men may bear.  cheer up, dick!--never fear me!--i'd
almost as soon strike a woman as you.  bertha mason is mad; and she came
of a mad family; idiots and maniacs through three generations!  her
mother, the creole, was both a madwoman and a drunkard!--as i found out
after i had wed the daughter: for they were silent on family secrets
before.  bertha, like a dutiful chi
 
 ___________________________
 
oon."

"taste the wine again, jane."

i obeyed him; then he put the glass on the table, stood before me, and
looked at me attentively.  suddenly he turned away, with an inarticulate
exclamation, full of passionate emotion of some kind; he walked fast
through the room and came back; he stooped towards me as if to kiss me;
but i remembered caresses were now forbidden.  i turned my face away and
put his aside.

"what!--how is this?" he exclaimed hastily.  "oh, i know! you won't kiss
the husband of bertha mason?  you consider my arms filled and my embraces
appropriated?"

"at any rate, there is neither room nor claim for me, sir."

"why, jane?  i will spare you the trouble of much talking; i will answer
for you--because i have a wife already, you would reply.--i guess
rightly?"

"yes."

"if you think so, you must have a strange opinion of me; you must regard
me as a plotting profligate--a base and low rake who has been simulating
disinterested love in order to draw you into a snare deliberately laid,

 
 ___________________________
 
ne, i will not trouble you with abominable details: some strong words
shall express what i have to say.  i lived with that woman upstairs four
years, and before that time she had tried me indeed: her character
ripened and developed with frightful rapidity; her vices sprang up fast
and rank: they were so strong, only cruelty could check them, and i would
not use cruelty.  what a pigmy intellect she had, and what giant
propensities!  how fearful were the curses those propensities entailed on
me!  bertha mason, the true daughter of an infamous mother, dragged me
through all the hideous and degrading agonies which must attend a man
bound to a wife at once intemperate and unchaste.

"my brother in the interval was dead, and at the end of the four years my
father died too.  i was rich enough now--yet poor to hideous indigence: a
nature the most gross, impure, depraved i ever saw, was associated with
mine, and called by the law and by society a part of me.  and i could not
rid myself of it by any legal p