jane eyre
an autobiography


by
charlotte bronte

_illustrated by f. h. townsend_

london
service & paton
5 henrietta street
1897

_the illustrations_
_in this volume are the copyright of_
service & paton, _london_

to
w. m. thackeray, esq.,

this work
is respectfully inscribed

by
the author




preface


a preface to the first edition of "jane eyre" being unnecessary, i gave
none: this second edition demands a few words both of acknowledgment and
miscellaneous remark.

my thanks are due in three quarters.

to the public, for the indulgent ear it has inclined to a plain tale with
few pretensions.

to the press, for the fair field its honest suffrage has opened to an
obscure aspirant.

to my publishers, for the aid their tact, their energy, their practical
sense and frank liberality have afforded an unknown and unrecommended
author.

the pr
 
 ___________________________
 
are
certain generous critics who have encouraged me as only large-hearted and
high-minded men know how to encourage a struggling stranger; to them,
_i.e._, to my publishers and the select reviewers, i say cordially,
gentlemen, i thank you from my heart.

having thus acknowledged what i owe those who have aided and approved me,
i turn to another class; a small one, so far as i know, but not,
therefore, to be overlooked.  i mean the timorous or carping few who
doubt the tendency of such books as "jane eyre:" in whose eyes whatever
is unusual is wrong; whose ears detect in each protest against
bigotry--that parent of crime--an insult to piety, that regent of god on
earth.  i would suggest to such doubters certain obvious distinctions; i
would remind them of certain simple truths.

conventionality is not morality.  self-righteousness is not religion.  to
attack the first is not to assail the last.  to pluck the mask from the
face of the pharisee, is not to lift an impious hand to the crown of
thorn
 
 ___________________________
 
c powers.  he
resembles fielding as an eagle does a vulture: fielding could stoop on
carrion, but thackeray never does.  his wit is bright, his humour
attractive, but both bear the same relation to his serious genius that
the mere lambent sheet-lightning playing under the edge of the summer-
cloud does to the electric death-spark hid in its womb.  finally, i have
alluded to mr. thackeray, because to him--if he will accept the tribute
of a total stranger--i have dedicated this second edition of "jane eyre."

currer bell.

_december_ 21_st_, 1847.




note to the third edition


i avail myself of the opportunity which a third edition of "jane eyre"
affords me, of again addressing a word to the public, to explain that my
claim to the title of novelist rests on this one work alone.  if,
therefore, the authorship of other works of fiction has been attributed
to me, an honour is awarded where it is not merited; and consequently,
denied where it is justly due.

this explanation will serve to rectify m
 
 ___________________________
 
t would come."  i had now got
hold of bessie's hand, and she did not snatch it from me.

"she has screamed out on purpose," declared abbot, in some disgust.  "and
what a scream!  if she had been in great pain one would have excused it,
but she only wanted to bring us all here: i know her naughty tricks."

"what is all this?" demanded another voice peremptorily; and mrs. reed
came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustling stormily.
"abbot and bessie, i believe i gave orders that jane eyre should be left
in the red-room till i came to her myself."

"miss jane screamed so loud, ma'am," pleaded bessie.

"let her go," was the only answer.  "loose bessie's hand, child: you
cannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured.  i abhor
artifice, particularly in children; it is my duty to show you that tricks
will not answer: you will now stay here an hour longer, and it is only on
condition of perfect submission and stillness that i shall liberate you
then."

"o aunt! have pity!  
 
 ___________________________
 
to the poor orphan child."

"come, miss jane, don't cry," said bessie as she finished.  she might as
well have said to the fire, "don't burn!" but how could she divine the
morbid suffering to which i was a prey?  in the course of the morning mr.
lloyd came again.

"what, already up!" said he, as he entered the nursery.  "well, nurse,
how is she?"

bessie answered that i was doing very well.

"then she ought to look more cheerful.  come here, miss jane: your name
is jane, is it not?"

"yes, sir, jane eyre."

"well, you have been crying, miss jane eyre; can you tell me what about?
have you any pain?"

"no, sir."

"oh!  i daresay she is crying because she could not go out with missis in
the carriage," interposed bessie.

"surely not! why, she is too old for such pettishness."

i thought so too; and my self-esteem being wounded by the false charge, i
answered promptly, "i never cried for such a thing in my life: i hate
going out in the carriage.  i cry because i am miserable."

"oh fie, miss!" said
 
 ___________________________
 
f deep ire and desperate revolt which
had stirred my corruption before, he thought it better to desist, and ran
from me tittering execrations, and vowing i had burst his nose.  i had
indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard a blow as my knuckles
could inflict; and when i saw that either that or my look daunted him, i
had the greatest inclination to follow up my advantage to purpose; but he
was already with his mama.  i heard him in a blubbering tone commence the
tale of how "that nasty jane eyre" had flown at him like a mad cat: he
was stopped rather harshly--

"don't talk to me about her, john: i told you not to go near her; she is
not worthy of notice; i do not choose that either you or your sisters
should associate with her."

here, leaning over the banister, i cried out suddenly, and without at all
deliberating on my words--

"they are not fit to associate with me."

mrs. reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this strange and
audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the st
 
 ___________________________
 
tony stranger
with the words: "this is the little girl respecting whom i applied to
you."

_he_, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where i stood, and
having examined me with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyes which
twinkled under a pair of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in a bass voice,
"her size is small: what is her age?"

"ten years."

"so much?" was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutiny for
some minutes.  presently he addressed me--"your name, little girl?"

"jane eyre, sir."

in uttering these words i looked up: he seemed to me a tall gentleman;
but then i was very little; his features were large, and they and all the
lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.

"well, jane eyre, and are you a good child?"

impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little world held a
contrary opinion: i was silent.  mrs. reed answered for me by an
expressive shake of the head, adding soon, "perhaps the less said on that
subject the better, mr. brocklehurst."

"
 
 ___________________________
 
ear papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at lowood
look, with their hair combed behind their ears, and their long pinafores,
and those little holland pockets outside their frocks--they are almost
like poor people's children! and,' said she, 'they looked at my dress and
mama's, as if they had never seen a silk gown before.'"

"this is the state of things i quite approve," returned mrs. reed; "had i
sought all england over, i could scarcely have found a system more
exactly fitting a child like jane eyre.  consistency, my dear mr.
brocklehurst; i advocate consistency in all things."

"consistency, madam, is the first of christian duties; and it has been
observed in every arrangement connected with the establishment of lowood:
plain fare, simple attire, unsophisticated accommodations, hardy and
active habits; such is the order of the day in the house and its
inhabitants."

"quite right, sir.  i may then depend upon this child being received as a
pupil at lowood, and there being trained in confor
 
 ___________________________
 
narily
used to a child.

that eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy i had.  shaking from
head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement, i continued--

"i am glad you are no relation of mine: i will never call you aunt again
as long as i live.  i will never come to see you when i am grown up; and
if any one asks me how i liked you, and how you treated me, i will say
the very thought of you makes me sick, and that you treated me with
miserable cruelty."

"how dare you affirm that, jane eyre?"

"how dare i, mrs. reed?  how dare i?  because it is the _truth_.  you
think i have no feelings, and that i can do without one bit of love or
kindness; but i cannot live so: and you have no pity.  i shall remember
how you thrust me back--roughly and violently thrust me back--into the
red-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day; though i was in agony;
though i cried out, while suffocating with distress, 'have mercy!  have
mercy, aunt reed!'  and that punishment you made me suffer because
 
 ___________________________
 
; the country changed; great grey hills
heaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, we descended a valley,
dark with wood, and long after night had overclouded the prospect, i
heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.

lulled by the sound, i at last dropped asleep; i had not long slumbered
when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-door was open,
and a person like a servant was standing at it: i saw her face and dress
by the light of the lamps.

"is there a little girl called jane eyre here?" she asked.  i answered
"yes," and was then lifted out; my trunk was handed down, and the coach
instantly drove away.

i was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise and motion
of the coach: gathering my faculties, i looked about me.  rain, wind, and
darkness filled the air; nevertheless, i dimly discerned a wall before me
and a door open in it; through this door i passed with my new guide: she
shut and locked it behind her.  there was now visible a house or
houses--for the 
 
 ___________________________
 
tarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vague concern for her.

resting my head on helen's shoulder, i put my arms round her waist; she
drew me to her, and we reposed in silence.  we had not sat long thus,
when another person came in.  some heavy clouds, swept from the sky by a
rising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streaming in through
a window near, shone full both on us and on the approaching figure, which
we at once recognised as miss temple.

"i came on purpose to find you, jane eyre," said she; "i want you in my
room; and as helen burns is with you, she may come too."

we went; following the superintendent's guidance, we had to thread some
intricate passages, and mount a staircase before we reached her
apartment; it contained a good fire, and looked cheerful.  miss temple
told helen burns to be seated in a low arm-chair on one side of the
hearth, and herself taking another, she called me to her side.

"is it all over?" she asked, looking down at my face.  "have you cried
y
 
 ___________________________
 
ncapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and
large, had continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle of her
sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.

about a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, miss temple,
who had written to mr. lloyd, received his answer: it appeared that what
he said went to corroborate my account.  miss temple, having assembled
the whole school, announced that inquiry had been made into the charges
alleged against jane eyre, and that she was most happy to be able to
pronounce her completely cleared from every imputation.  the teachers
then shook hands with me and kissed me, and a murmur of pleasure ran
through the ranks of my companions.

thus relieved of a grievous load, i from that hour set to work afresh,
resolved to pioneer my way through every difficulty: i toiled hard, and
my success was proportionate to my efforts; my memory, not naturally
tenacious, improved with practice; exercise sharpened my wits; in a 
 
 ___________________________
 
can to him, and so can sophie.  she
will be glad: nobody here understands her: madame fairfax is all english.
sophie is my nurse; she came with me over the sea in a great ship with a
chimney that smoked--how it did smoke!--and i was sick, and so was
sophie, and so was mr. rochester.  mr. rochester lay down on a sofa in a
pretty room called the salon, and sophie and i had little beds in another
place.  i nearly fell out of mine; it was like a shelf.  and
mademoiselle--what is your name?"

"eyre--jane eyre."

"aire?  bah!  i cannot say it.  well, our ship stopped in the morning,
before it was quite daylight, at a great city--a huge city, with very
dark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty clean town i came
from; and mr. rochester carried me in his arms over a plank to the land,
and sophie came after, and we all got into a coach, which took us to a
beautiful large house, larger than this and finer, called an hotel.  we
stayed there nearly a week: i and sophie used to walk every day in 
 
 ___________________________
 
pitcher which i flung
from my hand when i had emptied it, and, above all, the splash of the
shower-bath i had liberally bestowed, roused mr. rochester at last.
though it was now dark, i knew he was awake; because i heard him
fulminating strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool of
water.

"is there a flood?" he cried.

"no, sir," i answered; "but there has been a fire: get up, do; you are
quenched now; i will fetch you a candle."

"in the name of all the elves in christendom, is that jane eyre?" he
demanded.  "what have you done with me, witch, sorceress?  who is in the
room besides you?  have you plotted to drown me?"

"i will fetch you a candle, sir; and, in heaven's name, get up.  somebody
has plotted something: you cannot too soon find out who and what it is."

"there!  i am up now; but at your peril you fetch a candle yet: wait two
minutes till i get into some dry garments, if any dry there be--yes, here
is my dressing-gown.  now run!"

i did run; i brought the candle which stil
 
 ___________________________
 
undless and trackless waste, into the safe fold of common sense.

arraigned at my own bar, memory having given her evidence of the hopes,
wishes, sentiments i had been cherishing since last night--of the general
state of mind in which i had indulged for nearly a fortnight past; reason
having come forward and told, in her own quiet way a plain, unvarnished
tale, showing how i had rejected the real, and rabidly devoured the
ideal;--i pronounced judgment to this effect:--

that a greater fool than jane eyre had never breathed the breath of life;
that a more fantastic idiot had never surfeited herself on sweet lies,
and swallowed poison as if it were nectar.

"_you_," i said, "a favourite with mr. rochester?  _you_ gifted with the
power of pleasing him?  _you_ of importance to him in any way?  go! your
folly sickens me.  and you have derived pleasure from occasional tokens
of preference--equivocal tokens shown by a gentleman of family and a man
of the world to a dependent and a novice.  how dared y
 
 ___________________________
 
something in praise of your eyes, did he?  blind
puppy!  open their bleared lids and look on your own accursed
senselessness!  it does good to no woman to be flattered by her superior,
who cannot possibly intend to marry her; and it is madness in all women
to let a secret love kindle within them, which, if unreturned and
unknown, must devour the life that feeds it; and, if discovered and
responded to, must lead, _ignis-fatus_-like, into miry wilds whence there
is no extrication.

"listen, then, jane eyre, to your sentence: to-morrow, place the glass
before you, and draw in chalk your own picture, faithfully, without
softening one defect; omit no harsh line, smooth away no displeasing
irregularity; write under it, 'portrait of a governess, disconnected,
poor, and plain.'

"afterwards, take a piece of smooth ivory--you have one prepared in your
drawing-box: take your palette, mix your freshest, finest, clearest
tints; choose your most delicate camel-hair pencils; delineate carefully
the loveliest
 
 ___________________________
 
d the loss of money and fear of
poverty were quite breaking her down.  the information about mr. john's
death and the manner of it came too suddenly: it brought on a stroke.  she
was three days without speaking; but last tuesday she seemed rather
better: she appeared as if she wanted to say something, and kept making
signs to my wife and mumbling.  it was only yesterday morning, however,
that bessie understood she was pronouncing your name; and at last she
made out the words, 'bring jane--fetch jane eyre: i want to speak to
her.'  bessie is not sure whether she is in her right mind, or means
anything by the words; but she told miss reed and miss georgiana, and
advised them to send for you.  the young ladies put it off at first; but
their mother grew so restless, and said, 'jane, jane,' so many times,
that at last they consented.  i left gateshead yesterday: and if you can
get ready, miss, i should like to take you back with me early to-morrow
morning."

"yes, robert, i shall be ready: it seems 
 
 ___________________________
 
at sufferings, and a strong yearning to
forget and forgive all injuries--to be reconciled and clasp hands in
amity.

the well-known face was there: stern, relentless as ever--there was that
peculiar eye which nothing could melt, and the somewhat raised,
imperious, despotic eyebrow.  how often had it lowered on me menace and
hate! and how the recollection of childhood's terrors and sorrows revived
as i traced its harsh line now!  and yet i stooped down and kissed her:
she looked at me.

"is this jane eyre?" she said.

"yes, aunt reed.  how are you, dear aunt?"

i had once vowed that i would never call her aunt again: i thought it no
sin to forget and break that vow now.  my fingers had fastened on her
hand which lay outside the sheet: had she pressed mine kindly, i should
at that moment have experienced true pleasure.  but unimpressionable
natures are not so soon softened, nor are natural antipathies so readily
eradicated.  mrs. reed took her hand away, and, turning her face rather
from me, she 
 
 ___________________________
 
 can talk some things
over with you i have on my mind: to-night it is too late, and i have a
difficulty in recalling them.  but there was something i wished to
say--let me see--"

the wandering look and changed utterance told what wreck had taken place
in her once vigorous frame.  turning restlessly, she drew the bedclothes
round her; my elbow, resting on a corner of the quilt, fixed it down: she
was at once irritated.

"sit up!" said she; "don't annoy me with holding the clothes fast.  are
you jane eyre?"

"i am jane eyre."

"i have had more trouble with that child than any one would believe.  such
a burden to be left on my hands--and so much annoyance as she caused me,
daily and hourly, with her incomprehensible disposition, and her sudden
starts of temper, and her continual, unnatural watchings of one's
movements!  i declare she talked to me once like something mad, or like a
fiend--no child ever spoke or looked as she did; i was glad to get her
away from the house.  what did they do with he
 
 ___________________________
 
 that?"

i knew mrs. reed had not spoken for days: was she reviving?  i went up to
her.

"it is i, aunt reed."

"who--i?" was her answer.  "who are you?" looking at me with surprise and
a sort of alarm, but still not wildly.  "you are quite a stranger to
me--where is bessie?"

"she is at the lodge, aunt."

"aunt," she repeated.  "who calls me aunt?  you are not one of the
gibsons; and yet i know you--that face, and the eyes and forehead, are
quiet familiar to me: you are like--why, you are like jane eyre!"

i said nothing: i was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring my
identity.

"yet," said she, "i am afraid it is a mistake: my thoughts deceive me.  i
wished to see jane eyre, and i fancy a likeness where none exists:
besides, in eight years she must be so changed."  i now gently assured
her that i was the person she supposed and desired me to be: and seeing
that i was understood, and that her senses were quite collected, i
explained how bessie had sent her husband to fetch me from thor
 
 ___________________________
 
is painful."

she made an effort to alter her position, but failed: her face changed;
she seemed to experience some inward sensation--the precursor, perhaps,
of the last pang.

"well, i must get it over.  eternity is before me: i had better tell
her.--go to my dressing-case, open it, and take out a letter you will see
there."

i obeyed her directions.  "read the letter," she said.

it was short, and thus conceived:--

   "madam,--will you have the goodness to send me the address of my
   niece, jane eyre, and to tell me how she is?  it is my intention to
   write shortly and desire her to come to me at madeira.  providence has
   blessed my endeavours to secure a competency; and as i am unmarried
   and childless, i wish to adopt her during my life, and bequeath her at
   my death whatever i may have to leave.--i am, madam, &c., &c.,

   "john eyre, madeira."

it was dated three years back.

"why did i never hear of this?" i asked.

"because i disliked you too fixedly and thoroughly ever to len
 
 ___________________________
 
no more of all this, let it pass away from your mind.  forgive me
for my passionate language: i was a child then; eight, nine years have
passed since that day."

she heeded nothing of what i said; but when she had tasted the water and
drawn breath, she went on thus--

"i tell you i could not forget it; and i took my revenge: for you to be
adopted by your uncle, and placed in a state of ease and comfort, was
what i could not endure.  i wrote to him; i said i was sorry for his
disappointment, but jane eyre was dead: she had died of typhus fever at
lowood.  now act as you please: write and contradict my assertion--expose
my falsehood as soon as you like.  you were born, i think, to be my
torment: my last hour is racked by the recollection of a deed which, but
for you, i should never have been tempted to commit."

"if you could but be persuaded to think no more of it, aunt, and to
regard me with kindness and forgiveness"

"you have a very bad disposition," said she, "and one to this day i feel
it i
 
 ___________________________
 
 examination of the roman catholic dogmas, and to a careful study
of the workings of their system: if i find it to be, as i half suspect it
is, the one best calculated to ensure the doing of all things decently
and in order, i shall embrace the tenets of rome and probably take the
veil."

i neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted to dissuade
her from it.  "the vocation will fit you to a hair," i thought: "much
good may it do you!"

when we parted, she said: "good-bye, cousin jane eyre; i wish you well:
you have some sense."

i then returned: "you are not without sense, cousin eliza; but what you
have, i suppose, in another year will be walled up alive in a french
convent.  however, it is not my business, and so it suits you, i don't
much care."

"you are in the right," said she; and with these words we each went our
separate way.  as i shall not have occasion to refer either to her or her
sister again, i may as well mention here, that georgiana made an
advantageous match wit
 
 ___________________________
 
illo!" he cries; and he puts up his book and his pencil.  "there you
are!  come on, if you please."

i suppose i do come on; though in what fashion i know not; being scarcely
cognisant of my movements, and solicitous only to appear calm; and, above
all, to control the working muscles of my face--which i feel rebel
insolently against my will, and struggle to express what i had resolved
to conceal.  but i have a veil--it is down: i may make shift yet to
behave with decent composure.

"and this is jane eyre?  are you coming from millcote, and on foot?
yes--just one of your tricks: not to send for a carriage, and come
clattering over street and road like a common mortal, but to steal into
the vicinage of your home along with twilight, just as if you were a
dream or a shade.  what the deuce have you done with yourself this last
month?"

"i have been with my aunt, sir, who is dead."

"a true janian reply!  good angels be my guard!  she comes from the other
world--from the abode of people who are dead
 
 ___________________________
 
 i received,
but an embrace and a kiss.  it seemed natural: it seemed genial to be so
well loved, so caressed by him.

"jane, you look blooming, and smiling, and pretty," said he: "truly
pretty this morning.  is this my pale, little elf?  is this my mustard-
seed?  this little sunny-faced girl with the dimpled cheek and rosy lips;
the satin-smooth hazel hair, and the radiant hazel eyes?"  (i had green
eyes, reader; but you must excuse the mistake: for him they were
new-dyed, i suppose.)

"it is jane eyre, sir."

"soon to be jane rochester," he added: "in four weeks, janet; not a day
more.  do you hear that?"

i did, and i could not quite comprehend it: it made me giddy.  the
feeling, the announcement sent through me, was something stronger than
was consistent with joy--something that smote and stunned.  it was, i
think almost fear.

"you blushed, and now you are white, jane: what is that for?"

"because you gave me a new name--jane rochester; and it seems so
strange."

"yes, mrs. rochester," sa
 
 ___________________________
 
imagine such a lot befalling me is
a fairy tale--a day-dream."

"which i can and will realise.  i shall begin to-day.  this morning i
wrote to my banker in london to send me certain jewels he has in his
keeping,--heirlooms for the ladies of thornfield.  in a day or two i hope
to pour them into your lap: for every privilege, every attention shall be
yours that i would accord a peer's daughter, if about to marry her."

"oh, sir!--never rain jewels!  i don't like to hear them spoken of.
jewels for jane eyre sounds unnatural and strange: i would rather not
have them."

"i will myself put the diamond chain round your neck, and the circlet on
your forehead,--which it will become: for nature, at least, has stamped
her patent of nobility on this brow, jane; and i will clasp the bracelets
on these fine wrists, and load these fairy-like fingers with rings."

"no, no, sir! think of other subjects, and speak of other things, and in
another strain.  don't address me as if i were a beauty; i am your plain,
q
 
 ___________________________
 
ificant, you mean.  you are dreaming, sir,--or you are
sneering.  for god's sake don't be ironical!"

"i will make the world acknowledge you a beauty, too," he went on, while
i really became uneasy at the strain he had adopted, because i felt he
was either deluding himself or trying to delude me.  "i will attire my
jane in satin and lace, and she shall have roses in her hair; and i will
cover the head i love best with a priceless veil."

"and then you won't know me, sir; and i shall not be your jane eyre any
longer, but an ape in a harlequin's jacket--a jay in borrowed plumes.  i
would as soon see you, mr. rochester, tricked out in stage-trappings, as
myself clad in a court-lady's robe; and i don't call you handsome, sir,
though i love you most dearly: far too dearly to flatter you.  don't
flatter me."

he pursued his theme, however, without noticing my deprecation.  "this
very day i shall take you in the carriage to millcote, and you must
choose some dresses for yourself.  i told you we shall 
 
 ___________________________
 
e
or challenge, no tears, no sobs: a few words had been spoken, a calmly
pronounced objection to the marriage made; some stern, short questions
put by mr. rochester; answers, explanations given, evidence adduced; an
open admission of the truth had been uttered by my master; then the
living proof had been seen; the intruders were gone, and all was over.

i was in my own room as usual--just myself, without obvious change:
nothing had smitten me, or scathed me, or maimed me.  and yet where was
the jane eyre of yesterday?--where was her life?--where were her
prospects?

jane eyre, who had been an ardent, expectant woman--almost a bride, was a
cold, solitary girl again: her life was pale; her prospects were
desolate.  a christmas frost had come at midsummer; a white december
storm had whirled over june; ice glazed the ripe apples, drifts crushed
the blowing roses; on hayfield and cornfield lay a frozen shroud: lanes
which last night blushed full of flowers, to-day were pathless with
untrodden snow; 
 
 ___________________________
 
 always more satisfactory to see important points written
down, fairly committed to black and white."

and the pocket-book was again deliberately produced, opened, sought
through; from one of its compartments was extracted a shabby slip of
paper, hastily torn off: i recognised in its texture and its stains of
ultra-marine, and lake, and vermillion, the ravished margin of the
portrait-cover.  he got up, held it close to my eyes: and i read, traced
in indian ink, in my own handwriting, the words "jane eyre"--the work
doubtless of some moment of abstraction.

"briggs wrote to me of a jane eyre:" he said, "the advertisements
demanded a jane eyre: i knew a jane elliott.--i confess i had my
suspicions, but it was only yesterday afternoon they were at once
resolved into certainty.  you own the name and renounce the _alias_?"

"yes--yes; but where is mr. briggs?  he perhaps knows more of mr.
rochester than you do."

"briggs is in london.  i should doubt his knowing anything at all about
mr. rochester; 
 
 ___________________________
 
d fire dissolves ice.  the blaze there has thawed
all the snow from your cloak; by the same token, it has streamed on to my
floor, and made it like a trampled street.  as you hope ever to be
forgiven, mr. rivers, the high crime and misdemeanour of spoiling a
sanded kitchen, tell me what i wish to know."

"well, then," he said, "i yield; if not to your earnestness, to your
perseverance: as stone is worn by continual dropping.  besides, you must
know some day,--as well now as later.  your name is jane eyre?"

"of course: that was all settled before."

"you are not, perhaps, aware that i am your namesake?--that i was
christened st. john eyre rivers?"

"no, indeed!  i remember now seeing the letter e. comprised in your
initials written in books you have at different times lent me; but i
never asked for what name it stood.  but what then?  surely--"

i stopped: i could not trust myself to entertain, much less to express,
the thought that rushed upon me--that embodied itself,--that, in a
second, stoo
 
 ___________________________
 
cannot live!"

he groped; i arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned it in both mine.

"her very fingers!" he cried; "her small, slight fingers!  if so there
must be more of her."

the muscular hand broke from my custody; my arm was seized, my
shoulder--neck--waist--i was entwined and gathered to him.

"is it jane?  _what_ is it?  this is her shape--this is her size--"

"and this her voice," i added.  "she is all here: her heart, too.  god
bless you, sir!  i am glad to be so near you again."

"jane eyre!--jane eyre," was all he said.

"my dear master," i answered, "i am jane eyre: i have found you out--i am
come back to you."

"in truth?--in the flesh?  my living jane?"

"you touch me, sir,--you hold me, and fast enough: i am not cold like a
corpse, nor vacant like air, am i?"

"my living darling!  these are certainly her limbs, and these her
features; but i cannot be so blest, after all my misery.  it is a dream;
such dreams as i have had at night when i have clasped her once more to
my heart