-reasons that i may, nay, that i shall, impart to you some day).
she pulled out of her box, about ten minutes ago, a little pink silk
frock; rapture lit her face as she unfolded it; coquetry runs in her
blood, blends with her brains, and seasons the marrow of her bones.  'il
faut que je l'essaie!' cried she, 'et a l'instant meme!' and she rushed
out of the room.  she is now with sophie, undergoing a robing process: in
a few minutes she will re-enter; and i know what i shall see,--a
miniature of celine varens, as she used to appear on the boards at the
rising of--but never mind that.  however, my tenderest feelings are about
to receive a shock: such is my presentiment; stay now, to see whether it
will be realised."

ere long, adele's little foot was heard tripping across the hall.  she
entered, transformed as her guardian had predicted.  a dress of
rose-coloured satin, very short, and as full in the skirt as it could be
gathered, replaced the brown frock she had previously worn; a wreath of
rosebuds
 
 ___________________________
 
 with an
eye like that.  while you looked so, i should be certain that whatever
charter you might grant under coercion, your first act, when released,
would be to violate its conditions."

"why, jane, what would you have?  i fear you will compel me to go through
a private marriage ceremony, besides that performed at the altar.  you
will stipulate, i see, for peculiar terms--what will they be?"

"i only want an easy mind, sir; not crushed by crowded obligations.  do
you remember what you said of celine varens?--of the diamonds, the
cashmeres you gave her?  i will not be your english celine varens.  i
shall continue to act as adele's governess; by that i shall earn my board
and lodging, and thirty pounds a year besides.  i'll furnish my own
wardrobe out of that money, and you shall give me nothing but--"

"well, but what?"

"your regard; and if i give you mine in return, that debt will be quit."

"well, for cool native impudence and pure innate pride, you haven't your
equal," said he.  we were now ap
 
 ___________________________
 
s of
the risks, the horrors, the loathings of incongruous unions--would have
asked to marry me.  disappointment made me reckless.  i tried
dissipation--never debauchery: that i hated, and hate.  that was my
indian messalina's attribute: rooted disgust at it and her restrained me
much, even in pleasure.  any enjoyment that bordered on riot seemed to
approach me to her and her vices, and i eschewed it.

"yet i could not live alone; so i tried the companionship of mistresses.
the first i chose was celine varens--another of those steps which make a
man spurn himself when he recalls them.  you already know what she was,
and how my liaison with her terminated.  she had two successors: an
italian, giacinta, and a german, clara; both considered singularly
handsome.  what was their beauty to me in a few weeks?  giacinta was
unprincipled and violent: i tired of her in three months.  clara was
honest and quiet; but heavy, mindless, and unimpressible: not one whit to
my taste.  i was glad to give her a suffici