. brocklehurst buys all our food and
all our clothes."

"does he live here?"

"no--two miles off, at a large hall."

"is he a good man?"

"he is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good."

"did you say that tall lady was called miss temple?"

"yes."

"and what are the other teachers called?"

"the one with red cheeks is called miss smith; she attends to the work,
and cuts out--for we make our own clothes, our frocks, and pelisses, and
everything; the little one with black hair is miss scatcherd; she teaches
history and grammar, and hears the second class repetitions; and the one
who wears a shawl, and has a pocket-handkerchief tied to her side with a
yellow ribband, is madame pierrot: she comes from lisle, in france, and
teaches french."

"do you like the teachers?"

"well enough."

"do you like the little black one, and the madame ---?--i cannot
pronounce her name as you do."

"miss scatcherd is hasty--you must take care not to offend her; madame
pierrot is not a bad sort of person."
 
 ___________________________
 

potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed and cooked together.  of
this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful was apportioned to each
pupil.  i ate what i could, and wondered within myself whether every
day's fare would be like this.

after dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessons
recommenced, and were continued till five o'clock.

the only marked event of the afternoon was, that i saw the girl with whom
i had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace by miss scatcherd
from a history class, and sent to stand in the middle of the large
schoolroom.  the punishment seemed to me in a high degree ignominious,
especially for so great a girl--she looked thirteen or upwards.  i
expected she would show signs of great distress and shame; but to my
surprise she neither wept nor blushed: composed, though grave, she stood,
the central mark of all eyes.  "how can she bear it so quietly--so
firmly?" i asked of myself.  "were i in her place, it seems to me i
should wish the 
 
 ___________________________
 
first, being little accustomed to learn by heart, the
lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; the frequent change from
task to task, too, bewildered me; and i was glad when, about three
o'clock in the afternoon, miss smith put into my hands a border of muslin
two yards long, together with needle, thimble, &c., and sent me to sit in
a quiet corner of the schoolroom, with directions to hem the same.  at
that hour most of the others were sewing likewise; but one class still
stood round miss scatcherd's chair reading, and as all was quiet, the
subject of their lessons could be heard, together with the manner in
which each girl acquitted herself, and the animadversions or
commendations of miss scatcherd on the performance.  it was english
history: among the readers i observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at
the commencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of the
class, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention to stops,
she was suddenly sent to the very bottom.
 
 ___________________________
 
  even in that obscure position,
miss scatcherd continued to make her an object of constant notice: she
was continually addressing to her such phrases as the following:--

"burns" (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all called by
their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), "burns, you are standing on the
side of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately."  "burns, you poke
your chin most unpleasantly; draw it in."  "burns, i insist on your
holding your head up; i will not have you before me in that attitude,"
&c. &c.

a chapter havi
 
 ___________________________
 
ng been read through twice, the books were closed and the
girls examined.  the lesson had comprised part of the reign of charles
i., and there were sundry questions about tonnage and poundage and ship-
money, which most of them appeared unable to answer; still, every little
difficulty was solved instantly when it reached burns: her memory seemed
to have retained the substance of the whole lesson, and she was ready
with answers on every point.  i kept expecting that miss scatcherd would
praise her attention; but, instead of that, she suddenly cried out--

"you dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned your nails this
morning!"

burns made no answer: i wondered at her silence.  "why," thought i, "does
she not explain that she could neither clean her nails nor wash her face,
as the water was frozen?"

my attention was now called off by miss smith desiring me to hold a skein
of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me from time to time,
asking whether i had
 
 ___________________________
 
 ever been at school before, whether i could mark,
stitch, knit, &c.; till she dismissed me, i could not pursue my
observations on miss scatcherd's movements.  when i returned to my seat,
that lady was just delivering an order of which i did not catch the
import; but burns immediately left the class, and going into the small
inner room where the books were kept, returned in half a minute, carrying
in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together at one end.  this ominous
tool she presented to miss scatcherd with a respectful curtesy; then she
quietly, and without being told, unloosed her pinafore, and the teacher
instantly and sharply inflicted on her neck a dozen strokes with the
bunch of twigs.  not a tear rose to burns' eye; and, while i paused from
my sewing, because my fingers quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment
of unavailing and impotent anger, not a feature of her pensive face
altered its ordinary expression.

"hardened girl!" exclaimed miss scatcherd; "nothing can correct you of
yo
 
 ___________________________
 
d: the bit of bread, the draught of coffee swallowed at five
o'clock had revived vitality, if it had not satisfied hunger: the long
restraint of the day was slackened; the schoolroom felt warmer than in
the morning--its fires being allowed to burn a little more brightly, to
supply, in some measure, the place of candles, not yet introduced: the
ruddy gloaming, the licensed uproar, the confusion of many voices gave
one a welcome sense of liberty.

on the evening of the day on which i had seen miss scatcherd flog her
pupil, burns, i wandered as usual among the forms and tables and laughing
groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when i passed the
windows, i now and then lifted a blind, and looked out; it snowed fast, a
drift was already forming against the lower panes; putting my ear close
to the window, i could distinguish from the gleeful tumult within, the
disconsolate moan of the wind outside.

probably, if i had lately left a good home and kind parents, this would
have been the hou
 
 ___________________________
 
ght i, "i can perhaps get her to talk."  i sat down by her on the
floor.

"what is your name besides burns?"

"helen."

"do you come a long way from here?"

"i come from a place farther north, quite on the borders of scotland."

"will you ever go back?"

"i hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future."

"you must wish to leave lowood?"

"no! why should i?  i was sent to lowood to get an education; and it
would be of no use going away until i have attained that object."

"but that teacher, miss scatcherd, is so cruel to you?"

"cruel?  not at all!  she is severe: she dislikes my faults."

"and if i were in your place i should dislike her; i should resist her.
if she struck me with that rod, i should get it from her hand; i should
break it under her nose."

"probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you did, mr.
brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that would be a great grief
to your relations.  it is far better to endure patiently a smart which
nobody feels but yourself, than t
 
 ___________________________
 
ehend this doctrine of
endurance; and still less could i understand or sympathise with the
forbearance she expressed for her chastiser.  still i felt that helen
burns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes.  i suspected she
might be right and i wrong; but i would not ponder the matter deeply;
like felix, i put it off to a more convenient season.

"you say you have faults, helen: what are they?  to me you seem very
good."

"then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: i am, as miss scatcherd
said, slatternly; i seldom put, and never keep, things, in order; i am
careless; i forget rules; i read when i should learn my lessons; i have
no method; and sometimes i say, like you, i cannot _bear_ to be subjected
to systematic arrangements.  this is all very provoking to miss
scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, and particular."

"and cross and cruel," i added; but helen burns would not admit my
addition: she kept silence.

"is miss temple as severe to you as miss scatcherd?"

at the
 
 ___________________________
 
o rational, have not influence to cure
me of my faults; and even her praise, though i value it most highly,
cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight."

"that is curious," said i, "it is so easy to be careful."

"for _you_ i have no doubt it is.  i observed you in your class this
morning, and saw you were closely attentive: your thoughts never seemed
to wander while miss miller explained the lesson and questioned you.  now,
mine continually rove away; when i should be listening to miss scatcherd,
and collecting all she says with assiduity, often i lose the very sound
of her voice; i fall into a sort of dream.  sometimes i think i am in
northumberland, and that the noises i hear round me are the bubbling of a
little brook which runs through deepden, near our house;--then, when it
comes to my turn to reply, i have to be awakened; and having heard
nothing of what was read for listening to the visionary brook, i have no
answer ready."

"yet how well you replied this afternoon."

"it was me
 
 ___________________________
 
r turn, helen burns asked me to explain, and i proceeded forthwith
to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments.
bitter and truculent when excited, i spoke as i felt, without reserve or
softening.

helen heard me patiently to the end: i expected she would then make a
remark, but she said nothing.

"well," i asked impatiently, "is not mrs. reed a hard-hearted, bad
woman?"

"she has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, she dislikes your
cast of character, as miss scatcherd does mine; but how minutely you
remember all she has done and said to you!  what a singularly deep
impression her injustice seems to have made on your heart!  no ill-usage
so brands its record on my feelings.  would you not be happier if you
tried to forget her severity, together with the passionate emotions it
excited?  life appears to me too short to be spent in nursing animosity
or registering wrongs.  we are, and must be, one and all, burdened with
faults in this world: but the time will so
 
 ___________________________
 
ce
never crushes me too low: i live in calm, looking to the end."

helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she finished this
sentence.  i saw by her look she wished no longer to talk to me, but
rather to converse with her own thoughts.  she was not allowed much time
for meditation: a monitor, a great rough girl, presently came up,
exclaiming in a strong cumberland accent--

"helen burns, if you don't go and put your drawer in order, and fold up
your work this minute, i'll tell miss scatcherd to come and look at it!"

helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed the monitor
without reply as without delay.




chapter vii


my first quarter at lowood seemed an age; and not the golden age either;
it comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties in habituating myself
to new rules and unwonted tasks.  the fear of failure in these points
harassed me worse than the physical hardships of my lot; though these
were no trifles.

during january, february, and part of march, the d
 
 ___________________________
 
light question about her work of miss smith, was chidden for the
triviality of the inquiry, returned to her place, and smiled at me as she
again went by.  what a smile!  i remember it now, and i know that it was
the effluence of fine intellect, of true courage; it lit up her marked
lineaments, her thin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from
the aspect of an angel.  yet at that moment helen burns wore on her arm
"the untidy badge;" scarcely an hour ago i had heard her condemned by
miss scatcherd to a dinner of bread and water on the morrow because she
had blotted an exercise in copying it out.  such is the imperfect nature
of man! such spots are there on the disc of the clearest planet; and eyes
like miss scatcherd's can only see those minute defects, and are blind to
the full brightness of the orb.




chapter viii


ere the half-hour ended, five o'clock struck; school was dismissed, and
all were gone into the refectory to tea.  i now ventured to descend: it
was deep dusk; i retired i
 
 ___________________________
 
n of veneration
expanding at every sounding line.  she had scarcely finished ere the bell
announced bedtime! no delay could be admitted; miss temple embraced us
both, saying, as she drew us to her heart--

"god bless you, my children!"

helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go more reluctantly;
it was helen her eye followed to the door; it was for her she a second
time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear from her cheek.

on reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of miss scatcherd: she was
examining drawers; she had just pulled out helen burns's, and when we
entered helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and told that to-morrow
she should have half-a-dozen of untidily folded articles pinned to her
shoulder.

"my things were indeed in shameful disorder," murmured helen to me, in a
low voice: "i intended to have arranged them, but i forgot."

next morning, miss scatcherd wrote in conspicuous characters on a piece
of pasteboard the word "slattern," and bound it like a ph
 
 ___________________________
 
ylactery round
helen's large, mild, intelligent, and benign-looking forehead.  she wore
it till evening, patient, unresentful, regarding it as a deserved
punishment.  the moment miss scatcherd withdrew after afternoon school, i
ran to helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which
she was incapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and
large, had continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle of her
sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.

about a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, miss temple,
who had written to mr. lloyd, received his answer: it appeared that what
he said went to corroborate my account. 